Nicene and Post-Nicene Fathers, Series 1, Vol. 11: Saint Chrysostom: Homilies on the Acts of the Apostles and the Epistle to the Romans
Philip Schaff (ed.), various translators (1886)
Source: Internet Archive
https://archive.org/details/selectlibraryofn11auguuoft
Public Domain. Staged for the Tower of Babel digital library.

========================================================================

Fe ek Pee 4d
ehyh ately an


aie tive
ety


(ates

Hob ewt H/

hu Sho
at


a = Si rah
oe oe


i? sy
Vey opie Uy
Petr bh Wes


‘ He)
Ave


Ae ait Ait
ae
etal


DUCE
~¥) 4 Pate
Ty ea


Cy eety


eely tt


aN
‘sae fest


‘ mbigiee
es " ety | mciuen
Pritt th beta tt ato amt en
Atta tes Fert A oa


Pato


i
iG e
vawyan ast oe

petra

LS saayte ‘g


ita eity yes nist
want ils ER
ter


ie i ‘


on
4 . ‘ Se > diye eB CRTs Es |
Vi ie merefertoevc te ei etry to Ud ia, tf ayers Peach th &
» ate: DATA SE wan eT ee fee MALE ID "s a


Siu yi! Hin ASU peg wedbs ATS Faas 1 Leth hes) eee) ie
(eee eheTe Re ok 4 be Palen nis see
rays tA RSO NTA See ye


asian


AARON eee RI pa

Ue eTetetnt ye

yet ty th

AArswohay eel

Bc 0k Ok oe Ol ok toe UE
)


apache tree
Uri tee teeny i pence re
CANE ABS pbpkod Ghote aa?
Miash eae
Ate er omaha tits


4 ia


Aridi
bert init wee
ANE sb y aps © ve Nsieihiy
ALUVIMR ROTTER ee


¥ %
Dyer how! te
tela tng a


‘ 3
baie Whereas Ageetc Ma Ae
} OPV NALA Peet Rat Uke ae
sy! wid Nalle 4s RIGS VLA A ae dre et veeH ENS Pele hoe
»


MSHS Ge As Sie eee ca As ante
‘ »


NS


ON OE ae


thou est be be


Lig latewety


rh
Ab eeo ary ts


‘ ae ; ‘ wher) : ‘ : 4 : ‘ Nps se
MEAN ciuigrvswarietridts ; sat ASN, Wecheheeas
: : t 4 a aed é é ‘ } ‘ 4 ihe


”
ve


ANN AARAING
ALAR Maal Fda,
*


SUAS.
“


tt


Patan tees sora


SMALee Ens Y
4A ¢ Reuben &
ear eaan Listy ss ce 7


’ wy ;
perere Urea tea
nye tate


ie
49943 at

Sist telelt wet
? LR tse:
ibe an See 8
Si pase gearreetent pate


pee
$ 5


forte? <A <4
a cesttyt i eUrielMrers UL tesla ee
CHEE ATE eT AE or Feet aT
eesveenyu


it
4 ed
ala etre eetel


a a7 *
Mat et rabaeiat eet ere’
ea teeva eae


eePt
guriees er rete ae
Y i


ated

Sarees
pesreiier tet eres ae
ee no ergy ee wre tyere


44h4
bead shade re


Pierre
peretetee ere tite ite
ay Ftc beds botieue be


% ety tre pete bs

jsealaner4 bepese:
a ete eed Raat aah tn} wortese aeencte “s
opie itipbaatwansryne nett oy sf ps peters): spines everare He
Aa Pudsey eae gh ewees sspears set geese -“ maes
ib eat sige seraee sri tessss eich abet mites rant


veneruerrefr tte tr atire 220 eticremen re?
ib la: Liat ee es ese eigen Right LE Kpae 4

etatn ah as) yea te H

vey tbe

Niliteds Pelee y ieee adic tp


A de ace pesean etes 2
eT eee Le Boned earget eee ae
Wepre irrer sy etre tea seetes
hah grey Hae pg gle: bob a
we abet ory


is a 1;
if ar See Fatt
cere
; ahh Uh hE betk ge Lites wrth
o eer BAER Hw Conte eat
Aqeblorats A


pat


rgb hits 4 ie
iat ited mae cee
rat s esac


,
nV) isu ae
nada


ae eet
Parry ys pitiersat


8
4 ne Pyle adenet ce
Hae ric

. She He a4

ihe ot rit *

ea ae
size


sate ee
sve


a et
x


White ae

es :
iter ae as)

ne
ASNeT


jean he
pees begs Aira


part iy
soe


ii) sie eae lh ait
git a Sh MN
Fy Kes iv) iy ae


Fat Lae


Digitized by the Internet Archive
in 2007 with funding from
Microsoft Corporation


https://archive.org/details/selectlibraryofn11 auguuoft


ET SE
_ ~~
.


A Pe Tie te


—_= 77 +t are :
j ane


it"6


: r Al \
Oe kee i ak Ua Ps he


Ay Spene rT EIBRARY


OF THE


NICENE AND POST-NICENE FATHERS


OF


THE CHRISTIAN CHURCH.


EDITED BY
PHIBEP SCHAEE: DiD ae s.D.,


PROFESSOR OF CHURCH HISTORY IN THE UNION THEOLOGICAL SEMINARY, NEW YORK.


IN CONNECTION WITH A NUMBER OF PATRISTIC SCHOLARS OF EUROPE AND AMERICA


VOLUME XI.
SALNT. CHRYSOSTOM:


HOMILIES ON THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES AND
THE EPISTLE TO THE ROMANS.


NEW YORK:
Tithe Cokes hi AN :cLIiTbRATURE COMPANY,
1880.


APR 13 1965
G


Vy 9
Wd 7 N
SS Rsity oF TOROS


ots eet


974665


COPYRIGHT, 1889, BY


THE CHRISTIAN LITERATURE COMPANY.


ELECTROTYPED AND PRINTED
BY E. B. SHELDON & CO,


New Haven, Conn,


PREFACE TO THE AMERICAN EDITION.


In the preparation of this volume of Chrysostom’s Homilies on Acts and Romans, the
effort nas been to improve the Oxford edition by some changes and corrections, and by the
addition of critical and explanatory notes. ‘The translation remains substantially unchanged.
Frequent minor changes have, however, been made in phraseology, where it has seemed to
“me that the sense could thereby be made plainer. Archaic and obsolescent words or
expressions have often been replaced by more idiomatic modern language. In Biblical
‘quotations where the translation was an inaccurate rendering of the original, I have sub-
stituted either the Revised Version or a translation conformed to the recent critical
“texts. A considerable number of errors in the English edition have been corrected. The
imperfect state of the original text of the Homilies on Acts is a serious embarrassment,
alike to translator and editor, in this part of the work. Often the reports of the discourses
are in hopeless confusion, and it is impossible to determine confidently the meaning of
what has been reported, much less of what the preacher originally said. Happily this
remark applies to only a part of the exposition.

The notes which I have added are intended to bring modern criticism into relation
with the statements of Chrysostom upon points of special difficulty or importance. Some-
times they are added by way of correction to what is stated in the text. More frequently
_ however, they are intended to present briefly the opinions of critical interpreters upon
_ disputed or doubtful points, and thus to supplement for the modern reader the practical
expositions of these books of the New Testament. At other times it has seemed desir-
_ able to explain matters which are but lightly touched upon in the text or passed over
without explanation or notice. There is frequent occasion to observe how the spiritual
insight of the great preacher has led him, in the case of difficult passages, to a right
discernment of the same sense which critical exegesis discovers. I trust that these brief
“annotations, touching upon a great variety of points, may contribute somewhat to the
usefulness of the edition.

These notes are distinguished from those of the English editors by having appended

_to them the initials, G. B. S.

The annotations of the English editors which are so copious upon the Homilies on Acts
_ have been, with trifling exceptions, retained and the references have been, so far as possible,
_ adapted to the American edition. It is obvious, however, that this adaptation could not be
4 perfectly made because but few of the volumes of the American edition of the Homilies had
appeared when this volume was prepared for the press. References to English editions of
F works not yet accessible in an American edition were, of necessity, left unchanged. Some
"small portions of the work of the English editors which seemed to have no present value


iv PREFACE TO THE AMERICAN’ EDITION.


have been omitted. It is not improbable that still other omissions might well have been
made, but the editor has been slow to follow his own judgment in this particular in dealing ©
with the conscientious and painstaking labors of the Oxford editors. .

It will be noticed that the English notes to the Homilies on Romans are few and brief. —
These have been retained with such adaptations as could be made, and the American editor —
has added a considerable number of statements of critical opinions, together with such
explanations of the course of thought and connections of ideas in difficult passages of the
Epistle, as seemed desirable and useful. In the Homilies on Romans the state of the text is
such and the work of the translators so well performed, that one is rarely at a loss to
perceive the author’s meaning; the nature and limitations of his exposition, however, seem
to call for occasional supplementing and correction.

The indexes have been carefully revised. Topics which seemed unimportant and texts
which are merely quoted or alluded to, without being explained, have often been omitted.
By this process of revision the size of the indexes has been considerably reduced. It is
hoped that they will be found sufficient to guide those who consult the volume to —
what is said upon the main themes which find place in it.


GEORGE B. STEVENS.


YaLe University, NEw Haven, March, 1889.


THE HOMILIES OF ST. JOHN CHRYSOSTOM,


ARCHBISHOP OF CONSTANTINOPLE,


ON THE


Mii ore thr AOS LLES;


TRANSLATED, WITH NOTES AND INDICES, BY


REV) 9. WALKER, M.A,


OF BRASENOSE COLLEGE ;


REV. J. cH bBPPARD,. MM. UA.;


OF ORIEL COLLEGE, OXFORD ; AND


REV. H. BROWNE, M. A.,


OF CORPUS CHRISTI COLLEGE, CAMBRIDGE.


REVISED, WITH NOTES, BY


GEORGE B.. STEVENS, Pu.D.. DD;


PROFESSOR IN YALE UNIVERSITY.


é at nT i
REISS, Meet
é oy ie / ai ey
ie
ar)” : 7
4 ais


7


Te Ga RMI PP ea) Nay Oe a /


CONTENTS:


; PAGE
_ PREFACE TO THE AMERICAN EDITION . : P , : ‘ : : iil
_ PREFACES TO THE OXFORD EDITION OF ACTS : : : , : : vii»
CONTENTS OF HoMILIES ON ACTS : : . : 2 : : : je Sen
j HOomMILIES ON THE ACTS z : - : : : : : : “ : I


PREFACE TO HomILIEs ON ROMANS


_CONTENTs OF HomILies ON Romans . 7 es : : “ : , - a3
HoMILIES ON ROMANS : BA fees 3 4 ; : é Fs : Ces
INDEX oF SUBJECTS ENA MS Mee ne MRT bd ial PR Sv eens sid es am eA ConA 3 JTS 567
INDEX oF TEXTS : : ; 5 : : : : : - : A oS ge


ee


a


PRePack i PART I, OF THE OXFORD EDITION.


THE present volume of St. Chrysostom on the Acts of the Apostles has been delayed for some time by the
difficulty of fixing the Text. Some farther account of the grounds on which this has been done will be given
in the Preface to Part II. (vid. zzfra.) It may suffice for the present to say, that these Homilies appear
to have been less carefully reported than usual, and published without a revision by the Author. The
printed text was formed for the most part (Erasmus’s Latin Version entirely) from a manuscript, said to be of
the tenth century, in which these Homilies are given in a very different form, evidently the work of a later
hand, and intended to make them read more smoothly. The earlier text, shown to be such by internal
evidence, and alone followed in the Catena and all other ancient extracts and compilations, is preserved in
other Mss. and appears to have been in general disregarded by former editors, from its difficulty. The
Translation was originally made from Savile’s Text, by the Rev. J. WALKER, M.A. of Brasenose College, and
the Rev. J. SHEPPARD, M.A. of Oriel College, Oxford. The Editors are much indebted to the Rev. H.
BRowNE, M.A. of Corpus Christi College, Cambridge, who has restored the Text and corrected the Translation
accordingly, the difference being frequently so great as to require a passage to be translated anew. He has
likewise undertaken to prepare the Greek Text for publication, and to supply the prefatory matter. Many
passages will still be found imperfect and unsatisfactory, but it has been thought better to leave them evidently
so, than to resort to uncertain conjectures. A few conjectural emendations, however, have been admitted into
the Text, and many more suggested.


C. MARRIOTT.
Oxrorp, Feast of St. James, 1851.


beer aw TOOTART OF THE OXFORD EDITION,


THE manifestly imperfect condition in which these Homilies have come to us may partly be accounted for
by the circumstances of the times in which they were preached. It was in the Easter weeks of the third year
of his residence at Constantinople as Archbishop, that St. Chrysostom began this course of Sermons; and
during all the remaining part of that year (A.D. 400), the Capital of the East was kept in constant trouble and
alarm by the revolt of Gainas and the Goths. Moreover, scarcely had the preaching commenced, when the
complaints from the Churches of Asia Minor were brought (May, 400) before the Metropolitan See, which
business during many months painfully occupied the Archbishop’s thoughts, and eventually demanded his
presence at Ephesus. Few of St. Chrysostom’s Sermons were originally prepared in writing: certainly these
were not: and as certainly the text, drawn up by no skilful hand from notes taken during the preaching, can
never have been revised by the Preacher himself. This was a serious disadvantage: for these Homilies, if only
from the novelty of the subject, stood especially in need of revision. Zhe Acts of the Apostles, though read in
the churches in the season between Easter and Pentecost, were seldom preached upon; and we find St.
Chrysostom complaining in the opening of these Homilies, as also on an earlier occasion at Antioch, that this


X PREFACES: TO. THE ‘OXFORD EDIZION:


portion of the Scriptures was not so much read as it ought to be, nay, that there were “many to whom this
Book was not even known.” (p. 1 and note !). Hence it is not surprising, if the Preacher was not always under-
stood; and, in fact, the attentive reader will not unfrequently see reason to suspect, that the scribe (or
“reporter,”) from whose notes the text was formed, did not rightly apprehend the sense of what he heard.
Nor has the transcriber (or “ redactor”) remedied the defects, whatever they may have been, of the original
report. On the contrary, in other ways, of which we shall have to speak presently, he has often perplexed the
sense, and sometimes entirely misrepresented the Preacher’s meaning.

The earliest mention of our Homilies is by Cassiodorus (A.D. 514), who relates, that with the assistance of
friends he caused “ the fifty-five Homilies on the Acts, by St. John, Bishop of Constantinople,” to be translated
into Latin, Off. t. ii. p. 544. This version unfortunately is lost.* In the Canons of the Fifth and Sixth
General Councils, St. Chrysostom’s view of the Seven Deacons in the Acts is cited at length from Hom. xiv.
(p.91). John of Damascus, de Fid. Orthod. iii. 15, (A.D. 730), cites as from the second of these Homilies a
passage which appears in the first, being the comment oni.g. Photius has an entry in the Brbiotheca relating
to them, but by some mistake the number is given as fifty. Of the Cafeza on the Acts, compiled by a certain
Andreas Presbyter of unknown age and country, but not later than the tenth century (for there is a manuscript
of that age), a large proportion is taken from St. Chrysostom: and the Commentaries of CEcumenius (990) and
Theophylact (1077) are in many places formed from the Catena: as also are the Scholia in Mss. of the Acts.
To these may be added the Mortlegium or Ecloge, a compilation the date of which is unknown, but certainly
not later than the first half of the eleventh century. The Author of this work seems to have resorted to our
Homilies once only (Hom. xix. p 139): but there, he, as all the rest who have been mentioned, used the text
which in the notes we call te o/d text, and from which the present Iranslation is made.

For there is another and a widely different text, by which alone, unfortunately, these Homilies have been
known in modern times, except by the few who have had access to Manuscripts. In the National Library at
Paris there is (No. 729) a manuscript (in our notes marked E, in Par. Ben. 2, D), which the Parisian Editor
describes thus: Quorum (of six Mss. on the Acts) antiguissimus, olim Colb. nunc Reg. 729, sec. X., nitide et
accurate scriptus, desinit in hom. quinguagesima. (This is a mistake; it reaches to the end of the 55th.) Of
the other Mss. he assigns A. B. C. (No. 725, 6, 7), to the twelfth, fourteenth and thirteenth centuries
respectively. These, and a copy in the Library of New College (N), contain the o/d text. Two others D, F,
(728, and 73 suppl.) exhibit a text compiled from old and new, and with alterations peculiar to itself. Of the
six Parisian Mss. a full collation was made for “the Library of the Fathers:” of N we have at present but a
partial collation. li

The Ms. E. came into the hands of Erasmus, and from it he made his Latin version, down to the end of
Hom. liii. and there for some reason which is not explained he goes off to the other text, of which he has
nowhere taken notice in the preceding Homilies. Of this work he says in an Epistle to Tonstal, Bishop of
Durham: Z£x Chrysostomo in Acta verteram homilias tres; cujus opere me panituit, cum nihil hic viderem
Chrysostomt, Tuo tamen hortatu recepi codicem in manum; sed nihil unquam legit indoctius. Ebrius ac
stertens scriberem meliora, Sabet frigidos sensiculos nec eos satis commode potest explicare. In his Preface,
however, he considerably abates che severity of this censure, and contents himself with hinting a doubt whether
the work be St. Chrysostom’s: guod stylus concisum guiddam et abruptum habeat, id quod a phrosi Chrysostomi
videtur alienum : si docti tamen censebunt opus Chrysostomo dignum, libenter hoc ego quicguid est suspicionis
ponam.

Of the Greek text, the editio princeps, that of Commelin, professes to be formed from manuscripts Bzb/iorh.
Palatine Bavare, Augustane, Pistoriane, of which at present we are unable to give any account. Perhaps
Commelin’s leading Ms. was of a composite order: such however is his text; for it occasionally deserts E, to
which, as a general rule, it closely adheres. This was inconsistent, for the circumstances of the two texts are
such, that one or other ought to be followed throughout. There can be no valid reason for alternating
between the two: for they are not different reports of the same matter, such that between them one might
hope to approximate to the truth: the one is a refashionment of the other, and where it differs, it does so, not
because its framer had a more correct report of the Sermons, but because he wished to improve upon the
materials which lay before him in the other text.

Commelin’s text, in substance, is retained in all the subsequent editions. Savile, from the New College
Ms. has corrected words and phrases here and there, but in the main his text is still that of the edstio princeps.
(He describes it as composed from the New College Ms., another belonging to J. A. de Thou (Thuanus), e¢
tertio non ita pridem excuso in Germania.) The edition of Morel (which commonly goes under the name of
Fronto Duceus) repeats Commelin, but without Savile’s emendations: and the Benedictines (here not Mont-
faucon), though they profess to have collated the Parisian Mss., have reprinted with but slight improvements,


* From the same Cassiodorus there is extant a short work on the Acts under the title Conplextones Actuum A postolorum;
but this is merely a brief syllabus of the history, and contains nothing in which we could trace a reference to St. Chrysostom’s
Exposition.


PREPACES 10 THE ‘OXFORD’ EDITION. xi


and with not a few disimprovements, the text of Morel. In the Parisian reprint of the Benedictine
Chrysostom (Par. Ben. 2), the Editor has occasionally, but not constantly, recurred to the manuscripts, rarely
gives the preference to the text of A. B. C., and constantly assumes the inferiority of those copies, in contents
and authenticity as well as in antiquity, to the manuscript (E), which furnished the Latin version of Erasmus,
and in substance, as we have explained, the printed text of the original.

Had the Editors collated the manuscript copies of these Homilies—a labor from which they, or those
whom they employed, seem to have shrunk—they would probably have reversed their estimate of the relative
value of the two recensions. The general superiority of the other text in point of sense and coherence, not-
withstanding its frequent abruptness and uncouthness, is too evident to be called in question. Had they also
collated the Catena, (Ecumenius, Theophylact, and the Scholia, they would have found the external testimony
to be coincident with the internal evidence to the higher antiquity as well as greater authenticity of the text
which (for the most part unknown) they rejected. It would have been seen that this, besides being, with all
its faults, incomparably better, was the older of the two; and that the other could claim no higher antiquity
than that of the manuscript (said to be of the tenth century) in which it appears: that it is the work of some
scribe, who, offended by the manifest abruptness and ruggedness of the earlier text, set himself to smooth out
the difficulties, and to make it read more easily. For this is clearly the true state of the case. With this view.
the scribe sometimes alters words and phrases, sometimes transposes: often omits, where he found something
that he did not understand, oftener still amplifies, or rather dilutes: and interpolates matter which sometimes is
demonstrably borrowed with little disguise from the Catena (see p. 113, note!; 279, note *; 280, note *); or
which, when it is his own, is little worth. In short, he has thought more of sound than of sense, and if he
could make a passage run smoothly to the ear, has given himself little concern whether St. Chrysostom was
likely to have so thought, or so expressed himself. The notes appended to our Translation will abundantly
substantiate this censure. To have noted all the variations, either of the printed text, or of E alone, would
have been a task as unprofitable as it was wearisome: perhaps as it is, we have given more than enough to
vindicate the claims of the older text. If any one desires larger materials for comparison, Erasmus’ Latin
version, which, except in the two last Homilies, keeps close to E, will show that the text which we represent in
our Translation is, with all its imperfections, incomparably the better of the two. Even if it were otherwise
and were the alterations not, as they mostly are, disfigurements, but, considered in themselves, decided improve.
ments, still our duty was plain: the text which came to us accredited by all the testimony known to be extant,
we were not at liberty to reject in favor of an alien recension, unknown to the Ancients, and, as far as our
evidence goes, unheard of before the tenth century. Therefore, in forming the text for this Translation we
have entirely dismissed E, except where it has preserved readings which came strictly under the description of
“various readings.”

But while confining ourselves to that older text, we were not to leave unnoticed its more patent defects
and errors. We could not but perceive, that we had before us an unreyised report of St. Chrysostom’s
Sermons, which, especially in the Expositions, was frequently imperfect—sometimes, indeed, little more than a
set of rough notes thrown together, with, apparently, little or no attempt at arrangement. So far as this imper-
fection was caused by the reporter’s negligence or incapacity, there was no remedy: and leaving the matter as
we found it, or, at most, inserting in the text the marks of a /acuna, we have only ventured, in the notes, to
surmise what may have been the general purport of St. Chrysostom’s remarks. In other places, where the
defects of our sources seemed to be rather chargeable upon the redactor, we have sought to apply a remedy,
sometimes, but rarely, by conjectural emendation; very often by inserting portions of sacred text or other
connecting matter in [ ], and also by transposing parts which had fallen out of their true order. For it seems
that the original transcript from the reporter’s notes was defective in these two regards. (1) The reporter
would frequently omit to note in his tablets the ke(uevov or some other text of Scripture, or would indicate it in
the shortest possible way by a word or two at the beginning and ending of the passage, intending to insert it
afterwards at his leisure. It appears, however, that in many places this was either not done at all, or done in
the wrong place. Hence where the text seemed incurably defective or perplexed, we have often been able to
restore coherency by the simple expedient of inserting texts which were omitted, or else, by removing the texts
altogether, and redistributing them among the comments. Almost any page of the Translation, especially in
the Recapitulations, will illustrate this remark.

(2) It often happens, that the order of the comments both in the first and in the second exposition (or
recapitulation), does not follow the order of the texts. Of course the Preacher might be supposed to have
sometimes returned upon his own steps, but it was scarcely conceivable that St. Chrysostom should have
delivered an Exposition perplexed, as we often found it, by disjointed remarks thrown together without the
slightest method. It was necessary therefore to consider whether it might not be possible to educe something
like connected exposition, by assuming that the reporter’s notes had been transcribed from his tablets in a
wrong order. Where it could be seen that one sentence or portion was given as comment on such a verse,
another on some other verse, and so on, some clue to the true order was given us in the sequence of the texts


Xii PREFACES TO THE OXFORD: EDITION


themselves. Even so, the difficulties which beset this part of our task were greater than can be readily
estimated by any one who has not tried it. Sometimes the complication resisted all attempts at disentangle-
ment. We are far from supposing that we have done all that might have been done in this way: but it is
hoped that the labor which has been bestowed has not been altogether wasted, and that the restoration will
carry with it its own evidence. And as in these attempts we have indicated by letters the order in which the
trajected parts lie in the manuscripts, the reader in every case has the means of forming his own judgment. In
the first seventeen Homilies, we have only now and then resorted to this method: not because it was less
needed there, but because we had not then so clearly perceived what was the state of the case, and what was
practicable in this way. The eighteenth furnishes a remarkable instance, pp. 116-120. Let any one read it in
the order denoted by the letters, i. e. the six parts marked (@) consecutively, then the seven parts marked (4),
inserting in the third of the latter (see p. 116, note 8), the comment on v. 25, from page 117, (“And they when
they had testified,’’ etc., to ‘when the Samaritans believed,”) and he will have the entire “recapitulation” or
second exposition of the history of the Samaritans and Simon Magus as it appears in the Mss.—which he will
plainly perceive could not have proceeded in that form from St. Chrysostom. The same matter, read as we
have arranged it, will be found to form a continuous exposition, not indeed perfect, for the dislocated state
into which it had fallen seems to have led to further corruptions on the part of the scribes: but at any rate
coherent, and with the parts fitting into each other. Moreover, if the fourteen parts, as here arranged, be num-
bered 1. 2. 3. etc., it will be seen that the order in which they lie in the Mss. is 1. 3. 5: 8. 10. 12: 2. 4.6: 14:7.
9g. II. 13., whence it seems that the derangement proceeded by some kind of method. The like was often found
to be the case in subsequent instances. In p. 229, the trajection is I. 3. 5. 7. 9. II. 13: 2. 4. 6. 8. 10.12: i.e.,
the transcriber missed the alternate portions, and brought them all together at the end. In p. 229 (before the
series just noticed), and 260, it is 3. 2. I.,and in 170, 4. 3. 2. I., 1. e. three, and four, parts read in reverse order.
In a great number of instances the transposition is only of two parts, 2. 1: sometimes repeated as in 235, 2. I.,
Ee) 2722234, 213,15 2.02°2. 13.106, 2.1: 12 2.12 1 2. 1g): 2.1: A fon ofdrequient-occurrencessmosam
I. 3., as in 188, 220, 225, 247; and combined with others as in 213, 2. 4. I. 3.2.1: 1m 275, 2.1: 1: 2. 4. I. 3.
and 183, 2.1: I: 2.4.1.3: 2. 1. There is the like regularity in the scheme 2.1.4. 3. —p. 1255,and 3. tame
p. 216, 301. In the last Homily, which is extremely confused, the trajection seems to yield this very regular
scheme, 2. 4. 6. I. 3. 5: I: 5. 3-1-6. 4. 2. In other instances where the trajection is less regular, or does not
Seem to follows a rulejasim- a5i, 4. 1. 3) 2); 15253.12. 4. 1: 2424.) 0) 1) Sage) 250,20) tetAn o.com eae
and in 298, 316, 321 (on which three see the notes), the transcriber may have gone wrong on other grounds, and
not, as in the generality of instances, from mistaking the order in which the reporter had set the matter on his
tablets. The trajections we have attempted to remedy occur mostly in the expository parts. In the Z¢hica it
often appeared to us, that the coherency might be greatly improved by transposition, but the evidence of the
true order was more precarious here, than where the sequence of the texts furnished a clue; in these parts,
therefore, we have rarely ventured upon applying this remedy.

In these ways it is hoped that something has been done towards presenting these Homilies in a form
nearer to that in which they were delivered, than the form in which they are exhibited in the unadulterated
manuscripts, much more in the printed editions. The task was arduous, and we are far from supposing that
our labors have always been successful; but at least we have not spared pains and diligence. The Translation
was a work only less difficult than the reconstruction of the text. Here again much indulgence is needed on
the score of the difficulty of producing a version, which, while it represented the original with its roughnesses
and defects, should not be altogether unreadable. We have attempted, however, to give faithfully, though not
always literally, the sense, or what seemed to be the sense, of our materials.

As a commentary on ¢he Acts of the Apostles, this Work stands alone among the writings of the first ten
centuries. The Expositions of St. Clement of Alexandria (in the MWyfotypfoses), of Origen, of Diodorus of
Tarsus, and St. Chrysostom’s teacher, Theodore of Mopsuestia, as well as of Ammonius and others whose
materials are used in the Catena, have perished. Those who are acquainted with the characteristic qualities of
St. Chrysostom’s exegesis, will perceive here also the same excellencies which mark his other expository works
—especially the clear and full exposition of the historical sense, and the exact appreciation of the rhetorical
momenta in the discourses of St. Peter, St. Stephen, St. James and St. Paul, as recorded in the Acts. Of the
Ethica it is perhaps not too much to affirm, that not the most finished work of St. Chrysostom will be found to
furnish more of instruction and interesting matter (apart from the expression) than will be found in these
Homilies, on the religious and moral subjects of which they treat: for example, On the delay of Baptism, On
spiritual indolence and excuses derived from the cessation of Miraculous Grace, On the nature and uses of
Miracles, On Prayer, On the Study of the Scriptures, On Alms, On Anger and Gentleness, Against Oaths and
Swearing, and many others. Nor does any work exhibit a livelier portraiture of the character and life of the
great Preacher and Bishop, and of the manners of the times in which his lot was cast.


CONTENTS OF THE HOMILIES.


Homiy I.—Acts i. 1, 2. The former treatise I made, O Theophilus, concerning all that Jesus began
both to do and to teach, until the day in which he was received up, after that he had ner command-
ment through the Holy Ghost, unto the Apostles, whom He had chosen : : ;

HomiLy II.—Acts i. 6. They therefore, when they were come together, asked him, saying, Lord, dost
thou at this time restore the kingdom to Israel? ; : : E : ; : :

Homity III.—Actsi. 12. Thenreturned they unto Jerusalem from the mount called Olivet, which is nigh
unto Jerusalem a Sabbath day’s journey off

Homity IV.—Acts ii. 1, 2. And when the day of Pentecost was now come, they were all together in one
place. And suddenly there came from heaven a sound

Homity V.—Acts ii. 14. Ye men of Judea, and all ye that dwell at Jerusalem, be this known unto you,
and give ear to my words

Homity VI.—Acts ii. 22. Ye men of Israel, hear these words ‘ 3 : : :

Homity VII.—Acts ii. 37. And when they heard this, they were pricked in their heart, and said unto
Peter and the rest of the apostles, Brethren, what shall we do? ; : : :

Homity VIII.—Acts iii. 1. Now Peter and John were going up into the temple, at the hour of prayer,
being the ninth hour : é ;

HomiLy IX.—Acts iii. 12. And when Peter saw it, he answered unto the people, Ye men of Israel, why
marvel ye at this man, or why fasten ye your eyes on us, as though by our own power or godliness we
had made him to walk? : : : ‘ ‘ : : : . : ; -

Homity X.—Acts iv. 1. And as they spake unto the people, the priests and the captain of the temple
and the Sadducees came upon them . : : . . : : .

HomiLy XI.—Acts iv. 23. But being let go, they came to their own company, and reported all that the
chief priests and the elders had said unto them : 4 3 : " A : < ; -

Homity XII.—Acts iv. 36, 37. And Joseph, who by the Apostles was surnamed Barnabas (which is, being
interpreted, Son of exhortation), a Levite, a man of Cyprus by race, having a field, sold it, and
brought the money, and laid it at the apostles’ feet . . :

Homity XIII.—Acts v. 17, 18. But the high-priest rose up, and they that were with him feb is the
sect of the Sadducees) and they were filled with jealousy and laid hands on the apostles, and put
them in public ward : -

Homity XIV.—Acts v. 34. But there stood up one in the council, a Pharisee, named Gamaliel, a doctor
of the law, had in honor of all the people, and commanded to put the men forth a little while
Homity XV.—Acts vi. 8. And Stephen, full of grace and power, wrought great wonders and signs

among the people . ; - { - : ¢ : : ; : , :

Homity XVI.—Acts vii. 6, 7. And God spake on this wise, That his seed should sojourn in a strange
land; and that they should bring them into bondage, and entreat them evil four hundred years. And
the nation to which they shall be in bondage’will I judge, said God: and after that shall they come
forth, and serve me in this place


.


PAGE


- [00


xiv CONTENTS OF; THE: HOMILTES.


PAGE
Homity XVII.—Acts vii. 35. This Moses whom they refused, saying, Who made thee a ruler and a judge?
him hath God sent to be both a ruler and a deliverer with the hand of the Angel which appeared


to him in the bush é é ; : : ; 3 . . ‘ : z 2 ; xs 2 . 106
Homity XVIII.—Acts vii. 54. Now when they heard these things, they were cut to the heart, and they
gnashed on him with their teeth . : : : : : : : - ; : : : . 112


Homity XIX.—Acts viii. 26, 27. But an angel of the Lord spake unto Philip, saying, Arise, and go
toward the south unto the way that goeth down from Jerusalem unto Gaza; the same is desert. And
he arose, and went . : : : . : . . . . . : : ‘ : : = 120)
Homiry XX.—<Acts ix. 10-12. And there was a certain disciple at Damascus, named Ananias; and the
Lord said unto him ina vision, Ananias. And he said, Behold, I am here, Lord. And the Lord said
unto him, Arise, and go to the street which is called Straight, and enquire m the house of Judas for
one called Saul, 2 man of Tarsus: for, behold, he prayeth, and hath seen a man named Ananias
coming in, and laying his hands on him, that he might receive his sight . - - : ‘ : - 129


Homiry XXI.—Acts ix. 26, 27. And when he was come to Jerusalem, he assayed to join himself to the
disciples : and they were all afraid of him, not believing that he was a disciple. But Barnabas took
him, and brought him to the apostles, and declared unto them how he had seen the Lord in the way 134


HomiLy XXII.—Acts x. 1-4. Now there was a certain man in Czsarea, Cornelius by name, a centurion
of the band called the Italian band, a devout man, and one that feared God with all his house, which
gave much alms to the people, and prayed to God alway. He saw in a vision openly, as it were about
the ninth hour of the day, an angel of God coming in unto him, and saying to him, Cornelius. And he,
fastening his eyes upon him, and being affrighted said, What is it, Lord? And he said unto him, Thy
prayers and thine alms are gone up for a memorial before God . : : : : ; : - 141


HomiLty XXIII.—Acts x. 23, 24.. So he called them in, and lodged them. And on the morrow he arose
and went forth with them, and certain of the brethren from Joppa accompanied him. And on the
morrow they entered into Czsarea. And Cornelius was waiting for them, having called together his
kinsmen and near friends . ; : : : ‘ : é 3 : é : : : 148

HomiLy XXIV.—Acts x. 44-46. While Peter yet spake these words, the Holy Ghost fell on all them
which heard the word. And they of the circumcision which believed were amazed, as many as
came with Peter, because that on the Gentiles also was poured out the gift of the Holy Ghost. For
they heard them speak with tongues, and magnify God . : 5 : : : : ; : BGs


Homity XXV.—Acts xi. 19. They therefore that were scattered abroad upon the tribulation that arose
about Stephen travelled as far as Phoenicia, and Cyprus, and Antioch, preaching the word to none save
only to Jews. . : : : : c ; : : ; ; 2 : Sulit : ¢ . 162

HomiLy XXVI.—Acts xii. 1-3. Now at that time Herod the king put forth his hands to afflict certain of
the church. And he killed James the brother of John with the sword. And when he saw that it pleased
the Jews, he proceeded to seize Peter also. And those were the days of unleavened bread : . 168


Homity XXVII.—Acts xii. 18, 19. Now as soon as it was day, there was no small stir among the sol-
diers, what was become of Peter. And when Herod had sought for him, and found him not, he exam-
ined the guards, and commanded that they should be put to death. And he went down from Judea
to Czesarea, and tarriedthere . : ; : : 4 c - . - ‘ : 5 : A/S:


Homiry XXVIII.—Acts xiii. 4, 5. So they, being sent forth by the Holy Ghost, went down to Seleucia;

and from thence they sailed to Cyprus. And when they were at Salamis, they proclaimed the word

of God in the synagogues of the Jews: and they had also John as their attendant : ; : Ppatiiyhos
HomiLy XXIX.—Acts xiii. 16, 17. And Paul stood up and beckoning with the hand said, Men of Israel,

and ye that fear God, hearken. The God of this people Israel chose our fathers, and exalted the peo-


ple when they sojourned in the land of Egypt, and with a high arm led he them forth out of it . AS
HomiLty XXX.—Acts xiii. 42. And as they went out, they besought that these words might be spoken
unto them the next sabbath : : ‘ : : : : : : : : : < : . 188


HomILy XXXI.—Acts xiv. 14, 15. But when the apostles, Barnabas and Paul, heard of it, they rent
their garments, and sprang forth among the multitude, crying out, and saying, Sirs, why do ye these
things? We also are men of like passions with you, and bring you good tidings that ye should turn
from these vain things unto the living God, who made the heaven, and the earth, and the sea, and all
things that in them is : ° : : , : : : : P . ; : : : - 195


Homity XXXII.—Acts xv. 1. And certain men came down from Judea and taught the brethren, saying,
Except ye be circumcised after the custom of Moses, ye cannot be saved , : 4 ; : 201


CONTENTS, Ob THE HOMILIES. XV


PAGE
Homity XXXIII.—Acts xv. 13-15. And after they had held their peace, James answered, saying,
Brethren, hearken unto me: Symeon hath rehearsed how first God did visit the Gentiles, to take

. out of them a people for his name. And to this agree the words of the prophets : : - . 205


ee


HomiILty XXXIV.—Acts: xv. 35. But Paul and Barnabas tarried in Antioch, teaching and preaching the
word of the Lord, with many others also . 2 : ; : : : : - : ; : ere


Homiry XXXV.—Acts xvi. 13, 14. And on the sabbath day we went forth without the gate by a river
side, where we supposed there was a place of prayer; and we sat down, and spake unto the women
which were come together. And a certain woman named Lydia, a seller of purple, of the city of
Thyatira, one that worshipped God, heard us: whose heart the Lord opened, to give heed unto the
things which were spoken by Paul . - : : : ; : . : - 5 ie,


Homity XXXVI.—Acts xvi. 25, 26. But about eect Paul and Silas were praying, and singing hymns
unto God: and the prisoners were listening to them. And suddenly there was a great earthquake, so that
the foundations of the prison-house were shaken, and eee all the doors were sal a and every
one’s bands wereloosed _.. : ; : : eZee


HomiLty XXXVII.—Acts xvii. 1, 2, 3. Now when nee had sieht through Pescons and Paes
they came to Thessalonica, where was a synagogue of the Jews: and Paul, as his custom was, went in
unto them, and for three Sabbath days reasoned with them from the Scriptures, opening and alleging
that it behooved the Christ to suffer, and to rise again from the dead; and that this Jesus, whom,
said he, I proclaim unto you, is the Christ : : : : : : : . : ; ; 5,228


Homity XXXVIII.—Acts xvii. 16,17. Now while Paul waited for them at Athens, his spirit was pro-
voked within him, as he beheld the city full of idols. So he reasoned in the synagogue with the Jews,
and the devout persons, and in the market-place every day with them that met with him


to
Go
to


HomiLty XXXIX.—Acts xvii. 32-343 xvili. 1. Nowwhen they heard of the resurrection of the dead, some
mocked: But others said, We will hear thee concerning this yet again. Thus Paul went out from
among them. But certain men clave unto him, and believed: among whom also was Dionysius the
Areopagite, and a woman named Damaris, and others with them. After these things he departed
from Athens, and cameto Corinth . - : ; - - . : : . - : : . 239


Homity XL.—Acts xviii. 18. And Paul having tarried after this yet many days took his leave of the
brethren, and sailed thence for Syria, and with him Priscilla and Aquila; having shorn his head in
‘Cenchrea: for hehadavow . : - : - r : 5 : : c - - : » 245


Homity XLI.—Acts xix. 8,9. And he entered into the synagogue, and spake boldly for the space of
three months, reasoning and persuading as to the things concerning the kingdom of God. But when
some were hardened and disobedient, speaking evil of the Way before the multitude, he departed
from them, and separated the disciples, reasoning daily in the school of Tyrannus . -


ty


50
Homity XLII.—Acts xix. 21-23. Nowafter these things were ended, Paul purposed in the spirit, when
he had passed through Macedonia and Achaia, to go to Jerusalem, saying, After I have been there, I
must also see Rome. And having sent into Macedonia two of them that ministered unto him, Timothy
and Erastus, he himself stayed in Asia for a while. And about this time there arose no small stir
concerning the Way . F ; 5 : ; : Rat : - : : : : Ney;


Homity XLIII.—Acts xx. 1. And after the uproar was ceased, Paul having sent for the disciples, and
exhorted them, took leave of them and departed for to go into Macedonia . ; : : : = 203


Homity XLIV.—Acts xx.17 21. And from Miletus he sent to Ephesus, and called to him the elders
of the church. And whenthey were come to him, he said untothem, Ye yourselves know, from the
first day that I set foot in Asia, after what manner I was with youall the time, serving the Lord with
all lowliness of mind, and with tears, and with trials, which befell me by the plots of the Jews: how
that I shrank not from declaring unto you anything that was profitable and teaching you publicly,
and from house to house, testifying both to Jews andto Greeks, repentance toward God, and faith


toward our Lord Jesus Christ . : é : : 4 : ‘ : ; : : : : #207
Homity XLV.—Acts xx. 32. And now, I commend you to God, and to the word of his grace, which is

able to build you up, and to give you the inheritance among all them that are sanctified : = - 272
Homity XLVI.—Acts xxi. 18, 19. And the day following, Paul went in with us unto James: and all the
elders were present, And when he had saluted them, he rehearsed one by one the things which God

t had wrought among the Gentiles by his ministry. : . : ‘ : . . ; é Rego


=Homity XLVII.—Acts xxi. 39,40. But Paul said, I am a Jew of Tarsus, in Cilicia, a citizen of no mean
city: and I beseech thee, give me leave to speak unto the people. And when he had given him leave,


,


xvi CONTENTS OF THE HOMILIES:


PAGE
Paul standing on the stairs, beckoned with the hand unto the people. And when there was made
a great silence, he spake unto them in the Hebrew language, saying : : : : - 3 . 282


Homity XLVIII.—Acts xxii. 17-20. And it came to pass, that, when I had returned to Jerusalem, and
while I prayed in the temple, I fell into a trance; and saw him saying unto me, Make haste, and get
thee quickly out of Jerusalem: because they will not receive of thee testimony concerning me. And I
said, Lord, they themselves know that I imprisoned and beat in every synagogue them that be-
lieved on thee: and when the blood of Stephen, thy witness, was shed, I also was standing by, and
consenting, and keeping the garments of them that slew him . : : : 5 é : ; 21207,


Homity XLIX.—<Acts xxiii. 6-8. But when Paul perceived that the one part were Sadducees, and the
other Pharisees, he cried out in the council, Brethren, I am a Pharisee, a son of Pharisees: touching
the hope and resurrection of the dead I am called in question. And when he had so said, there
arose a dissension between the Pharisees and Sadducees: and the assembly was divided. For the
Sadducees say that there is no resurrection, neither angel, nor spirit: but the Pharisees confess both . 292


Ifomity L.—Acts xxiii. 31, 32, 33. So the soldiers, as it was commanded them, took Paul, and brought
him by night to Antipatris. But on the morrow they left the horsemen to go with him, and returned to
the castle: and they, when they came to Czsarea, and delivered the letter to the governor, pre-
sented Paul also before him. : 5 7 ; : : : : : : : : 5 - 206


Homity LI.—Acts xxiv. 22, 23. But Felix, having more exact knowledge concerning the Way, deferred
them, saying, When Lysias the chief captain shall come down, I will determine your matter. And he
gave order to the centurion that he should be kept in charge, and should have indulgence ; and not to
forbid any of his friends to minister unto him : : ; E : : : : : ; » 302


‘fiomiLy LII.—Acts xxv. 23. So onthe morrow, when Agrippa was come, and Bernice, with great pomp,
Sod they were entered into the place of hearing, with the chief captains, and the principal men of
the city, at the command of Festus Paul was brought in . : ¢ : : : : : ‘ - 308


Homity LIII.—Acts xxvi. 30-32. And the king rose up, and the governor, and Bernice, and they that sat
with them: and when they had withdrawn they spake one to another, saying, This man doeth nothing
worthy of death or of bonds. And Agrippa said unto Festus, This man might have been set at liberty,
if he had not appealed unto Cesar . : 5 5 : ; é : : ‘ ; : é . 3M


HomiLy LIV.—Acts xxviii. 2,3. And the barbarians showed us nocommon kindness; for they kindled
a fire, and received us all, because of the present rain, and because of the cold. But when Paul had
gathered a bundle of sticks, and laid them on the fire, a viper came out by reason of the heat, and
fastened on his hand . : : ; : : ; 2 : 3 5 : : : . 319


HomiLty LV.—Acts xxviii. 17-29. And it came to pass, that after three days he called together those
that were the chief of the Jews: and when they were come together, he said unto them, I, Brethren,
though I have done nothing against the people, or the customs of our fathers, yet was delivered
prisoner from Jerusalem into the hands of the Romans. Who, when they had examined me, desired to
set meat liberty, because there was no cause of death in me. But when the Jews spake against it, I was
constrained to appeal unto Cesar: not that I had aught to accuse my nation of. For this cause
therefore did I intreat you to see and to speak with me; for because of the hope of Israel I am bound
with this chain . : ‘ - - : . ‘ 2 : ‘ t ‘ * fs : 6 « 324


A COMMENTARY


ON


To EsrteGel S


Che. DEE... AP isch Diem


Be St.) JOHRN, CHRYSOSTOM,


ARCHBISHOP OF CONSTANTINOPLE. 1


PO Me ye 1.


ACTS


“ The former treatise have I made, O Theophilus, con-
cerning all things which Jesus began both to do and
to teach, until the day on which, having given
charge to the Apostles, whom He had chosen, by
the Holy Spirit, He was taken up.”


To many persons this Book is so little
known, both it and its author, that they are
not even aware that there is such a book in
existence For this reason especially I have
taken this narrative for my subject, that I
may draw to it such as do not know it, and
not let such a treasure as this remain hidden
out of sight. For indeed it may profit us no
less than even the Gospels; so replete is it
with Christian wisdom and sound doctrine, es-
pecially in what is said concerning the Holy
Ghost. Then let us not hastily pass by it,
but examine it closely. Thus, the predictions
which in the Gospels Christ utters, here we
may see these actually come to pass; and


1 These Sermons were preached at Constantinople, in the
second or third year of St. Chrysostom’s archiepiscopate : see
Hom. xliv. ‘‘ Lo, by the grace of God, we also have been
by the space of three years, not indeed night and day ex-
horting you, but often every third, or at least every seventh,
day doing this.’’ It appears from Hom. i. that the course
began during the weeks of Easter: at which season the
Book of Acts was by long established practice read in other
Churches (as at Antioch and in Africa), if not at Constanti-
nople. See St. Chrys. Hom. Cur in Pentecoste Acta legan-
tur, and St. August. 77. zz Joann. vi. 18.

2 St. Chrys. had made the same complaint at Antioch in the
Homilies (A. D. 387) in Principium Actorum, etc. t. iii. p. 54.
“We are about to set before you a strange and new dish... .
strange, I say, and not strange. Not strange; for it belongs
to the order of Holy Scripture: and yet strange; because per-
adventure your ears are not accustomed to such a subject.
Certainly, there are many to whom this Book is not even
known (moAAois your Td BiBAtov TodTO ovSE yywpimov eat) and
many again think it so plain, that they slight it: thus to some
men their knowledge, to some their ignorance, is the cause of
stheir-neglect...... We are to enquire then who wrote it,
and when, and on what subject: and why it is ordered (vevo-
po8erntat) to be read at this festival. For peradventure you
do not hear this Book read [at other times] from year’s end to
year’s end.”’


1 tig


note in the very facts the bright evidence i
Truth which shines in them, and the mighty
change which is taking place in the disciples
now that the Spirit has come upon them.
For example, they heard Christ say, ‘“ Who-
so believeth on Me, the works that I do
shall he do also, and greater works than these
shall hedo” (John xiv. 12): and again, when
He foretold to the disciples, that they should
be brought before rulers and kings, and in
their synagogues they should scourge them,
and that they should suffer grievous things,
and overcome all (Matt. x. 18): and that
the Gospel should be preached in all the world
(Ib. xxiv. 14): now all this, how it came to
pass exactly as it was said, may be seen in
this Book, and more besides, which He told
them while yet with them. Here again you
will see the Apostles themselves, speeding
their way as on wings over land and sea; and
those same men, once so timorous and void of
understanding, on the sudden become quite
other than they were; men despising wealth,
and raised above glory and passion and con-
cupiscence, and in short all such atffec-
tions: moreover, what unanimity there is
among them now; nowhere any envying as
there was before, nor any of the old hanker-
ing after the preéminence, but all virtue
brought in them to its last finish, and shining
through all, with surpassing lustre, that char-
ity, concerning which the Lord had given so
many charges saying, “In this shall all men
know that ye are My disciples, if ye love one
another.” (John xiii. 35.) And then, besides,
there are doctrines to be found here, which
we could not have known so surely as we now


9
~


THE. WORKS OF) Sis CHRYSOUSTOSE


{Homixy I-


do, if this Book had not existed, but the very |
crowning point of our salvation would be hid-
den, alike for practice of life and for doctrine.

The greater part, however, of this work is
occupied with the acts of Paul, who “ laboured
more abundantly than they all.” (1. Cor. xv.
10.) And the reason is, that the author of
this Book, that is, the blessed Luke, was his
companion: a man, whose high qualities, suf-
ficiently visible in many other instances, are
especially shown in his firm adherence to his
Teacher, whom he constantly followed.* ‘Thus
at a time when all had forsaken him, one gone
into Galatia, another into Dalmatia, hear
what he says of this disciple: ‘ Only Luke is
with me.” (2 Tim. iv. 10.) And giving the
Corinthians a charge concerning him, he says,
““Whose praise is in the Gospel throughout
all the Churches.” (2 Cor. viii. 18.) © Again,
when he says, “* He was seen of Cephas, then
of the twelve,” and, “according to the Gospel
which ye received” (1 Cor. xv. 5, 1), he
means the Gospel of this Luke.t So that
there can be no mistake in attributing this
work to him: and when I say, to him, I mean,
to Christ. And why then did he not relate
every thing, seeing he was with Paul to the
end? We may answer, that what is here
written, was sufficient for those who would
attend, and that the sacred writers ever ad-
dressed themselves to the matter of immediate
importance, whatever it might be at the time:
it was no object with them to be writers of
books: in fact, there are many things which
they have delivered by unwritten tradition.
Now while all that is contained in this Book is
worthy of admiration, so is especially the way
the Apostles have of coming down to the
wants of their hearers: a condescension sug-


* The two reasons which Chrysostom urges’ for the study of
the Acts are also the two chief grounds upon which modern
criticism depends for establishing not only the general trust-
worthiness of the book, but also its authorship by Luke.
They are in substance, (1) The continuity of the history as
connected with the gospels and, particularly, coincidences of
style, matter and diction with the third gospel, and (2) The
remarkable undesigned coincidences of statement between the
Acts and Pauline Epistles which exclude the possibility of
inter-dependence. From Col. i. 11, 14; Philem. 24; 2 Tim.
iv. 11, we learn that Luke was a close companion of Paul. In
the part of the Book of Acts which treats especially of the
work of Paul, the writer frequently refers to himself in the
use of the first person plural as an -associate of the apostle
(vid. xvi, 10; xx. 6Sq.; xxi. 1 Sq.; xxvii. 1). These considerations
demonstrate the fitness of Luke to prepare such a treatise as the


Acts and render the supposition of his authorship plausible.
When they are combined with those mentioned under (1) and
when the dedication of both books toa certain Theophilus is
eet the argument becomes very cogent and complete.
a ».

+ The reference in the Text of the expression: ‘‘ the Gospel
which ye received,” (x Cor. xv.1) to Luke’s “* gospel’ is, of
course, groundless. Paul speaks of it as the gospel which he
preached unto them. It is “his gospel’? as in Rom. ii. 16;
Xvi. 25; Gal. i. 11, etc. The use of évayy€éAcov to denote a book
is post:apostolic.—G. B. S.

1 Hom. in Princip. Act. p. 54. ‘* Kirst we must see who
wrote the Book. . . . whether a man, or God: and if man, let
us reject it; for, ‘Call no man master upon earth: but i
God, let us receive it.”


gested by the Spirit who has so ordered it,
that the subject on which they chiefly dwell is
that which pertains to Christ as man. For so
it is, that while they discourse so much about
Christ, they have spoken but little concerning
His Godhead: it was mostly of the Manhood
that they discoursed, and of the Passion, and
the Resurrection, and the Ascension. For the
thing required in the first instance was this,
that it should be believed that He was risen,
and ascended into heaven. As then the point
on which Christ himself most insisted was, to
have it known that He was come from the
Father, so is it this writer’s principal object
to declare, that Christ was risen from the
dead, and was received up into Heaven, and
that He went to God, and came from God.
For, if the fact of His coming from God were
not first believed, much more, with the Resur-
rection and Ascension added thereto, would
the Jews have found the entire doctrine in-


credible. Wherefore. gently and by degrees
he leads them on to higher truths. Nay, at
Athens Paul even calls Him man_ simply,


without saying more (Acts xvii. 31). -For if,
when Christ Himself spoke of His equality
with the Father, they often attempted to stone '
Him, and called Him a blasphemer for this
reason, it was little to be expected that they
would receive this doctrine from the fisher-
men, and that too, with the Cross coming be-
fore it.

But why speak of the Jews, seeing that
even the disciples often upon hearing the
more sublime doctrines were troubled and
offended? ‘Therefore also He told them, “I
have many things to say unto you, but ye can-
not bear them -now.(John, .xvil~12)) ale
those could not, who had been so long time
with Him, and had been admitted to so many
secrets, and had seen so many wonders, how
was it to be expected that men, but newly
dragged away from altars, and idols, and sac-
rifices, and cats, and crocodiles (for such did
the Gentiles worship), and from the rest of
their evil ways, should all at once receive the
more sublime matters of doctrine? And how
in particular should Jews, hearing as they did
every day of their lives, and having it ever
sounded in their ears, ‘‘ The Lord thy God is’
one Lord, and beside Him is none other”
(Deut. vi. 4): who also had seen Him hanging -
nailed on the Cross, nay, had themselves
crucified and buried Him, and not seen Him
even risen: when they were told that this
same person was God and equal with the
Father, how should they, of all men, be other-
wise than shocked and revolted? Therefore
it is that gently and little by little they carry
them on, with much consideration and for-


Homity I.]


bearance letting themselves down to their low
attainments, themselves the while enjoying in
more plentiful measure the grace of the Spirit,
and doing greater works in Christ’s name than
Christ Himself did, that they may at once
raise them up from their grovelling apprehen-
sions, and confirm the saying, that Christ was
raised from the dead. For this, in fact, is
just what this Book is: a Demonstration of
the Resurrection :'* this being once believed,
the rest would come in due course. The sub-
ject then and entire scope of this Book, in the
main, is just what I have said. And now let
us hear the Preface itself.

“The former treatise have I made, O The-
ophilus, of all that Jesus began both to do
and to teach.”” (v. 1.) Why does he put him
in mind of the Gospel? ‘To intimate how
strictly he may be depended upon. For at
the outset of the former work he says, “It
seemed good to me also, having had perfect
understanding of all things from the very
first, to write unto thee in order.” (Luke i. 3.)
Neither is he content with his own testimony.
but refers the whole matter to the Apostles.
saying, ‘Even as they delivered them unto
us, which from the beginning were eyewit-
nesses and ministers of the word.” (Luke,
i.2.) Having then accredited his account in
the former instance, he has no need to put
forth his credentials afresh for this treatise,
seeing his disciple has been once for all sat-
isfied, and by the mention of that former
work he has reminded him of the strict rell-
ance to be placed in him for the truth. For
if a person has shown himself competent and
trustworthy to write of things which he has
heard, and moreover has obtained our con-
fidence, much more will he have a right to
our confidence when he has composed an
account, not of things which he has received
from others, but of things which he has seen
and heard. For thou didst receive what re-
lates to Christ; much more wilt thou receive
what concerns the Apostles.

What then, (it may be asked), is it a ques-
tion only of history, with which the Holy
Spirit has nothing to do? Not so. For, if
“those delivered it unto us, who from the


1 Hom. cur in Pentec. Acta legantur, t. iii. p. 89. E. ‘‘ The
demonstration of the Resurrection is, the Apostolic miracles:
and of the Apostolic miracles this Book is the school.”’

* The statement that the Acts isa ‘‘ Demonstration of the
Resurrection ’’ has acertain profound truth, but is incorrect
if intending to assert that such was the conscious purpose of
the author. The resurrection of Jesus is a prominent theme
in the Apostolic discourses, but the book is no more designed
primarily to prove the resurrection than are the Epistles to
the Romans and Corinthians. The immediate purpose of the
book 1s to record the labors and triumphs at the Apostolic
Church as supplementary to the narrative of the teaching and
work of Jesus (i. 1, 2). The events narrated presuppose
ao and would have been impossible without it.—


RAE AOS (Or THE APOSTLES: 3


beginning were eyewitnesses and ministers of
the word;” then, what he says, is (theirs.
And why did he not say, ‘As they who were
counted worthy of the Holy Spirit delivered
them unto us;’ but “Those who were eyewit-
nesses?” Because, in matter of belief, the
very thing that gives one a right to be be-
lieved, is the having learned from eyewit-
nesses : whereas the other appears to foolish
persons mere parade and pretension. And
therefore John also speaks thus: “I saw, and
bare record that this is the Son of God.”
(John i. 34.) And Christ -expresses Him-
self in the same way to Nicodemus, while he
was dull of apprehension, ‘‘ We speak that we
do know, and testify that we have seen; and
no one receiveth our witness.” (Ib. iil. 11.)
Accordingly, He gave them leave to rest their
testimony in many particulars on the fact of
their having seen them, when He said, “ And
do ye bear witness concerning Me, because
ye have. been with Me from the beginning.”
(John xv, 27.) The Apostles themselves also
often speak in a similar manner; “ We are
witnesses, and the Holy Spirit which God
hath given to those that obey Him.” (Acts ii.
32); and on a subsequent occasion, Peter,
still giving assurance of the Resurrection,
said, ‘Seeing we did eat and drink with
Him.” (Acts x. 41.) For they more readily
received the testimony of persons who had
been His companions, because the notion of
the Spirit was as yet very much beyond them.
Therefore John also at that time, in his Gos-
pel, speaking of the blood and water, said, he
himself saz z¢, making the fact of his having
seen it equivalent, for them, to the highest
testimony, although the witness of the Spirit
is more certain than the evidence of sight, but
not so with unbelievers. Now that Luke was
a partaker of the Spirit, is abundantly clear,
both from the miracles which even now take
place; and from the fact that in those times
even ordinary persons were gifted with the
Holy Ghost ; and again from the testimony of
Paul, in these words, ‘‘ Whose praise is in the
Gospel ”’ (2 Cor. viii. 18); and from the ap-
pointment to which he was chosen: for having
said this, the Apostle adds, ‘ But also ap-
pointed of the Churches to travel with us with
this grace which is administered by us.” *
Now mark how unassuming he is. He
does not say, The former Gospel which I
preached, but, ‘“‘The former treatise have I
made ;” accounting the title of Gospel to be
too great for him; although it is on the score


’


* Chrys. states too confidently that “the brother’’ whose
praise is referred toin 2 Cor. viii. 18, is Luke. It cannot be
determined who this ‘‘ brother’? was. See Meyer rm doco.
Other conjectures are: Barnabas, Mark, Erastus, and an actual
brother of Titus.—G. B. S.


4


THE WORKS OF ‘ST CHEYSOSEORE


[Homity I.


of this that the Apostle dignifies him:
“ Whose praise,” he says, “is in the Gospel.”
But he himself modestly says, “‘ The former
treatise have I made—O Theophilus, of all
that Jesus began both to do and to teach:”
not simply “of all,” but from the beginning to
the end; “until the day,” he says, “in which
He was taken up.” And yet John says, that
it was not possible to write all: for “were
they written, I suppose,” says he, “ that even
the world itself could not contain the books
written.” (John xxi. 25.) How then does the
Evangelist here say, “Of all?” He does not
say “all,” but “ of all,” as muchas to say, “‘in a
summary way, and in the gross;” and “ of all
that is mainly and pressingly important.”
Then he tells us in what sense he says a//,
when he adds, ‘“ Which Jesus began both to
do and to teach;”’ meaning His miracles and
teaching; and not only so, but implying that
His doing was also a teaching.

But now consider the benevolent and Apos-
tolic feelings of the writer: that for the
sake of a single individual he took such pains
as to write for him an entire Gospel. ‘That
thou mightest have,” he says, “the certainty
of those things, wherein thou hast been in-
simucted.”) «(Luke i::4:) In’ truth, he had
heard Christ say, “It is not the will of My
Father that one of these little ones should
perish.” (Matt. xviii. 14.) And why did he
not make one book of it, to send to one man
Theophilus, but has divided it into two sub-
jects? For clearness, and to give the brother
a pause for rest. Besides, the two treatises
are distinct in their subject-matter.

But consider how Christ accredited his
words by His deeds. Thus He saith, “ Learn
of Me, for I am meek and lowly in heart.”
(Ib. xi. 29.) He taught men to be poor,! *
and exhibited this by His actions: “ For the
Son of Man,” He says, “‘hath not where to lay
Misthead.” +: (ib. vill. 20.) Again, He
charged men to love their enemies; and He
taught the same lesson on the Cross, when
He prayed for those who were crucifying Him.
He said, “ If any man will sue thee at the law,
and take away thy coat, let him have thy
cloak also” (Ib. v. 40): now fe not only
gave His garments, but even His blood. In


1 Ms. C. has oixtippovas, merciful; the rest, axtyjmovas,
without possessions, which is certainly the true reading. Thus
in the Sermon de future Vite deliciis, where Chrys. dis-
courses largely on the harmony of Christ’s teaching and ac-
tions, he says, Hau axTnMoavvny Tadevwr, Opa mas Sia TAY
Epywv avrTny emdeixvutar, Aéywv, Ai adwrexes, K. T. A.

* ‘‘He taught them to be poor.’’ Here we havea tinge of
asceticism. Even if we suppose that the beatitude of the poor
refers to literal poverty (Luke vi. 20) as well as to poverty in
spirit (Matt. v. 3), it is still incorrect to say that Jesus taught
his disciples that poverty was in itself a virtue. The ascetic
principle is of heathen, not of Christian origin. It is notice-
eae Chrys. quotes no passage to sustain his statement.—


this way He bade others teach. Wherefore
Paul also said, “So as ye have us for an
ensample.” (Philip. iii. 17.) For nothing is
more frigid than a teacher who shows his phi-
losophy only in words: this is to act the part
not of a teacher, but of a hypocrite. There-
fore the Apostles first taught by their conduct,
and then by their words; nay rather they had
no need of words, when their deeds spoke so
loud. Nor is it wrong to speak of Christ’s
Passion as action, for in suffering all He per-
formed that great and wonderful act, by which
He destroyed death, and effected all else that
He did for us.

“Until the day in which He was taken up,
after that He, through the Holy Spirit, had
given commandments unto the Apostles whom
He had chosen. After He had given com-
mandments through the Spirit” (v. 2); ie.
they were spiritual words that He spake unto
them, nothing human; either this is the mean-
ing, or, that it was by the Spirit that He
gave them commandments.t Do you observe
in what low terms he still speaks of Christ, as
in fact Christ had spoken of Himself? “ But
if I by the Spirit of God cast out devils”
(Matt. xii. 28); for indeed the Holy Ghost
wrought in that Temple. Well, what did He
command? “Go ye therefore,” He says,
‘“make disciples of all the nations, baptizing
them into the Name of the Father, and of the
Son, and of the Holy Ghost; teaching them
to observe all things whatsoever I have com-
manded you.” (Ib. xxviii. 19, 20.) A high en-
comium this for the Apostles; to have such
a charge entrusted to them, 1 mean, the sal-
vation of the world! words full of the Spirit!
And this the writer hints at in the expression,
“through the Holy Ghost” (and, “the words
which I spake unto you,” saith the Lord,
“are Spirit’) (John vi. 63); thus leading the
hearer on to a desire of learning what the
commands were, and establishing the author-
ity of the Apostles, seeing it is the words of
the Spirit they are about to speak, and the
commandments of Christ. ‘ After He had
given commandments,” he says, “He was
taken up.” He does not say, ‘ ascended ;’
he still speaks as concerning a man. It ap-
pears then that He also taught the Disciples
after His resurrection, but of this space of
time no one has related to us the whole in
detail. St. John indeed, as also does the
present writer, dwells at greater length on
this subject than the others; but none has
clearly related every thing (for they hastened
to something else); however, we have learnt


+ The latter is doubtless the correct interpretation. (So
mie Hackett). Cf. Matt. xii. 28; Johniii. 34; Luke iv. 1.—


Homi.y I.]


Pree AG Or: Lik APOSTLES: 5


these things through the Apostles, for what
they heard, that did they tell. “To whom
also He shewed Himself alive.” Having first
spoken of the Ascension, he adverts to the
Resurrection ; for since thou hast been told
that “ He was taken up,” therefore, lest thou
shouldest suppose Him to have been taken up
by others!, he adds, “To whom He shewed
Himself alive.” For if He shewed Himself in
the greater, surely He did in the minor cir-
cumstance. Seest thou, how casually and un-
perceived he drops by the way the seeds of
these great doctrines? *

“Being seen of them during forty days.”
He was not always with them now, as He
was before the Resurrection. For the writer
does not say “forty days,” but, “ during forty
days.” He came, and again disappeared ;
by this leading them on to higher concep-
tions, and no longer permitting them to stand
affected towards Him in the same way as be-
fore, but taking effectual measures to secure
both these objects, that the fact of His Resur-
rection should be believed, and that He Him-
self should be ever after apprehended to be
greater than man. At the same time, these
were two opposite things; for in order to the
belief in His Resurrection, much was to be
done of a human character, and for the other
object, just the reverse. Nevertheless, both
results have been effected, each when the
fitting time arrived.

But why did He appear not to all, but to
the Apostles only? Because to the many it
would have seemed a mere apparition, inas-
much as they understood not the secret of the
mystery. For if the disciples themselves were
at first incredulous and were troubled, and
needed the evidence of actual touch with the
hand, and of His eating with them, how would
it have fared in all likelihood with the multi-
tude? For this reason therefore by the mira-
cles [wrought by the Apostles] He renders
the evidence of His Resurrection unequivocal,
so that not only the men of those times—this
is what would come of the ocular proof—but
also all men thereafter, should be certain of
the fact, that He was risen. Upon this
ground also we argue with unbelievers. For


+ 1,e. as G@cumenius explains 7» 7. iva my tis vouton €érepou
dvvauer ToUTO yeveoPar, lest any should suppose this to have
been done by the power of another, he adds, to show that it
was His own act, 70 whom also, etc.

* It is more than doubtful whether the mention of the
resurrection is introduced (i. 3 sq.) for the purpose of meet-
ing sceptical objections. The writer will rather make it the
point of departure for his subsequent narrative. He has men-
tioned the ascension; the resurrection is the other great
event and he will introduce a resumé of the more important
circumstances which happened during the period between
these two events and which have an important bearing upon
the history about to be related.—G. B. S.


+ Chrys. seems to overlook the appearance “ to above five |


hundred brethren at once,”’ x Cor. xv. 6.—G. B. S


if He did not rise again, but remains dead,
how did the Apostles perform miracles in His
name? But they did not, say you, perform
miracles? How then was our religion (évoc)
instituted? For this certainly they will not
controvert nor impugn what we see with our
eyes: so that when they say that no miracles
took place, they inflict a worse stab? upon
themselves. For this would be the greatest of
miracles, that without any miracles, the whole
world should have eagerly come to be taken in
the nets of twelve poor and illiterate men.
For not by wealth of money, not by wisdom of
words, not by any thing else of this kind, did
the fishermen prevail; so that objectors must
even against their will acknowledge that there
was in these men a Divine power, for no hu-
man strength could ever possibly effect such
great results. For this He then remained
forty days on earth, furnishing in this length
of time the sure evidence of their seeing Him
in His own proper Person, that they might
not suppose that what they saw was a phan-
tom. And not content with this, He added
also the evidence of eating with them at their
board: as to signify this, the writer adds,
“And being at table*® with them, He com-
manded.”* (v. 4.) And this circumstance the
Apostles themselves always put forth as an in-
fallible token of the Resurrection; as where
they say, ‘‘ Who did eat and drink with Him.”
(Acts x,41.)

And what did He, when appearing unto
them those forty days? Why, He conversed
with them, says the writer, ‘concerning the
kingdom of God.” (v. 3.) For, since the disci-
ples both had been distressed and troubled at
the things which already had taken place, and
were about to go forth to encounter great
difficulties, He recovered them by His dis-
courses concerning the future. “He com
manded them that they should not depart from
Jerusalem, but wait for the promise of the
Father.” (v. 4.) First, He led them out to Gali-
lee, afraid and trembling, in order that they
might listen to His words in security. After-


2 Tlepureipovar, Ms. C. and Cat. (see 1 Tim. vi, 9, prerced them-
selves through with many sorrows), and in this sense Home. in
Matt. 455 B. 463 A. The word is used as here, ibid. 831 C.
where several Mss. have mavtaxov 9 mAavyn éauTHy TepiTeEcper,
for €auty mepiminrec,

3 SvvadcCouevos. In the margin of E. V. ‘‘ Eating together
with them. The Catena here and below, had pr. man. the
other reading, cuvavAcgouevos, but corrected in both places.
St. Chrys. so takes the word, Hom. in Princip. Act. § 11.767 E.
tn Joann. 522 D. CEcumen. in |. explains it, tovréote xowwwrav
GA@V, KoLvwvav Tpamégns, ‘* Partaking of the salt, partaking of
the table.”’

* Chrys. here follows the interpretation which derives
guvadrcouevos (i. 4) from ovv and aAs (salt) hence, eating to-
gether. So several ancient authorities as Vulgate (convesceus)
and even modern, as Meyer. RButthe preferable derivation is
from ovv and adAns (crowded), hence fo de assembled, to meet
with (sc. avtois). So Olshausen, Hackett, Lechler, Thayer's
Lex. and most modern authorities.—G. B. S.


6 THE WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


wards, when they had heard, and had passed
forty days with Him, “He commanded them
that they should not depart from Jerusalem.”
Wherefore? Just as when soldiers are to
charge a multitude, no one thinks of letting
them issue forth until they have armed them-
selves, or as horses are not suffered to start
from the barriers until they have got their
charioteer; so Christ did not suffer these to
appear in the field before the descent of the
Spirit, that they might not be in a condition to
be easily defeated and taken captive by the
many. Nor was this the only reason, but
also there were many in Jerusalem who should
believe. And then again that it might not be
said, that leaving their own acquaintance,
they had gone to make a parade among
strangers, therefore among those very men
who had put Christ to death do they exhibit
the proofs of His Resurrection, among those
who had crucified and buried Him, in the very
town in which the iniquitous deed had been
perpetrated ; thereby stopping the mouths of
all foreign objectors. For when those even
who had crucified Him appear as believers,
clearly this proved both the fact of the cruci-
fixion and the iniquity of the deed, and af-
forded a mighty evidence of the Resurrection.
Furthermore, lest the Apostles should say,
How shall it be possible for us to live among
wicked and bloody men, they so many in num-
ber, we so few and contemptible, observe how
He does away their fear and distress, by these
words, “But wait for the promise of the
Father, which ye have heard of Me.” (v. 4.)
You will say, When had they heard this?
When He said, “It is expedient for you that I
go away; for if I go not away, the Comforter
will not come unto you.” (John xvi. 7.) And
again, “I will pray the Father, and He shall
send you another Comforter, that He may
abide with you.” (ib. xiv. 16.) ‘

But why did the Holy Ghost come to them,
not while Christ was present, nor even im-
mediately after his departure, but, whereas
Christ ascended on the fortieth day, the Spirit
descended “ when the day of Pentecost,” that
is, the fiftieth, “was fully come?” (Acts ii. 1.)
And how was it, if the Spirit had not yet
come, that He said, ‘‘ Receive ye the Holy
Ghost?” (John xx. 22.) In order to render
them capable and meet for the reception of
Him. For if Daniel fainted at the sight of an
Angel (Dan. viii. 17), much more would these
when about to receive so great a grace.
Either this then is to be said, or else that
Christ spoke of what was to come, as if come
already; as when He said, “Tread ye upon
serpents and scorpions, and over all the
power of the devil.” (Luke x. 19.) But


|Homity I.


why had the Holy Ghost not yet come? It
was fit that they should first be brought to
have a longing desire for that event, and so
receive the grace. For this reason Christ
Himself departed, and then the Spirit de-
scended. For had He Himself been there,
they would not have expected the Spirit so
earnestly as they did, On this account neither
did He come immediately after Christ’s As-
cension, but after eight or nine days. It is
the same with us also; for our desires towards
God are then most raised, when we stand in
need. Accordingly, John chose that time to
send his disciples to Christ when they were
likely to feel their need of Jesus, during his
own imprisonment. Besides, it was fit that
our nature should be seen in heaven, and that
the reconciliation should be perfected, and
then the Spirit should come, and the joy
should be unalloyed. For, if the Spirit being
already come, Christ had then departed, and
the Spirit remained; the consolation would
not have been so great as it was. For in fact
they clung to Him, and could not bear to part
with Him ; wherefore also to comfort them He
said, “It is expedient for you that I go
away.” (John xvi. 7.) On this account He
also waits during those intermediate days,
that they might first despond for awhile, and
be made, as I said, to feel their need of Him.
and then reap a full and unalloyed delight.
But if the Spirit were inferior to the Son, the
consolation would not have been adequate ;
and how could He have said, “It is expedient
for you?” For this reason the greater mat-
ters of teaching were reserved for the Spirit,
that the disciples might not imagine Him in-
ferior.

Consider also how necessary He made it for
them to abide in Jerusalem, by promising that
the Spirit should be granted them. For lest
they should again flee away after His Ascen-
sion, by this expectation, as by a bond, He
keeps them to that spot. But having said,
‘“Wait for the promise of the Father, which ye
have heard of Me,” He then adds, “ For John
truly baptized with water, but ye shall be bap-
tized with the Holy Ghost not many days
hence.” (v. 4,5.) For now indeed He gives
them to see the difference there was betwixt
Him and John, plainly, and not as heretofore
in obscure hints; for in fact He had spoken
very obscurely, when He said, “‘ Notwithstand-
ing, he that is least in the kingdom of heaven
is greater than he:” but now He says plainly,
‘John baptized with water, but ye shall be
baptized with the Holy Ghost.” (Matt. xi. 11.)
And he no longer uses the testimony, but
merely adverts to the person of John, remind-
ing the disciples of what he had said, and


Homity I.!


shows them that they are now become greater
than John; seeing they too are to baptize
with the Spirit. Again, He did not say, I
baptize you with the Holy Ghost, but, “ Ye
shall be baptized:” teaching us humility.
For this was plain enough from the testimony
of John, that it was Christ Himself Who
should baptize: “He it is that shall baptize
you with the Holy Ghost and with fire ” (Luke
lii. 16.); wherefore also He made mention of
Jobn.!

The Gospels, then, are a history of what
Christ did and said; but the Acts, of what
that “other Comforter” said and did. Not
but that the Spirit did many things in the
Gospels also: even as Christ here in the Acts
still works in men as He did in the Gospels:
only then the Spirit wrought through the
Temple, now through the Apostles: then, He
came into the Virgin’s womb, and fashioned
the Temple ; now, into Apostolic souls: then,
in the likeness of a dove; now, in the likeness
of fire. And wherefore? Showing there the
gentleness of the Lord, but here His taking
vengeance also, He now puts them in mind of
the judgment likewise. For, when need was
to forgive, need was there of much gentle-
ness; but now we have obtained the gift, it is
henceforth a time for judgment and examina-
tion.

But why does Christ say, “Ye shall be
baptized,” when in fact there was no water in
the upper room? Because the more essential
part of Baptism is the Spirit, through Whom
indeed the water has its operation; in the
same manner our Lord also is said to be
anointed, not that He had ever been anointed
with oil, but because He had received the
Spirit. Besides, we do in fact find them re-
ceiving a baptism with water [and a baptism
with the Spirit], and these at different
moments. In our case both take place under
one act, but then they were divided. For in
the beginning they were baptized by John;
since, if harlots and publicans went to that
baptism, much rather would they who there-
after were to be baptized by the Holy Ghost.
Then, that the Apostles might not say, that
they were always having it held out to them
in promises (John xiv. 15, 16), (for indeed
‘Christ had already discoursed much to them
concerning the Spirit, that they should not
imagine It to be an impersonal Energy or
Operation, (évépyevav avurécratov) that ‘they
might not say this, then, He adds, “ not many
days hence.” And He did not explain when,
that they might always watch: but, that it


+ So Mss. C. F. D. and the Catena.


— ‘ The others have uovov
avtov, * of him (John) alone,”


not of his testimony.


THE ACTS OF THE


Fa ol Oo Gd Dc 7
would soon take place, He told them, that
they might not faint; yet the exact time He
refrained from adding, that they might always
be vigilant. .Nor does He assure them by
this alone; I mean, by the shortness of the
time, but withal by saying, “The promise
which ye have heard of Me.” For this is
not, saith He, the only time I have told you,
but already I have promised what I shall cer-
tainly perform. What wonder then that He
does not signify the day of the final consumma-
tion, when this day which was so near He did
not choose to reveal? And with good rea-
son; to the end they may be ever wakeful,
and in a state of expectation and earnest
heed.

For it cannot, it cannot be, that a man
should enjoy the benefit of grace except he


watch. Seest thou not what Elias saith to his
disciple? “If thou see me when I am taken
up” Kings ii. 10), this that thou askest


shall be done for thee. Christ also was ever
wont to say unto those that came unto Him,
“Believest thou?” For if we be not appro-
priated and made over to the thing given,?
neither do we greatly feel the benefit. So it
was also in the case of Paul; grace did not
come to him immediately, but three days in-
tervened, during which he was blind ; purified
the while, and prepared by fear. For as
those who dye the purple first season with
other ingredients the cloth that is to receive
the dye, that the bloom may not be fleeting; *
so in this instance God first takes order that
the soul shall be thoroughly in earnest, and
then pours forth His grace. On this account
also, neither did He immediately send the
Spirit, but on the fiftieth day. Nowif any
one ask, why we also do not baptize at that
season of Pentecost? we may answer, that
grace is the same now as then;* but the mind
becomes more elevated now, by being pre-
pared through fasting. And the season too
of Pentecost furnishes a not unlikely reason.
What may that’ be? Our fathers held Bap-


2 Eav yap mi olkeww8@uev mpds Td Sidouevov. Erasm. Visi rei
date addicti fuerimus.

3 Oi THY adovpytéa BartovTes. .. . iva py e&itnAov yernrac TO
av@os. _ Comp. Plat. Republ. iv. vol. i. p. 289. Stallb. Ovxovy
oia@a, jj Hy & eya, OTe ot Badets, émrecoav BovAndact Bayar Epa oor
elvac adovpya, TmpwTov ev ExA€yOVTAaL EK TOTOUTWY Xpwmatwv mia
puow THY Twv AEUKOYV, ETELTA TpoTmapagKevacovge ouK oAtyn. Tapa
oKEvy) OeparevoavTes OTWS deferat ors madtota 70 avdos, Kai ovTw
$n Barrtovat.

4 The question, fully eel igen is, ‘ Why do we baptize, not
at Pentecost, du¢ on Easter Eve?’ And the answer is, * Be-
cause the lenten fast forms a meet preparation for the recep-
tion of baptism. And moreover, there is a reason which
weighed with our fathers, in respect of this season of the fifty
days, the time of the Church’s great festivity. The baptism
newly received would restrain the neophytes from giving
loose to carnal lusts; having prepared them to keep the feast
with a holy and awful gladness.’ It should be borne in mind,
that these Homilies were commenced during the Ievrnxoorn,
i.e. the period of fifty days between Easter and Pentecost:
at which season the Book of Acts was usually read in the
Churches.


8 THE’ WORKS: OF STi. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homiy I.


ee SS SSS


tism to be just the proper curb upon evil
concupiscence, and a_ powerful lesson for
teaching to be sober-minded even in a time of
delights.

As if then we were banquetting with Christ
Himself, and partaking of His table, let us do
nothing at random, but let us pass our time in
fastings, and prayers, and much sobriety of
mind. For if a man who is destined to enter
upon some temporal government, prepares
himself all his life long, and that he may ob-
tain some dignity, lays out his money, spends
his time, and submits to endless troubles ;
what shall we deserve, who draw near to the
kingdom of heaven with such negligence, and
both show no earnestness before we have re-
ceived, and after having received are again
negligent? Nay, this is the very reason why
we are negligent after having received, that
we did not watch before we had received.
Therefore many, after they have received, im-
mediately have returned to their former
vomit, and have become more wicked, and
drawn upon themselves a more severe punish-
ment; when having been delivered. from their
former sins, herein they have more grievously
provoked the Judge, that having been de-
livered from so great a disease, still they did
not learn sobriety, but that has happened unto
them, which Christ threatened to the paralytic
man, saying, ‘‘ Behold thou art made whole:
sin no more, lest a worse thing come unto
thee ” (John v. 14): and which He also pre-
dicted of the Jews, that ‘the last state shall be
worse than the first.” (Matt. xii. 45.) For 7,
saith He, showing that by their ingratitude
they should bring upon them the worst of
evils, “if I had not come, and spoken unto
them, they had not had sin”’ (John xv, 22); so
that the guilt of sins committed after these
benefits is doubled and quadrupled, in that,
after the honour put upon us, we show our-
selves ungrateful and wicked. And the Laver
of Baptism helps not a whit to procure for us
a milder punishment. And consider: a man
has gotten grievous sins by committing mur-
der or adultery, or some other crime: ‘hese
were remitted through Baptism. For there is
no sin, no impiety, which does not yield and
give place to this gift; for the Grace is
Divine. <A man has again committed adultery
and murder; the former adultery is indeed
done away, the murder forgiven, and not
brought up again to his charge, “ for the gifts
and calling of God are without repentance ”
(Rom. xi. 29); but for those committed after
Baptism he suffers a punishment as great as
he would if both the former sins were brought
up again, and many worse than these. For
the guilt is no longer simply equal, but


doubled and tripled.* Look: in proof that
the penalty of these sins is greater, hear what
St. Paul says: ‘‘ He that despised Moses’ law
died without mercy, under two or three wit-
nesses: of how much sorer punishment, sup-
pose ye, shall he be thought worthy, who hath
trodden under foot the Son of God, and hath
counted the blood of the covenant an unholy
thing, and hath done despite unto the Spirit
of grace?” (Heb. x. 28, 29.)

Perhaps we have now deterred many from
receiving baptism. Not however with this
intention have we so spoken, but on purpose
that having received it, they may continue in
temperance and much moderation. ‘ But I
am afraid,’ says one. If thou wert afraid,
thou wouldest have received and guarded it.
‘Nay,’ saith he, ‘but this is the very reason
why I do not receive it,—that I am fright-
ened.’ And art thou not afraid to depart
thus? ‘God is merciful,’ saith he. Receive
baptism then, because He is merciful and
ready to help. But thou, where to be in ear-
nest is the thing required, dost not allege this
mercifulness ; thou thinkest of this only where
thou hasta mind to do'so. And yet that was
the time to resort to God’s mercy, and we
shall then be surest of obtaining it, when we
do our part. For he that has cast the whole
matter upon God, and, after his baptism, sins,
as being man it is likely, he may, and repents,
shall obtain mercy; whereas he that prevar-
icates with God’s mercy, and departs this life
with no portion in that grace, shall have his
punishment without a word to be said for him.
‘But how if he depart,’ say you, ‘after hav-
ing had the grace vouchsafed to him?’ He
will depart empty again of all good works. 1
For it is impossible, yes, it is in my opinion
impossible, that the man who upon such
hopes dallied with baptism should have
effected ought generous and good, And why


* This view, that baptism cleansed from all sin, and that,
therefore, sin after baptism was far more heinous and hard to.
be forgiven, held wide sway in the early church and operated
as a powerful motive for the delay of baptism. The reception
of the grace of baptism involves this increased liability to:
deadlier sin. For this reason Tertullian had urged its post-
ponement. ‘And so according to the circumstances and
disposition, and even age, of each individual, the delay of
baptism is preferable; principally, however, in the case of
little children.’’ “If any understand the weighty import of
baptism, they will fear its reception more than its delay,”’ etc
De Baptismo, xviii. Chrys. did not carry the idea to this
length.—G., B. S.

1 Ti oty dv xatafwels dyow amedcvoetat TaALY KEvos KaTOpOw-
patwv, Cod. C,and so A, but with ameAevon In the latter re-
cension this sentence is omitted. and instead of it, we have,
Ti S€ ravTa Kata THS TEavTOD GwTypias TpoBadAy ; ‘ But why dost
thou put forth such pretences against thine own salvation?’
Chrys. had just said, aweA@wv apoipos THs XaptTos amatpaitnToOY
éfe. THY Tiyuwpiov. The objector (with the usual prevaricating
formula, ti oty éav 70 nat td; Hom. in Matt. 229 D.) says: Te
ovy av KatakwwOeis, SC. THS XapLTos améAOy ; to which Chrys. an-
swers: ’AreAevoetat TAAL xevos KatopOwuatwrv . He will depart
as empty of good works as he was before his baptism : adding,
For it is, I think, utterly impossible that such an one [though
he should live ever so long after baptism] would have:
wrought out his own salvation.


this.


Homi_y I.]


PHE ,ACTS: OR. THE APOSTLES. 9


dost thou harbor such fear, and presume
upon the uncertain chance of the future?
Why not convert this fear into labor and
earnestness, and thou shalt be great and ad-
mirable? Which is best, to fear or to
labor? Suppose some one to have placed
thee, having nothing to do, in a tottering
house, saying, Look for the decaying roof to
fall upon thy head: for perhaps it will fall,
perhaps not; but if thou hadst rather it
should not, then work and inhabit the more
secure apartment: which wouldest thou have
rather chosen, that idle condition accompanied
with fear, or this labor with confidence ?
Why then, act now in the same way. For the
uncertain future is like a decayed house, ever
threatening to fall; but this work, laborious
though it be, ensures safety.

Now God forbid that it should happen to us
to fall into so great straits as to sin after bap-
tism. However, even if aught such should
happen, God is merciful, and has given us
many ways of obtaining remission even after
But just as those who sin after baptism
are punished for this reason more severely
than the Catechumens, so again, those who
know that there are medicines in repentance,
and yet will not make use of them, will
undergo a more grievous chastisement. For
by how much the mercy of God is enlarged,
by so much does the punishment increase, if
we do not duly profit by that mercy. What
sayest thou, O man? When thou wast full of
such grievous evils, and given over, suddenly
thou becamest a friend, and wast exalted to
the highest honor, not by labors of thine
own, but by the gift of God: thou didst again
return to thy former misconduct; and though
thou didst deserve to be sorely punished,
nevertheless, God did not turn away, but gave
unnumbered opportunities of salvation, where-
by thou mayest yet become a friend: yet for
all this, thou hast not the will to labor.
What forgiveness canst thou deserve hence-
forth? Will not the Gentiles with good
reason deride thee as a worthless drone?
For if there be power in that doctrine of
yours, say they, what means this multitude of
uninitiated persons? If the mysteries be ex-
cellent and desirable, let none receive bap-
tism at his last gasp. For that is not the
time for giving of mysteries but for making of
wills; the time for mysteries is in health of
mind and soundness of soul. For, if a man
would not prefer to make his will in such a
condition ; and if he does so make it, he gives
a handle for subsequent litigation (and this
is the reason why testators premise these
words: “ Alive, in my senses, and in health,
I make this disposal of my property: ’”’), how |


should it be possible for a person who is no
longer master of his senses to go through the
right course of preparation for the sacred
mysteries?* For if in the affairs of this life,
the laws of the world would not permit a man
who was not perfectly sound in mind to make
a will, although it be in his own affairs that
he would lay down the law; how, when thou
art receiving instruction concerning the king-
dom of heaven, and the unspeakable riches of
that world, shall it be possible for thee to
learn all clearly, when very likely too thou art
beside thyself through the violence of thy
malady? And when wilt thou say those
words * to Christ, in the act of being buried
with Him when at the point to depart hence?
For indeed both by works and by words must
we show our good will towards Him. (Rom.
vi. 4.) Now what thou art doing is all one,
as ifa man should want to be enlisted as a
soldier, when the war is just about to break
up; or to strip for the contest in the arena,
just when the spectators have risen from their
seats. For thou hast thine arms given thee,
not that thou shouldest straightway depart
hence, but that being equipped therewith,
thou mayest raise a trophy over the enemy.
Let no one think that it is out of season to
discourse on this subject, because it is not
Lent now. Nay, this it is that vexes me, that
ye look to a set time in such matters.
Whereas that Eunuch, barbarian as he was
and on a journey, yea on the very highway,
he did not seek for a set time (Acts viii. 27) ;
no, nor the jailer, though he was in the midst
of a set of prisoners, and the teacher he saw
before him was aman scourged and in
chains, and whom he was still to have in
his custody. (ib. xvi. 29.) But here, not
being inmates of a jail, nor out on a journey,
many are putting off their baptism even to
their last breath.

Now if thou still questionest that Christ is
God, stand away from the Church: be not
here, even as a hearer of the Divine Word,
and as one of the catechumens :* but if thou
art sure of this, and knowest clearly this truth,


1 Mera axpiBelas pvotaywyeioba. alluding to the xatnxnors
MvoTtaywytKny, i. e. the course of instruction by which the cate
chumens were prepared for baptism. See the Catechetica}
Discourses of St. Cyril of Jerusalem.

2 Ta pyuata éxetva: i. e. not (as Ben seems to interpret)
‘“‘Buried with Christ; ’’ as if this were part of the form of
words put into the mouth of the person to be baptized; but
the words, ‘‘I renounce thee, O Satan, and all thy angels,
and all thy service, and all thy pomp: and I enlist myself with
Thee, O Christ.” St. Chrysost. Serm. ad pop. Antioch, xxi. p.
244. The words, ‘‘buried with Him,’’ serve to show more
clearly the absurdity of such delay: ‘‘we are ‘buried with
Christ in His death,’ that we may rise again to newness of
life, not that we should pass at once from the spiritual burial
to the literal.’

3 The catechumens were allowed to be present at the first
part of the service (Missa catechumenorum); and were dis
missed after the Sermon, before the proper Prayers of the
Church, or Wissa Fidelium.


1o


why delay? Why shrink back and hesitate ?
For fear, say you, lest I should sin. But dost
thou not fear what is worse, to depart for the
next world with such a heavy burden? For
it is not equally excusable, not to have gotten
a grace set before you, and to have failed in
attempting to live uprightly. If thou be
called to account, Why didst thou not come
for it? what wilt thou answer? In the other
case thou mayest allege the burden of thy
passions, and the difficulty of a virtuous life:
but nothing of the kind here. For here is
grace, freely conveying liberty. But thou
fearest lest thou shouldest sin? Let this be
thy language after Baptism: and then enter-
tain this fear, in order to hold fast the liberty
thou hast received; not now, to prevent thy
receiving such a gift, Whereas now thou art
wary before baptism, and negligent after it.
But thou art waiting for Lent: and why?
Has that season any advantage? Nay, it was
not at the Passover that the Apostles re-
ceived! the grace, but at another season ; and
then three thousand (Luke says,) and five
thousand were baptized: (ch. li. 41; iv. 4,
and ch. x.) and again Cornelius. Let us then
not wait for a set time, lest by hesitating and
putting off we depart empty, and destitute of
so great gifts. What do you suppose is my
anguish when I hear that any person has been
taken away unbaptized, while I reflect upon
the intolerable punishments of that life, the
inexorable doom! Again, how I am grieved
to behold others drawing near to their last
gasp, and not brought to their right mind
even then. Hence too it is that scenes take
place quite unworthy of this gift. For
whereas there ought to be joy, and dancing,
and exultation, and wearing of garlands, when
another is christened; the wife of the sick
man has no sooner heard that the physician
has ordered this, than she is overcome
with grief, as if it were some dire calamity;
she sets up the greatest lamentation, and
nothing is heard all over the house but crying
and wailing, just as it is when condemned
criminals are led away to their doom. The
sick man again is then more sorely grieved ;


1 KarnfiwOnocav THs xapitos, as above, p. 8, note 1, ri oby av
catatiwbecs ;


THE WORKS OF *STMCHERYSOSTOR:


[Homiy I.


and if he recovers from his illness, is as vexed -
as if some great harm had been done to him.
For since he had not been prepared for a vir-
tuous life, he has no heart for the conflicts
which are to follow, and shrinks at the
thought of them. Do you see what devices
the devil contrives, what shame, what ridi-
cule? Let us rid ourselves of this disgrace ;
let us live as Christ has enjoined. He gave
us Baptism, not that we should receive and
depart, but that we should show the fruits of
it in our after life. How can one say to him
who is departing and broken down, Bear
fruit? Hast thou not heard that “the fruit of
the Spirit is love, joy, peace?” (Gal. v. 22.)
How comes it then that the very contrary
takes place here? For the wife stands there
mourning, when she ought to rejoice; the
children weeping, when they ought to be glad
together; the sick man himself lies there in
darkness, and surrounded by noise and tumult,
when he ought to be keeping high festival ;
full of exceeding despondency at the thought
of leaving his children orphans, his wife a
widow, his house desolate. Is this a state in
which to draw near unto mysteries? answer
me; is this a state in which to approach the
sacred table?? Are such scenes to be toler-
ated? Should the Emperor send letters and
release the prisoners in the jails, there is joy
and gladness: God sends down the Holy
Ghost from Heaven to remit not arrears
of money, but a whole mass of sins, and
do ye all bewail and lament? Why, how
grossly unsuitable is this! Not to men-
tion that sometimes it is upon the dead that
the water has been poured, and holy mys-
teries flung upon the ground. However,
not we are to blame for this, but men who
are so perverse. I exhort you then to leave
all, and turn and draw near to Baptism with
all alacrity, that having given proof of great
earnestness at this present time, we may ob-
tain confidence for that which is to come;
whereunto that we may attain, may it be
granted unto us all by the grace and mercy of
our Lord Jesus Christ, to Whom be glory and
power for ever and ever. Amen.


? The Holy Communion, administered immediately after
baptism.


- matters that. had happened to them, but the


with greater honour, saying, “Wilt Thou at


Homity II.]


THE. ACTS SORST HE’ APOSDLES,


II


Elwes 44.


ACTS


* When they therefore were come together, they asked |
of Him, saying, Lord, wilt Thou at this time re-
store again the kingdom to Israel ?”’


WHEN the disciples intend to ask anything,
they approach Him together, that by dint of
numbers they may abash Him into compli-
ance. They well knew that in what He had
said previously, ‘Of that day knoweth no man”
(Matt. xxiv. 36), He had merely declined
telling them: therefore they again drew near,
and put the question. They would not have
put it had they been truly satisfied with that |
answer. For having heard that they were)
about to receive the Holy Ghost, they, as
being now worthy of instruction, desired to
learn. Also they were quite ready for free-
dom: for they had no mind to address them- |
selves to danger; what they wished was to
breathe freely again; for they were no light,


utmost peril had impended over them. And)
Without saying any thing to Him of the Holy
Ghost, they put this question: “ Lord, wilt
Thou at this time restore the kingdom to
Israel?” They did not ask, when? but
whether “ at this time.”” So eager were they
for that day. Indeed, to me it appears that
they had not any clear notion of the nature of
that kingdom; for the Spirit had not yet in-
structed them.* And they do not say, When
shall these things be? but they approach Him


this time restore again the kingdom,” as being |
now already fallen. For there they were still,
affected towards sensible objects, seeing they
were not yet become better than those who
were before them ; here they have henceforth
high conceptions concerning Christ. Since
then their minds are elevated, He also speaks |
to them in a higher strain. For He no longer
tells them, “‘ Of that day not even the Son of,
Man knoweth ” (Mark xiii. 32) ; but He says,
“It is not for you to know the times or the


* The emphatic position of €vy tw xpovw tovTw as well as the
answer of Jesus shows that the disciples’ earnest hope and ex-
pectation were that their Lord should, during their life-time,
personally organize a kingdom on the basis of the Jewish


' theocracy. Chrys. is explicit in pointing out their incorrect
_ conception of the kingdom of Christ, but does not here explain


the specifically Jewish character of that conception. In the
early disciples we behold the constant struggle of the Chris-
tian spirit to break away from the forms of Jewish national-
ism.—G. B.S.


sO:


seasons which the Father hath put in His
own : power.” (Acts 1, 7.)... Ye ask, things
greater than your capacity, He would say.
And yet even now they learned things that
were much greater than this. And that you
may see that this is strictly the case, look how
many things I shall enumerate. What, I pray
you, was greater than their having learned
what they did learn? ‘Thus, they learned that
there is a Son of God, and that God has a Son
equal with Himself in dignity (John v, 17-20);
they learned that there will be a resurrection
(Matt. xvii.g); that when He ascended He
sat on the right hand of God (Luke xxii. 69) ;
and what is still more stupendous, that Flesh
is seated in heaven, and adored by Angels,
and that He will come again (Mark xvi. 19) ;


they learned what is to take place in the judg-


ment (Matt. xvi. 27); learned that they shail
then sit and judge the twelve tribes of Israel
(Luke xxi. 27); learned that the Jews would
be cast out, and in their stead the Gentiles
should come in (Matt. xix. 28). For, tell me,
which is greater? to learn that a person will
reign, or to learn the time when? (Luke xxi.
24). Paul learned “things which it is not
lawful for a man to utter” (2 Cor. xii. 4);
things that were before the world was made,
he learned them all. Which is the more diffi-
cult, the beginning or the end? Clearly to
learn the beginning. This, Moses learned,
and the time when, and how long ago: and
he enumerates the years. And! the wise
Solomon saith, ‘I will make mention of things
from the beginning of the world.”” And that
the time is at hand, they do know: as Paul
saith, “The Lord is at hand, be careful for
nothing.” (Phil. iv. 5). These things they
knew not [then], and yet He mentions many
signs (Matt. ch. xxiv). But, as He has just
said, “‘ Not many days hence,” wishing them
to be vigilant, and did not openly declare
the precise moment, so is it here also. How-
ever, itis not about the general Consumma-
tion that they now ask Him, but, “ Wilt Thou
at this time,” say they, ‘‘ restore the kingdom
to Israel?”” And not even this did He re-


1 Cod. C. omits this sentence here, and inserts it below (p.
12), where it is evidently out of place. The passage referred
to seems to be Ecclus. 51, 8.


12


THE WORKS OF ‘ST. CHRYSOSTOM:


{Homity II.


veal to them. They also asked this [about
the end of the world] before: and as on that
occasion He answered by leading them away
from thinking that their deliverance was near,
and, on the contrary, cast them into the
midst of perils, so likewise on this occasion,
but more mildly. For, that they may not
imagine themselves to be wronged, and these
things to be mere pretences, hear what He
says: He immediately gives them that at
which they rejoiced: for He adds: “ But ye
shall receive power, after that the Holy Ghost
is come upon you; and ye shall be witnesses
unto Me both in Jerusalem, and in all Judea,
and in Samaria, and unto the uttermost part
of the earth.” (Acts i. 8.) Then, that they
may make no more enquiries, straightway
He was received up. Thus,sjust as on the
former occasion He had darkened their minds
by awe, and by saying, “I know not ;’’ here
also He does so by being taken up. For
great was their eagerness on the subject, and
they would not have desisted; and yet it was
very necessary that they should not learn this.
For tell me,! which do the Gentiles most dis-
believe? that there will be a consummation of
the world, or that God is become man, and
issued from the Virgin?? But I am ashamed
of dwelling on this point, as if it were about
some difficult matter. Then again, that the
disciples might not say, Why dost thou leave
the matter in suspense? He adds, “‘ Which
the Father hath put in His own power.”
And yet He declared the Father’s power and
His to be one: as in the saying, “ For as the
Father raiseth up the dead and quickeneth
them, even so the Son quickeneth whom He
will.” (John v. 21.) If where need is to work,
Thou actest with the same power as the
Father; where it behooves to know, dost Thou
not know with the same power? Yet cer-
tainly to raise up the dead is much greater
than to learn the day. If the greater be with
power, much more the other.

But just as when we see a child crying, and
pertinaciously wishing to get something from
us that is not expedient for him, we hide the
thing, and show him our empty hands, and
say, ‘“‘See, we have it not:” the like has
Christ here done with the Apostles. But as
the child, even when we show? him [our empty
hands], persists with his crying, conscious he
has been deceived, and then we leave him,
and depart, saying, “ Such an one calls me: ”


1 The connection must be supplied: e. g. It was not that
this point of knowledge was too high for them; for, as has
been shown, they knew already, or were soon to know, things
much higher than this, and which their hearers would find
much harder to believe. For tell me, etc.

2 Here C. has the sentence: ‘*t Also the wise Solomon saith,
etc.’’ p. rr, note}.

3 Kai decxvvvtwy nuov, C. the modern text has py.


| : : - : :
and we give him something else instead, in


order to divert him from his desire, telling
him it is a much finer thing than the other,
and then hasten away; in like manner Christ
acted.* The disciples asked to have some-
thing, and He said He had it not. And on
the first occasion he frightened them. Then
again they asked to have it now: He said He
had it not; and He did not frighten them
now, but after having shown‘ [the empty
hands], He has done this, and gives them a
plausible reason:° “Which the Father,” He
says, ‘‘ hath put in his own power.” What?
Thou not know the things of the Father!
Thou knowest Him, and not what belongs to
Him! And yet Thou hast said, “ None
knoweth the Father but the Son” (Luke x.
25); and, “The Spirit searcheth all things,
yea, the deep things of God” (1 Cor. ii. 10) ;
and Thou not know this! But they feared to
ask Him again, lest they should hear Him
say, “Are ye also without understanding?”
(Matt. xv. 26.) For they feared Him now
much more than before. “But ye shall re-
ceive power, after that the Holy Ghost is
come upon you.” As in the former instance
He had not answered their question (for it is
the part of a teacher to teach not what the
disciple chooses, but what is expedient for
him to Jearn), so in this, He tells them be-
forehand, for this reason, what they ought to
know, that they may not be troubled. In
truth, they were yet weak. But to inspire
them with confidence, He raised up their
souls, and concealed what was grievous.


* These illustrations, which seem to admit a half deceptive
element in our Lord’s conversations, are as little justified by
the passage in hand as by the character of Jesus. What Jesus
promises, viz.: the Holy Spirit, is not promised in order to
‘divert’ the disciples from their desire, but to assure to them
a greater blessing than they then knew how toanticipate. The
disciples wish a temporal kingdom with personal prerogatives;
Jesus promises them the Spirit of Truth and opens before
them the life of spiritual growth and usefulness. The illus-
tration would have been more appropriate, had Chrys. said:
“The child persists in his crying, but Jesus quiets him b
giving him something far better than he had asked.’’—G. B. S.

4 "AAAa meta To Seckar (as above, Kat decxvivTwy nuav, Sc.
yuuvas Tas XElpas), TOUTO TeTOLnKEV, SC. Pofer. The Mss. except
C and A, and the Edd. have 6 before memotyxev, which gives
no sense.

° Chrys. therefore explains these sayings of our Lord (po-
lemically against the Arians) as oixovoyia- i. e. the thing said
is not objectively true, but the morality of all actions depends
on the subjective condition of the mpoaipeots or purpose (mapa
THY TOV XpwWLEVWY TpOalperLY yryveTar PavAov H KaAdov, de Sacer-
dot. 1. 8.), so that where this is right and good, a deception is
lawful. This lax view of the morality of Truth was very gen-
eral in the Greek Church: not so in the early Latin Church. See
the two Treatises of St. Augustine, De Mendacto (‘' Lib. of Fa-
thers,” Seventeen Short Treatises of St. Aug.) The stricter doc-
trine however is maintained by St. Basil, who in his shorter Mo-
nastic Rule peremptorily condemns all oixovouia, and pious
fraud (effictosum mendacium) of every description, on the
ground that all falsehood is from Satan, John v. 44. and that
our Lord has made no distinction between one sort of lying and
another. Again, the monk Johannes of Lycopolis in Egypt:
: All falsehood is foreign from Christ and Christian men, be it
in a small or in a great matter; yea, though a good end be
served by it, itis never to be allowed, for the Saviour hath
declared, that all lying is from the Wicked One.” Pallad.
ffist. Lausiacin Bibl. Patr. t. xiii. p. 965.


Homity II.]


rE AC rs OFT) HEY APOSTLES


13


Since he was about to leave them very
shortly, therefore in this discourse He says
nothing painful. But how? He extols as
great the things which would be painful: all
but saying, “‘ Fear not’: for ye shall receive
| power, after that the Holy Ghost is come
upon you; and ye shall be witnesses unto Me
both in Jerusalem, and in all Judea, and in
Samaria.”’ For since he had said, ‘‘ Go not
into the way of the Gentiles, and into any city
of the Samaritans enter ye not” (Matt. x. 5),
what there He left unsaid, He here adds,
“And to the uttermost part of the earth; ”
and having spoken this, which was more
fearful than all the rest, then that they may
not again question Him, He held His peace.
“And having this said, while they beheld,
He was taken up; and a cloud received
Him out of their sight” (v. 9). Seest thou
that they did preach and fulfil the Gospel ?
For great was the gift He had bestowed on
them. In the very place, He says, where ye
are afraid, that is, in Jerusalem, there preach
ye first, and afterwards unto the uttermost
part of the earth. Then for assurance of
what He had said, ‘While they beheld, He
was taken up.” Not “while they beheld”
did He rise from the dead, but “ while they
beheld, He was taken up.” Inasmuch, how-
ever, as the sight of their eyes even here was
not all-sufficient ; for in the Resurrection they
saw the end, but not the beginning, and in
the Ascension they saw the beginning, but
not the end: because in the former it had
been superfluous to have seen the beginning,
the Lord Himself Who spake these things
being present, and the sepulchre showing
clearly that He is not there; but in the
latter, they needed to be informed of the
sequel by word of others: inasmuch then as
their eyes do not suffice to show them the
height above, nor to inform them whether He
is actually gone up into heaven, or only seem-
ingly into heaven, see then what follows.
That it was Jesus Himself they knew from
the fact that He had been conversing with
them (for had they seen only from a distance,
they could not have recognized Him by
sight),’ but that He is taken up into Heaven
the Angels themselves inform them. Observe
how it is ordered, that not all is done by the
Spirit, but the eyes also do their part. But
why did “a cloud receive Him?” This too
Was a sure sign that He went up to Heaven.
Not fire, as in the case of Elijah, nor fiery


1 Tloppw0ev yap ovx éviy iddvras yvavac ; i. e. had they but seen
the Ascension from a distance, and not been conversing with
the Lord at the moment of His Assumption. Cod. E. trans-
poses the clause to the end of the sentence ; meaning that they
could not by mere sight have been cognizant of the fact of His
ascension ixzto heaven.


,


chariot, but ‘a cloud received Him;”’ which
was a symbol of Heaven, as the Prophet
says;* ‘“‘Who maketh the clouds His chariot”’
(Ps. civ. 3); it is of the Father Himself that
this is said. Therefore he says, “on a
cloud ;” in the symbol, he would say, of the
Divine power, for no other Power is seen to
appear on a cloud. For hear again what
another Prophet says: ‘The Lord sitteth
upon a light cloud” (Is. xix. 1). For? it was
while they were listening with great attention
to what He was saying, and this in answer to
a very interesting question, and with their
minds fully aroused and quite awake, that this
thing took place. Also on the mount [Sinai]
the cloud was because of Him: since Moses
also entered into the darkness, but the cloud
there was not because of Moses. And He
did not merely say, ‘‘I go,” lest they should
again grieve, but He said, “I send the Spirit ”
(John xvi. 5, 7); and that He was going away
into heaven they saw with their eyes. O
what a sight they were granted! ‘And while
they looked stedfastly,” it is said, ‘ toward
heaven, as he went up, behold, two men stood
by them in white apparel; which also said,
Ye men of Galilee, why stand ye gazing up
into heaven? This same Jesus, which is
taken up from you into heaven’”’—they used
the expression “ This” demonstratively, say-
ing, “this Jesus, which is taken up from you
into heaven, shall thus ’’—demonstratively,
“in this way ”’—“ come in like manner as ye
have seen Him going into heaven.” (v. 10,
11.) Again, the outward appearance is cheer-
ing [“‘in white apparel”’]. They were Angels,
in the form of men. And they say, ‘“ Ye men
of Galilee:” they showed themselves to be
trusted by the disciples, by saying, “‘ Ye men
of Galilee.” For this was the meaning: else,
what needed they to be told of their country,
who knew it well enough? By their appear-
ance also they attracted their regard, and
shewed that they were from heaven. But
wherefore does not Christ Himself tell them
these things, instead of the Angels? He
had beforehand told them all things ; [‘* What
if ye shall see the Son of Man] going up
where He was before?” (John vi. 62).
Moreover the Angels did not say, ‘whom
you have seen taken up,’ but, “going inta
heaven :” ascension is the word, not assump-


b


2 Ps. civ. 3. 6 TiOeis védher Thy eriBacow avtov : ‘* Who maketh
on acloud His stepping,”’ or, “ going.”

3 At first sight it jack as if this sentence were out of place
here. But the connection may be thus explained: this circum-
stance, of the cloud, is not idle, but very significant; and the
minds of the disciples were alive to its import, as betokening
His Godhead. True, might it not also be said of Moses on the
mount Sinai, that a cloud received him out of their sight ? For
** Moses entered into the darkness,’’ Exod. xx. 21. But the
cloud there was because of Him, ‘‘ where God was,”’ not be-
cause of Moses.


,


14


THE! WORKS OF STs ‘CHRYSOSPOSE


[Homity II.


tion; the expression “taken up,” belongs to
the flesh. For the same reason they say,
“He which is taken up from you shall thus
come,” not, “shall be sent,” but, ‘‘ shall come.
He that ascended, the same is he also that
descended ” (Eph. iv. 10). So again the ex-
pression, “a cloud received Him:” for He
Himself mounted upon the cloud. Of the ex-
pressions, some are adapted to the concep-
tions of the disciples, some agreeable with the
Divine Majesty. Now, as they behold, their
conceptions are elevated : He has given them
no slight hint of the nature of His second
coming. For this, ‘Shall Aus come,” means,
with the body; which thing they desired to
hear; and, that he shall come again to judg-
ment “thus” upon a cloud. “ And, behold,
two men stood by them.” Why is it said,
“men?” Because they had fashioned them-
selves completely as such, that the beholders
might not be overpowered. ‘ Which also
said:” their words moreover were calculated
for soothing: ‘“ Why stand ye gazing up into
heaven?” They would not let them any
longer wait there for Him. Here again, these
tell what is greater, and leave the less unsaid.
That ‘“ He will thus come,” they say, and that
“ye must look for Him from heaven.” For
the rest, they called them off from that spec-
tacle to their saying, that they might not, be-
cause they could not see Him, imagine that
He was not ascended, but even while they are
conversing, would be present ere they were
aware. For if they said on a former occa-
sion, ‘‘ Whither goest Thou?” (John xiii. 36)
much more would they have said it now. 2
“Wilt Thou at this time,” say they, “ re-
store the kingdom to Israel?” (Recapitula-
tion). They so well knew his mildness, that
after His Passion also they ask Him, “ Wilt
thou restore?” And yet He had before said
to them, “ Ye shall hear of wars and rumors
of wars, but the end is not yet,” nor shall
Jerusalem be taken. But now they ask Him
about the kingdom, not about the end. And
besides, He does not speak at great length
with them after the Resurrection. They ad-


?


1 j. e. the Angels had before used the phrase of assumption:
but this does not express the whole matter ; therefore, to show
that it is the act of His own Divine power, they now say,
going. and afterwards express it that He w7?/ come, not that
He will be sent. He ascended, as He descended, by His own
Divine power. So again it is said, ‘‘ A cloud received Him: ”’
but in this Ife was not passive. as God He stepped upon the
cloud: emé8y alluding to the expression in the Psalm above
cited, TLBeis Thy EriBacw.

? All the Editions and the Latin Versions connect with this
the following sentence: ‘‘ Much more would they have said
now, Dost Thou at this time restore the kingdom to Israei?”
But itis evident, that at this point begins the recapitulation,
or renewed exposition. It is in fact a peculiarity of these
Discourses, that Chrys. having gone through the exposition of
the text, often, as here, goes over the same ground again,
usually with some such formula as, ‘‘ But let us look through
what has been said from the beginning.”’


dress then this question, as thinking that they
themselves would be in high honor, if this
should come to pass. But He (for as touch-
ing this restoration, that it was not to be, He
did not openly declare; for what needed they
to learn this? hence they do not again ask,
‘““What is the sign of Thy coming, and of the
end of the world?” for they are afraid to say
that: but, “Wilt Thou restore the kingdom to
Israel?” for they thought there was such a
kingdom), but He, I say, both in parables had
shown that the time was not near,“ and here
where they asked, and He answered thereto,
“Ye shall receive power,” says He, ‘ when the
Holy Ghost is come upon you.’ Is come upon
you,” not, “is sent,” [to shew the Spirit’s
coequal Majesty. How then darest thou, O
opponent of the Spirit; ‘to! ‘call amie
creature® ?] “And ye shall be witnesses to
Me.” He hinted at the Ascension. [‘ And
when he had spoken these things.4] Which
they had heard before, and He now reminds
them of. [‘* He was taken up.”] Already it
has been shown, that He went up into heaven.
[“ And a cloud, etc.’’] ‘“ Clouds and darkness
are under: His feet,” ((Ps.' xviii:/'9; evil)
saith the Scripture: for this is declared
by the expression, “And a cloud received
Him:” the Lord of heaven, it means.
For as a king is shown by the royal chariot,
so was the royal chariot sent for Him,
[“ Behold, two men, etc.] That they may vent
no sorrowful exclamations, and that it might
not be with them as it was with Elisha,
(2 Kings ii. 12) who, when his master was
taken up, rent his mantle. And*what say they?
“This Jesus, which is taken up from you into
heaven, shall thus come.” And, “ Behold,
two men stood by them.” (Matt. xviii. 16.)
With good reason: for “in the mouth of two
witnesses shall every word be established”
(Deut. xvii. 6): and these utter the same things.
And it is said, that they were “in white
apparel.” In the same manner as they had
already seen an Angel at the sepulchre, who
had even told them their own thoughts; so
here also an Angel is the preacher of His
Ascension ; although indeed the Prophets had
frequently foretold it, as well as the Resurrec-
tion. ®


* The reference here must be to such parablesas: ‘t The
Sower,” ‘‘ The Leaven,” ‘‘ The Grain of Mustard Seed.”’ (Matt.
xiii. 1-43), and the parable of the Growing Seed (Mark iv. 26-
29), all of which seem to represent the progress of his truth as
a long and slow development. To these might be added such
expressions as €ws THs guvTeAcias Tov ai@vos (Matt. xxviii. 20)
and €ws €oxarov THs yns (Acts i. 8).—G. B.S

8 This sentence is from the later recension.

* The text of these Homilies is often greatly confused by
the omission, especially in the recapitulations, of the words on
which Chrys. is commenting.

® Here Erasmus has followed another reading (of E.), the
very reverse in sense; ‘‘ And if indeed the Prophets did not
foretell this, be not astonished, for it was superfluous to say


Homity II.|


Everywhere it is Angelis: as at the Nativ-
ity, “for that which is conceived in her,” saith
one, “is by the Holy Ghost” (Matt. i. 20):
and again to Mary, “Fear not, Mary.” (Luke
i. 30.) And at the Resurrection: “ He is not
here; He is risen, and goeth before you.”’
(ib. xxiv. 6.) ‘Come, and see!” (Matt. xxviii.
6.) And at the Second Coming. For that they
may not be utterly in amaze, therefore it is
added, ‘Shall thus come.” (ib. xxv. 31.)
They recover their breath a little; if indeed
He shall come again, if also thus come, and
not be unapproachable! And that expression
also, that it is “from them” He is taken up,
is not idly added.1_ And of the Resurrection
indeed Christ
cause of all things this is, next to the Nativity,
nay even above the Nativity, the most won-
derful: His raising Himself to life again):
for, ‘“ Destroy,” He says, “‘this Temple, and
in three days [2 will raise it up.” (John ii. 19.)
“Shall thus come,” say they. If any there-
fore desires to see Christ; if any grieves that
he has not seen Him: having this heard, let
him show forth an admirable life, and cer-
tainly he shall see Him, and shall not be dis-
appointed. For Christ will come with greater
glory, though “thus,” in this manner, with a
body *; and much more wondrous will it be,
to see Him descending from heaven. But for
what He will come, they do not add.

[Shall thus come,” etc.] This is a con-
firmation of the Resurrection; for if he was
taken up with a body, much rather must He
have risen again with a body. Where are
those who disbelieve the Resurrection? Who
are they, I pray? Are they Gentiles, or
Christians? for I am ignorant. But no, I
know well: they are Gentiles, who also dis-
believe the work of Creation. For the two
denials go together: the denial that God cre-
ates any thing from nothing, and the denial
that He raises up what has been buried.
But then, being ashamed to be thought such
as “‘ know not the power of God ” (Matt. xxii.
29), that we may not impute this to them, they
allege: We do not say it with this meaning,
but because there is no need of the body.
Truly it may be seasonably said, ‘The fool
wili speak foolishness.” (Is. xxxii. 6.) Are


any thing individually about this, being necessarily involved
in the idea of the resurrection, (tj avactace: cuvvoovperns).

1 In the later recension it is added: ‘‘ but is declaratory of
His love towards them, and of their election, and that He will
not leave those whom He has chosen.”

2 John ii. 19; €yw eyep@ avtov, Chrys. adding the pronoun for

emphasis.
_.* The emphasis of the ottws and ov tpérov is better preserved
if we interpret them to mean w7szé/y, or with the accompani-
ment of a cloud, in reference to the vedeAy (g), rather than
merely (as Chrys.) ‘‘with a body.”’? They had not raised the
question as to his coming with or without abody. What they
wanted to know was whether he was coming in such a way
that they could recognize him.—G. B. S.


THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES.


Himself bears witness (be-|


15


you not ashamed not to grant, that God can
create from nothing? If he creates from
matter already existing, wherein does He
differ from men? But whence, you de-
mand, are evils? Though you should not
know whence, ought you for that to introduce
another evil in the knowledge of evils?
Hereupon two absurdities follow. For if you
do not grant, that from things which are not,
God made the things which are, much more
shall you be ignorant whence are evils: and
then, again, you introduce another evil, the
affirming that Evil (rip kakiav) is uncreated.
Consider now what a thing it is, when you
wish to find the source of evils, to be both
ignorant of it, and to add another to it.
Search after the origin of evils, and do not
blaspheme God. And how do I blaspheme ?
says he. When you make out that evils have
a power equal to God’s; a power uncreated.
For, observe what Paul says; “ For the invis-
ible things of Him from the creation of the
world are clearly seen, being understood by
the things that are made.” (Rom. i. 20.)
But the devil would have both to be of matter,
that there may be nothing left from which we
may> come to the knowledge of God. For tell
me, whether is harder: to3 take that which is
by nature evil (if indeed there be ought such ;
for I speak upon your principles, since there
is no such thing as evil by nature), and make
it either good, or even coefficent of good? or,
to make of nothing? Whether is easier (I
speak of quality); to induce the non-existent
quality; or to take the existing quality, and
change it into its contrary? where there
is no house, to make the house; or where it is
utterly destroyed, to make it identically exist
again? Why, as this is impossible, so is that :
to make a thing into its opposite. Teli me,
whether is harder; to make a perfume, or to
make filth have the effect of perfume? Say,
whether of these is easier (since we subject
God to our reasonings: nay, not we, but ye) ;
to form eyes, or to make a blind man to see
continuing blind, and yet more sharp-sighted,
than one who does see? ‘To make blindness
into sight, and deafness into hearing? To
me the other seems easier. Say then do


3 The text in both classes of manuscripts, and in the Edd.,
needs reformation. The argument is, If good and evil be, as
the Manichzans say, both self-subsistent, then evil must sub-
sist for ever. For if, as they affirm, God cannot create out of
nothing, neither can He change a thing into its opposite ; nay,
much less, for this is harder than that. In E. (the text of the
Edd.) the reading is, To dvaee xaxdv Kaddv Torna (El ye Ti EoTL
xa’ Uuas yap Aé€yw: dice. yap ovdév EoTe ToLnTat Kaxov Kadov
cuvepyov) 7 To €€ OK OvTwy: which as usual in this Ms. is an
attempt to explain the meaning, but is not what the context
requires. in C. A. (the original text) To dvaet Kaxov rornoat (et
ye Tt €ott Kab’ Wuas yap A€yw huge yap ovdev EaTt TornTaL KaKoY
3) KaAov Kal KaAov cuvEpyov) 7 TO four. A.] €f ovx ovtTwy. Read,
To dice: xaxov (€i ye Ti eaTL’ Kad’ Umas yap A€yw: Hider yap ovder
égTt Kaxov) ToLnoat 7 KaAoV 7H Kal KaAoUv guVEpyor.


16 THE WORKS OF


{Homity II.


ST: CHRYS@ST OM:


you grant God that which is harder, and
not grant the easier? But souls also they
affirm to be of His substance. Do you see
what a number of impieties and absurdities
are here! In the first place, wishing to show
that evils are from God, they bring in another
thing more impious than this, that they are
equal with Him in majesty, and God prior in
existence to none of them, assigning this
great prerogative even to them! In the next
place, they affirm evil to be indestructible:
for if that which is uncreated can be de-
stroyed, ye see the blasphemy! So that it
comes to this, either! that nothing is of God,
if not these; or that these are God! Thirdly,
what I have before spoken of, in this point
they defeat themselves, and prepare against
themselves fresh indignation. Fourthly, they
affirm unordered matter to possess such inhe-
rent (éxirjdewryra) power. Fifthly, that evil is
the cause of the goodness of God, and that
without this the Good had not been good.
Sixthly, they bar against us the ways of
attaining unto the knowledge of God.
Seventhly, they bring God down into men,
yea plants and logs. For if our soul be of
the substance of God, but the process of its
transmigration into new bodies brings it at
last into cucumbers, and melons, and onions,
why then the substance of God will pass into
cucumbers! And if we say, that the Holy
Ghost fashioned the Temple [of our Lord’s
body] in the Virgin, they laugh us to
scorn: and if, that He dwelt in that spiritual
Temple, again they laugh; while they them-
selves are not ashamed to bring down God’s
substance into cucumbers, and melons, and
flies, and caterpillars, and asses, thus excog-
itating a new fashion of idolatry: for let it not
be as the Egyptians have it, ‘‘ The onion is
God’; ‘but: let it be, ““God im the onion” !
Why dost thou shrink from the notion of
God’s entering into a body?? ‘It is shock-
ing, says he. Why then this is much more
shocking. But,’ forsooth, it is not shocking


1 “Oore avayxyn 7 undév Tov Meov eivar ci un Taita: Kai Oedv
eivat. For so it seems the passage should be read, for which
the Mss. have 7 et uy Tavra, and then in the older text, Kai
@edv eivac, for which the modern recension, D. E. F. and Edd.
have 7 kai @edv wy eivac.

2 thy évowpatworv Tov Meov. Edd. petevownatworv. But the
Manichees affirmed a wetevowuatwouv of the particle of the
Divine Substance, the human soul; viz. the more polluted soul
transmigrates into other men, and animals (Archelai et Manet:
Disput. §. ix. Routh, Red/. Sacc. iv. 161.), but in the last stage
of the process of its purgation, into vegetable substances less
attached to the earth by roots, such as gourds, etc. in which
the Diyine particle is self-conscious and intelligent (see the
following note), whereas in animal substances it is brutified.
In this sense it is said above, 7 perevo. éxBatver cis otxvous
«x. T. A, What they denied was, an évowpatwors Oeod by In-
carnation.

S"AAN ovK aicxpov; mas yap; Omep (om. A.) av eis Huas
yevntar: To 6€ gdby ovTws aicxpov. Edd. add’ ovK aioxpov; mas;
OTEp yap av €is Nuas yevyntat OvtTws aiaxpov. Erasmus; An non
hoc turpe est? Quomodo non turpe sit in Deum, quod, si no-
bis contingat, revera turpe futurum sit? Ben. Quandoguidem


—how should it be ?—this same thing which is
so, if it be into us! ‘ But thy notion is indeed
shocking.’ Do ye see the filthiness of their
impiety ?—But why do they not wish the body
to be raised? And why do they say the
body is evil? By what then, tell me, dost
thou know God? by what hast thou the
knowledge of existing things? The phi-
losopher too: by means of what is he a philos-
opher, if the body does nothing towards it?
Deaden the senses, and then learn something
of the things one needs to know! What
would be more foolish than a soui, if from the
first it had the senses deadened? If the
deadening of but a single part, I mean of the
brain, becomes a marring of it altogether; if
all the rest should be dcadened, what would
it be good for? Show me a soul without a
body. Do you not hear physicians say,
The presence of disease sadly enfeebles the
soul? How long will ye put off hanging
yourselves? Is the body material ? tell ‘me.
‘To be sure, it is.” Then you ought to hate
it. Why do you feed, why cherish it? You
ought to get quit of this prison. But besides:
“God cannot overcome matter, unless he
(cuuraxy) implicate himself with it: for he
cannot issue orders to it (O feebleness !)
until he close with it, and (oratj) take his
stand (say you) through the whole of it!”
And aking indeed does all by commanding ;
but God, not by commanding the evil! In
short, if it were unparticipant of all good, it
could not subsist at all. For Evil cannot sub-
sist, unless it lay hold upon somewhat of the
accidents of Virtue: so that if it had been
heretofore all unmixed with virtue, it would
have perished long ago: for such is the con-
dition of evils. Let there be a profligate
man, let him put upon himself no restraint
whatever, will he live ten days? Let there be


si in nobis fiat, vere turpe est. i. e. For, that same which, if
it take place in us, is indeed shocking [how should it not be so
in God ?]. The exclamation, Eidete oupderov aveBetas! seems
to imply either that 6vtws atoxporv is part of the Manichzan’s
reply, or that something 1s omitted. Perhaps the reporter
wrote, To dé 0. bvtTws aicxpov, meaning gua, ** But the body,
etc.”’ “Av eis nuas yévytac can hardly be, as taken by Erasm.,
guod st nobis contingat, 1.e. that our substance should migrate
into plants, etc. but rather, if it be into us that this (embodying
of the Divine Substance) takes place. For illustration of the
Manichzan tenets here alluded to, comp. Euod. de Fd. adv.
Manich. § 35. (Opp. St. Augustin., Append. t. viii. Ben.) Moz
Deus Manichei luctum pateretur de partis sy@ abscissione vel
amisstone ; guam partem dicunt gquuminfructibus vel in her-
bis fuerit, td est, in melone. vel beta, vel talibus rebus, et
principium suum et medietatem et finem nosse, cum autem ad
carnent venerit omnem intelligentiam amittere,; ut propterea
magister hominthus missus sit, quia stultain illis facta est
pars Det, etc. “Then the God of the Manichzean would not
suffer grief in consequence of the cutting off or loss of part of
his substance ; which part, they say, if it be in fruits or in herbs,
as in the melon or beet or such-like, knows its beginning and
middle and end; but when it comes to flesh, loses all intelli-
gence: so that the reason why the Teacher was sent to men
was, because in them the particle of God was stultified, etc.”’
And Commonitor, de recip. Manich. Att. 3. (ibid.) ut credatur
pars Det polluta tenert in cucumertbus et melonibus et radicu-
lis et porris et gquibusque vilissimts herbults, etc.


Homi ty III] THE ACES: OF


a robber, and devoid of all conscience in his
dealings with every one, let him be such even
to his feliow-robbers, will he be able to live?
Let there be a thief, void of all shame, who
knows not what blushing is, but steals openly
in public. It is not in the nature of evils to
subsist, unless they get some small share at
least in good. So that hereupon, according
to these men, God gave them their subsistence.
Let there be a city of wicked men; will it
stand? But let them be wicked, not only
with regard to the good, but towards each
other. Why, it is impossible such a city
should stand. Truly, ‘‘ professing themselves
to be wise, they became fools.” (Rom. i.
22.) If bodily substance be evil, then all
things visible exist idly, and in vain, both


“ Then returned they unto Jerusalem from the mount
called Olivet, which is from Jerusalem a sabbath
day’s journey.


”


“THEN returned they,” it is said : namely,
when they had heard. For they could not
have borne it, if the angel had not (izepétero)
referred them to another Coming. It seems
to me, that it was also on a sabbath-day ’ that
these things took place; for he would not
thus have specified the distance, saying,


Jerusalem a sabbath day’s journey,” un-
less they were then going on the sabbath-
day acertain definite distance. “And when |
they were come in,” it says, “they went up
into an upper room, where they were making)
their abode:” so they then remained in Jeru.
salem after the Resuirection: “both nee
and James, and John :” no longer is only
latter together with his brother mentioned, 2

but together with Peter the two: “and
Andrew, and Philip, and Thomas, Barthol- |
omew, and Matthew, and James (the son) of
Alpheus, and Simon Zelotes, and Judas, (the
brother) of James.” * (v.13.) He has done


1 This must be taken as a hasty remarks unless (which 1s not
likely) a sabbath extraordinary is meant.

2 The meaning seems to be, ‘‘he is not content to mention
only James and John with Peter, but gives the full list of the
Apostles. °

* The meaning ot ‘lovdéas ‘IaxwBov (1. 13, cf. Luke vi. 16) 1s a
disputed point. Whether the genitive denotes the relation of
brother or son has never been decided. The interpretation ot

-


“from the mount called Olivet, which is from |


THE APOSTLES; 17


water and earth, and sun, and air; for air is
also body, though not solid. It is in point
then to say, “ The wicked have told me fool-
ish things.” (Ps. cxix. 85.) But let not us
endure them, let us block up our ears against
them. For there is, yea, there is, a resurrec-
tion of bodies. This the sepulchre which is at
Jerusalem declares, this the pillar? to which
He was bound, when He was scourged. For,
“We did eat and drink with Him,” it is said.
Let us then believe in the Resurrection, and
do things worthy of it, that we may attain to
the good things which are to come, through
Christ Jesus our Lord, with Whom to the
Father, and the Holy Ghost together, be
power, honor, now and for ever, world with-
out end. Amen,


POMi Ls Lil.


AGES Tes:


well to mention the disciples: for since one
| had betrayed Christ, and another had been
unbelieving, he thereby shows that, except
the first, all of them were preserved.

“ These were all continuing with one accord
in prayer together with the women.” (v. 14.)
For this is a powerful weapon in temptations ;
and to this they had been trained. [‘‘Con-
tinuing with one accord.”] Good. (kazéc).
Besides, the present temptation directed
them. to this: for they exceedingly feared the
Jews. ‘With the women,” it is said: for he
had said that they had followed Him: “and
with Mary the mother of Jesus.” (Luke xxiii.
55.) How then [is it said, that “that disciple ”]
took her to his own home” (John xix. 26), at
|that time? But then the Lord had brought
them together again, and so returned. “ And


| the English translators is allowed to stand because it is, prob-
ably, the more common one and has many able modern exe-
getes in its favor among whom are Buttmann, Gram. N. T.
xk. (Eng. Trans.) p. 94. and, more doubtfully, Winer, N. T.
Gram. (Eng. Trans., p. 190. It is, however, certain that usage
is strongly in favor, of supplying vuos. The former view iden-
tifies this Judas with the author of the Epistle (Jud. i. 1) and is
| that of our older English Trans. The latter understands this
| Judas to be the son of an unknown James and is favored by
Thayer’s Zex., Meyer and the Revised Vs. Tome this view
seems probably correct.—G. B. S.

3 7d EvAov EvOa mpowedeOn Kat EuagtrywOy. The ‘ Pillar of
Flagellation * is exhibited in the Latin Choir of the Church of
the Holy Sepulchre.

4 Tladiv 6& cvvayaywyv avtois ovtTws KatnAPev. So the older
text: 1. e. When they were scattered every man to his own
home, that disciple had taken her ets 7a idéca. But after the
Resurrection Christ had gathered them together, and so (with
all assembled) had returned to the usual place or mode of
living.


18


with His brethren.” (John xvii. 5.) These
also were before unbelieving.

“And in those days,” it says, “‘ Peter stood
up in the midst of the disciples, and said,”
(v. 15.) Both as being ardent, and as having
been put in trust by Christ with the flock,
and as having precedence in honor,’ he
always begins the discourse. (‘‘ The number
of the names together were about an hundred
and twenty.) Men and brethren,” he says,
“this Scripture must needs have been ful-
filled, which the Holy Ghost spake before,” ?
[etc.] (v. 16.) Why did he not ask Christ
in the room of


to give him some one
Sueasy “Tt is “better as* i¢--is.. For in* the
first place, they were engaged in other


things; secondly, of Christ’s presence with
them, the greatest proof that could be given
was this: as He had chosen when He was
among them, so did He now being absent.
Now this was no small matter for their conso-
lation. But observe how Peter does every-
thing with the common consent;
imperiously. And he does not speak thus
without a meaning. But observe how he con-
soles them concerning what had passed. In
fact, what had happened had caused them no
small consternation. For if there are many


now who canvass this circumstance, what
may we suppose they had to say then?
“Men and brethren,” says Peter. For if


the Lord called them brethren, much more


may he. [‘ Men,” he says]: they all being
present.* See the dignity of the Church, the
angelic condition! No distinction there,


‘“‘neither male nor female.” I would that the
Churches were such now! None there had
his mind full of some worldly matter, none
was anxiously thinking about household con-
cerns. Sucha benefit are temptations, such
the advantage of afflictions !

“This Scripture,” says he, “must needs
have been fulfilled, which the Holy Ghost
spake before.” Always he comforts them by
the prophecies. So does Christ on all occa-


1 Hporiporepos, B. C.: mpotimwmevos A. and Catena: tod xopod
mpatos, E.D.F. Comp. Hom. im Matt. liv. t. ii. 107. ‘* What
then saith the mouth of the Apostles, Peter? He, the ever
ardent, the coryphzus of the choir of the Apostles.’*

2 Chrys. seems to have read on to the end of the chapter.
The rest of the citation being omitted in the Mss. the remod-
eller of the text makes alterations, and adds matter of his own,
to make the exposition run smoother. ‘t Why did he not ask
Christ, alone, to give him some one in the place of Judas?
And why of their own selves do they not make the election ?”
Then instead of BeAtvov yéyove Aowrov mpaTov meév yap, x. 7. A. he
has, BeAtiwv Aowrov iv yeyorws 6 Iletpos avtos eavtov, kK. T. X.
‘““ Peter has now become a better man than he was. So much
for this point. But as to their request to have their body filled
up not simply, but by revelation, we will mention two reasons;
first, ’’etc.

8 Edd. ‘Wherefore he uses this address, they all being
present.”’ But the old text has simply mavtwy mapovtwyr, i. e.
all, both men and women. Chrys. is commenting on the
address avépes adeApoi as including the woven also who were
before said to be present. Comp. Hom. in Matt. \xxiii. Pp. 712,
B. on the separation of men and women in the Churches.


THE WORKS OF STs CHRYSOSTOM.


nothing -


[Homity III.


sions. In the very same way, he shows here
that no strange thing had happened, but
what had already been foretold. ‘This
Scripture must needs have been fulfilled,” he
says, “which the Holy Ghost by the mouth
of David spake before.” He does not say,
David, but the Spirit through him. See what
kind of doctrine the writer has at the very
outset of the book. Do you see, that it was
not for nothing that I said in the beginning
of this work, that this book is the Polity of
the Holy Spirit? “Which the Holy Ghost
spake before by the mouth of David.”
Observe how he appropriates (oixecovra) him ;
and that it is an advantage to them, that this
was spoken by David, and not by some other
Prophet. ‘Concerning Judas,” he _ says,
“which was guide.” Here again mark the
philosophical temper of the man: how he does
not mention him with scorn, nor say, “that
wretch,” “that miscreant :” but simply states
the fact; and does not even say, ‘who
betrayed Him,” but does what he can to
transfer the guilt to others: nor does he


;animadvert severely even on these: “ Which


’


was guide,” he says, ‘to them that took
Jesus.” Furthermore, before he declares
where David had spoken, he relates what had
been the case with Judas, that from the
things present he may fetch assurance of the
things future, and show that this man had
already received his due. “For he was
numbered,” says he, “with us, and had
obtained part of this ministry. Now this
man acquired a field out of the reward of
iniquity.” (v. 17, 18.) He gives his discourse a
moral turn, and covertly mentions the cause
of the wickedness, because it carried reproof
with it... And he does not say, The Jews,
but, “‘ this man, acquired” it. For since the
minds of weak persons do not attend to
things future, as they do to things present, he
discourses of the immediate punishment
inflicted. ‘And falling headlong, he burst
asunder in the midst.” He does well to
dilate not upon the sin, but upon the punish-


ment. ‘And,” he says, “all his bowels
gushed out.” This brought them consola-
tion.2, “And it was known unto all the


dwellers at Jerusalem ; insomuch as that field
is called in their proper tongue Aceldama, that


1 AavOavovtws A€yer THY aitiav, macdevTiKHy ovcav. i, e. “in
speaking of the wages of Judas, he indicates, that the Jews, by
whom he was hired, were the authors of the wickedness: but
because this carried reproof, he does it covertly, by implica-
tion.”’ In the next sentence, he goes on to another point of
the exposition, Kat ov Aéyet, x. 7. A. 1. e. ‘* And observe also,
that with the same wise forbearance, he says it not of the
Jews, but of Judas, that a piece of ground was all that was
gotten by this wickedness: now, in fact, not Judas earned
this, but the Jews.’’ The modern text has ov Aéyet yap.

2 Tovto rapauvéiav éxeivors epepe. Something seems to be
omitted here.


Homity III.]


is to say, the field of blood.” (v. 19). Now the |


Jews! gave it this name, not on this account,
but because of Judas; here, however, Peter
makes it tu have this reference, and when he
brings forward the adversaries as witnesses,
both by the fact that they named it, and by
saying, ‘in their proper tongue,” this is what
he means.

Then after the event, he appositely brings
in the Prophet, saying, “‘ For it is written in
the Book of Psalms, Let his habitation be
desolate, and let no man dwell therein”
(v. 20) (Ps. Ixix. 25): this is said of the field
and the dwelling: ‘“ And his bishopric let
another take; that is, his office, his priesthood.
So that this, he says, is not my counsel, but
His who hath foretold these things. For,
that he may not seem to be undertaking
a great thing, and just such as Christ had
done, he adduces the Prophet as a witness.
** Wherefore it behooves of these men which
have companied with us all the time.” (v. 21.)
Why does he make it their business too?
That the matter mght not become an object
of strife, and they might not fall into conten-
tion about it. For if the Apostles them-
selves once did this, much more might those.
This he ever avoids. Wherefore at the
beginning he said, ‘Men and brethren. It
behooves” to choose from among you.” He
defers the decision to the whole body, thereby
both making the elected objects of reverence
and himself keeping clear of all invidiousness
with regard to the rest. For such occasions
always give rise to great evils. Now that
some one must needs be appointed, he
adduces the prophet as witness: but from
among what persons: “Of these,” he says,
“ which have companied with us all the time.”
To have said, the worthy must present them-
selves, would have been to insult the others ;
but now he refers the matter to length of
time; for he says not simply, ‘* These who
have companied with us,” but, “all the time
that the Lord Jesus went in and out among
us, beginning from the baptism of John unto
that same day that He was taken up from us,
must one be ordained to be a witness with us
me His resurrection” (v.22): that their
college (6 yopic) might not be left mutilated.
Then why did it not rest with Peter to make
the election himself: what was the motive?
This; that he might not seem to bestow it
of favor. And besides, he was not yet


1 Here also Chrys. seems to be imperfectly reported. His
meaning may be gathered from what 1s said further on, in the
recapitulation: i. e. in giving the field that name, “‘ because it
was the price of blood’”' (Matt. xxvii. 8), they unconsciously
prophesied : for indeed the reward of ¢hezry iniquity was this,
that their place became an Aceldama.

2 So A. B. C. andthe Catena. The other text has ef nuor,
which 1s less apposite.


PePoiwors On CHE APOSTLES:


19


endowed with the spirit. ‘And _ they
appointed two, Joseph called Barsabus, who
was surnamed Justus, and Matthias.” (v. 23.)
Not he appointed them: but it was he that
introduced the proposition to that effect, at
the same time pointing out that even this
was not his own, but from old time by
prophecy ; so that he acted as expositor, not
as preceptor. ‘Joseph called Barsabus, who
was surnamed Justus.” Perhaps both names
are given, because there were others of the
same name, for among the Apostles also
there were several names alike; as James,
and James (the son) of Alphzus; Simon
Peter, and» Simon -Zelotes;. ‘Judas: (the
brother) of James, and Judas Iscariot. ‘The
appellation, however, may have arisen from a
change of life, and very likely also of the
moral character. ‘They appointed two,” it
is said, “ Joseph called Barsabus, who was
surnamed, Justus, and Matthias. And they
prayed, and said, Thou, Lord, which knowest
the hearts of all men, show whether of these
two thou hast chosen, that he may take part
of this ministry and Apostleship, from which
Judas by transgression fell, that he might go
to his own place.” (v. 24, 25.) They do well
to mention the sin of Judas, thereby showing
that it is a witness they ask to have; not
increasing the number, but not suffering it to
be diminished. ‘And they gave forth their
lots ” (for the spirit was not yet sent), “and
the lot fell upon Matthias: and he was
numbered with the eleven Apostles.” (v. 26.)


“Then,” it says, ‘returned they unto Jeru-
salem from the mount called Olivet (Recapit-
ulation), [“ which‘ is nigh to Jerusalem, at the
distance of a sabbath-day’s journey :”’] so that
there was no long way to go, to be a cause of
alarm to them while yet trembling and fearful.
‘¢ And when they were come in, they went up
into an upper room.” They durst not appear
in the town. They also did well to go up into
an upper room, as it became less easy’ to
arrest them at once. “And they continued,”
it is said, “with one accord in prayer.” Do


3 “AdAws S€ Kai metaBoArns Biov, tows Sé Kal mpoatperews Hy H
dvonacia. i. e. St. Luke gives both the names Joseph (or Joses)
and Justus, perhaps for the sake of distinction. he name (as
Latin) may have been given in consequence of a change of
life (viz. of circumstances), and (as meaning ‘the Just’) per-
haps also from a change of character (mpoatpeats.)—Or, mpoat-
peats (Biov) may be opposed to petaBodAy Biov and then the
meaning would be, that the name may have related to a
change, i.e. reformation of life, or perhaps to his original
choice or moral purpose of life. But tows d€ kai seems best to
suit the former explanation.

4 This clause of the text is added, though wanting in our
Mss. The comment is, wore unde paxpayv BadiGovor oddv dd8ov
Tia yeverOar Tpeuovow Ete Kai Sedoixoow avrois. i. e. ‘‘so that
not being a long way for them walking, it was of, etc.,’’ which
construction being somewhat obscure, the modern text has,
route dno, iva SetEn OTe paxpav ov BadiCovaw odov, ws doBor
Tia wy yever@ar Tpemovow Ere kat SeSorxdoty avrois.


20


THE WORKS OF ST.WCHRYSOSEOU


[Homity III.


you see how watchful they were? “ Continu-
ing in prayer,” and “with one accord,” as it
were with one soul, continuing therein: two
things reported in their praise. [‘‘ Where?
they were abiding,” etc., to, “And Mary the
Mother of Jesus and His brethren.”] Now
Joseph perhaps was dead: for it is not to be
supposed that when the brethren had become
believers, Joseph believed not; he who in
fact had believed before any. Certain it is
that we nowhere find him looking upon
Christ as man merely. As where His mother
said, [‘‘ Thy father and I did seek thee sorrow-
ing.” (Luke ii. 48.) And upon another
occasion, it was said,] ‘“‘ Thy mother” and thy
brethren seek thee.” (Matt. xiii. 47.) So
that Joseph knew this before all others. And
to them [the brethren] Christ said, ‘“ The
world cannot hate you, but Me it hateth.
(John vii. 7.)

Again, consider the moderation of James.
He it was who received the Bishopric of Jeru-
salem, and here he says nothing. Mark also
the great moderation of the other Apostles,
how they concede the throne to him, and no
longer dispute with each other. For that
Church was as it were in heaven: having
nothing to do with this world’s affairs: and
resplendent not with walls, no, nor with num-
bers, but with the zeal of them that formed
athe assembly. They were “about an hun-
dred and twenty,” it says. The seventy per-
haps whom Christ Himself had chosen, and
other of the more earnest-minded disciples, as
Joseph and Matthias. (v. 14.) There were
women, he says, many, who followed Him.
(Mark xv, 41.) [“The number of the names
together.] Together *”’ they were on all occa-
sions.

if wwenand. brethren;’?.€tce.| Here is “fore=


1 Here again, as usual, in the renewed exposition, the text 1s
omitted.

2 ‘H pntyp gov Kat of adeApot gov éenroduev oe. A. C. 6
mazyjp cov xk. T.A. B. For e¢yr. we must read ¢ynrovow. The
passage referred tois Matt. xiii. 47, where however it is not
Mary that speaks, but ‘A certain person said unto Him, Be-
hold, Thy mother and Thy brethren stand without seeking to
speak with Thee. In the Homily on that passage, Chrys. in-
terprets that Mary presented herself on that occasion ovdév
ovdermw epi avTov meya havTagonevn, ‘Shaving as yet no high
idea of His Person,’ and that both she and His brethren, ws
avOpuTw mporeixov WiAw “looked upon Him as mere man.”’ In
the same way he adverts to that incident here, for contrast
with the higher faith of Joseph; but as the statement, ‘‘ His
mother said,” is not accurate, the modern text széstztutes the
passage, Luke ii. 48, and reads, 9 mytnp éAeyev, "Eyw kai
0 TaTnp gov OdvVwmeEvoL ECytodMEeV oe. It seems that Chrys. cited
this passage also (hence our Mss. have e¢nrovmev for ¢nrover),
meaning, that it was not Joseph who said this, but Mary.—
(Ecumenius, however, gives a different turn to this passage
of St. Chrys. ‘‘And if Joseph had been alive, he too would
have been present ; especially as he never, /zke Azs sons (ot e&
avrov. viz. the adeApoi), entertained a doubt of the mystery of
the Incarnation. But it is manifest that 4e was long dead ;
simce 2ven on the occasion when, as Jesus was teaching, His
kinsfolk demanded to see Him, Joseph was not present. For
what says the Gospel? ‘‘Thy mother and thy brethren with-
out see~ thee ;’’ but not also, 7hy father.

3 ’Emt 70 avTo. a comment on VY. 15.


| the iniquity.”


thought for providing a teacher; here was the
first who ordained a teacher. He did not
say, ‘We are sufficient.’ So far was he be-
yond all vain-glory, and he looked to one
thing alone. And yet he had the same power
to ordain as they all collectively. But well
might these things be done in this fashion,
through the noble spirit of the man, and be-
cause prelacy then was not an affair of dig-
nity, but of provident care for the governed.
This neither made the elected to become
elated, for it was to dangers that they were
called, nor those not elected to make a griev-
ance of it, as if they were disgraced. But
things are not done in this fashion now; nay,
quite the contrary.—For observe, they were
an hundred and twenty, and he asks for one
out of the whole body: with good right, as
having been put in charge of them: for to
him had Christ said, “And when thou art
converted, strengthen thy brethren.” (Luke
XXil. 32; Bens)

“For he was numbered with us,” (xpéroc ron
mptyuatoc aibevrei absent from A. B. C.) says
Peter. On this account it behooves to pro-
pose another; to be a witness in his place.
And see how he imitates his Master, ever
discoursing from the Scriptures, and saying
nothing as yet concerning Christ; namely,
that He had frequently predicted this Him-
self. Nor does he mention where the Scrip-
ture speaks of the treachery of Judas; for
instance, “The mouth of the wicked and the
mouth of the deceitful are opened against
me” (Ps, cix. 1.); but where it speaks only
of his punishment; for this was most to
their advantage. It shows again the benevo-
lence of the Lord: “For he was numbered
with us ” (rovre yap avtove udduora woéder: Asixvect
zaaw A. B. C.), he says, ‘and obtained his lot
of this ministry.” He calls it everywhere
“lot,” showing that the whole is from God’s
grace and election, and reminding them of the
old times, inasmuch as God chose him into
His own lot or portion, as of old He took the
Levites. He also dwells upon the circum-
stances respecting Judas, showing that the
reward of the treachery was made itself the
herald of the punishment. For he “ac-
quired,” he says, “a field out of the reward of
Observe the divine economy


4 Kairovye toortvroyv amacw eixe THY KataéoTacw, Which Erasm.
justly renders, Quaxquam habebat jus constituendi por omni-
éus : i, e. the ordination by St. Peter singly, would have been
as valid as the ordination by the whole body. D. F. have
katrou ovde, i. e. and yet he possessed a power of ordaining, in
which they were not all upon a par with him: which reading
is accepted by Morel. Sav. and Ben., and is rendered by the
last, Quanguam non pari forma apud omnes ejus vigebat
auctoritas. This reading originated in a mistake as to the
meaning of the other, as if that asserted only that St. Peter
had the same power of ordaining as avy of the rest.


ae


Homity IIL] THE ACTS OF


in the event. ‘Of the iniquity,” he says.
For there are many iniquities, but never was
anything more iniquitous than this: so that
the affair was one of iniquity. Now not only
to those who were present did the event be-
come known, but to all thereafter, so that
without meaning or knowing what they were
about, they gave it a name; just as Caiaphas
had prophesied unconsciously. God com-
pelled them to call the field in Hebrew “ Acel-
dama.” (Matt. xxvi. 24.) By this also the
evils which were to come upon the Jews were
declared: and Peter shows the prophecy to
have been so far in part fulfilled, which says,
“It had been good for that man if he had not
been born.’”’ We may with. propriety apply
this same to the Jews likewise; for if he who
was guide suffered thus, much more they.
Thus far however Peter says nothing of this.
Then, showing that the term, ‘“ Aceldama,”
might well be applied to his fate, he intro-
duces the prophet, saying, ‘‘ Let his habitation
be desolate.” For what can be worse desola-
tion than to become a place of burial? And
the field may well be called A4zs. For he who
cast down the price, although others were the
buyers, has a right to be himself reckoned
owner of a great desolation.1. This desolation
was the prelude to that of the Jews, as will
appear on looking closely into the facts. For
indeed they destroyed themselves by famine,
and killed many, and the city became a burial-
place of strangers, of soldiers,” for as to those,
they would not even have let them be buried,
for in fact they were not deemed worthy of
sepulture.

“Wherefore of these men which have com-
panied with us,” continues Peter. Observe
how desirous he is they should be eye-wit-
nesses. It is true indeed that the Spirit
would shortly come; and yet great care is
shown with regard to this circumstance. ‘“ Of
these men,” he says, “ which have companied
with us, all the time that the Lord Jesus went
in and out among us.” He shows that they
had dwelt with Christ, not simply been pres-
ent as disciples. In fact, from the very be-
ginning there were many that then followed


1 KUplos Epnuwoews weyadns. Something perhaps is wanting
between «vp. and ep. wu. Indeed the text seems to consist of
little more than a few rough notes.

2 Tados yéyovey 7 TOAts Tov ~évwv, THY oTpaTwwTwv. In the
defective state of the text it is not easy to conjecture what this
can mean. Perhaps, alluding to the words in St. Matthew, ‘‘a
place to bury strangers in.’’ St. Chrys. may have explained,
that the strangers were not heathen (€xeivous yap od’ av elacay
tapyvat, they would not have allowed such to be buried in or
by the Holy City, much less have provided a place of burial
for them), but foreign Jews: and if in tados yeyovev yn moAts he
alludes to the description in Josephus, B. J. v. 12. 3. and 13. 7.
this explanation of the term ‘‘ strangers’’ would be the more
apposite, as the myriads who perished in the siege were assem-
bled from ali parts of the world. The ‘soldiers’ seem to be
the mercenaries on the side of the Jews: five thousand Idu-
Means are mentioned, B. J. v. 6. 1.


LHe APOSTLES! 2!


Him. Observe, for instance, how this ap-
pears in these words: “ One of the two which
heard John speak, and followed Jesus.—All
the time,”’ he says, “ that the Lord Jesus went
in and out among us, beginning from the bap-
tism of John.” (John i. 40.) True! for no
one knew what preceded that event, though
they did learn it by the Spirit. ‘Unto that
same day that He was taken up from us, must
one be ordained to be a witness with us of
His resurrection.” * He said not, a witness of
the rest of his actions, but a witness of
the resurrection alone. For indeed that wit-
ness had a better right to be believed, who
was able to declare, that He Who ate and
drank, and was crucified, the same rose again.
Wherefore it was needed that he should be a
witness, not only of the time preceding this
event, nor only of what followed it, and of the
miracles; the thing required was, the resur-
rection. For the other matters were manifest
and acknowledged, but the resurrection took
place in secret, and was manifest to these
only. And they do not say, Angels have told
us; but, We have seen.’ For this it was that
was most needful at that time: that they
should be men having a right to be believed,
because they had seen.

““And they appointed two,” it is said.f
Why not many? That the feeling of disap-
pointment might not reach further, extending
to many. Again, it is not without reason
that he puts Matthias last; he would show,
that frequently he that is honourable among
men, is inferior before God. And they all
pray in common saying, ‘ Thou, Lord, which
knowest the hearts of all men, show. Thou,”
not “We.” And very seasonably they use the
epithet, ‘‘ heart-knowing:” for by Him Who
is this ® must the choice be made. So confi-
dent were they, that assuredly one of them
must be appointed, They said not, Choose,
but, ‘Show the chosen one;” knowing that
all things were forcordained of God; “* Whom


* The requirement for the apostolic office 1s here clearly
indicated. The candidate must have associated with Christ
and his apostles during the period from John’s baptism to the
Lord’s ascension, i. e. during His public ministry, The char-
acter of the apostolate is also significantly implied in the term
Maptus THs avacTagews avtov. The resurrection was the great
central theme of apostolic teaching and preaching (vid. Acts
iv. 2, 33; XVii. 18, 32).—G. B. S.

3 Here the Edd. have nets: ré0ev SHAov; €& Gv Oavparoupyov-
wev. “Sourselves: how is this proved? by the miracles we
work.’’ C. has not these words, which are not needed, but
rather disturb the sense.

+ The words of the text (v. 23) Kai €orycayv dvo are better
rendered ‘ put forward ”’ (Rev. Vs.) than “‘appointed.”’ (A.Y.)
The meaning is that the company chose two persons as candi-
dates, leaving the decision between them to the lot.—G. B. S.

4 Ody adds 5& mpooriOnow exetvov, D. and E. have ovx amA@s
Sé ov mpotiOnow éxecvov, according to which the sense would be


the same: ‘ Not without reason does he avoid putting Mat-
thias first.’

5 Here the Edd. add, ovxt trav e&wGev, ‘‘not by those with-
out:’’ but these words are not tound in our Mss. of either


text, nor in the Catena.


22


THE: WORKS: OF (ST) CHEYSOSIGM,


[Homicry III.


”


Thou didst choose: one of these two,” say
they, “to have his lot in this ministry and
apostleship.” For there was besides another
ministry (d:axovia). “ And they gave them their
lots.” For they did not yet consider them-
selves to be worthy to be informed by some
sign.! And besides, if in a case where neither
prayer was made, nor men of worth were the
agents, the casting of lots so much availed,
because it was done of a right intention, I
mean in the case of Jonah (Jonah i. 7);
,much more did it here. ‘Thus,’ did he, the
designated, fill up the company, complete the
order: but the other candidate was not
annoyed ; for the apostolic writers would not
have concealed [that or any other] failings of
their own, seeing they have told of the very
chief Apostles, that on other occasions they
had indignation (Matt. xx. 24; xxvi. 8), and
this not once only, but again and again.
Let us then also imitate them. And now I
address no longer every one, but those who
aim at preferment. If thou believest that the
election is with God, be not displeased.
(Mark x. 14, 21; xiv. 4.) For it is with Him
thou art displeased, and with Him thou art
exasperated: it is He who has made the
choice ; thou doest the very thing that Cain
did; because, forsooth, his brother’s sacrifice
was preferred, he was indignant, when he
ought to have felt compunction. However,
that is not what I mean here; but this, that
God knows how to dispense things for the
best. In many cases, thou art in point
of disposition more estimable than the other,
but not the fit person. Besides, on the
other hand, thy life is irreproachable, and thy
habits those of a well-nurtured man, but in
the Church this is not all that is wanted.
Moreover, one man is adapted for one thing,
another for another. Do you not observe,
how much discourse the holy Scripture has
made on this matter? But let me say why it
is that the thing has become a subject of com-
petition : it is because we come to the Epis-
copate not as unto a work of governing and
superintending the brethren, but as to a post
of dignity and repose. Did you but know
that a Bishop is bound to belong to all, to
bear the burden of all; that others, if they
are angry, are pardoned, but he never; that
others, if they sin, have excuses made for
them, he has none; you would not be eager


1 So, except E. all our Mss. and the Catena: and Morel.
Ben. But Sav. and Par. ‘‘ they did not yet think themselves
worthy to make the election by themselves: wherefore they
desire to be informed by some sign.’? An unnecessary altera-
tion; for the szgz means some miraculous token. So
CEcumen.

2 Mss. and Edd. moAA@ waddov évraiba émAjpwaoe tov xopov,
annptise Thy Taéiv. The Catena adds 0 avadexGeis (avadery Geis),
which we have adopted.


for the dignity, would not run after it. Sent
is, the Bishop is exposed to the tongues of all,
to the criticism of all, whether they be wise
or fools. He is harassed with cares every
day, nay, every night. He has many to hate
him, many to envy him. ‘Talk not to me of
those who curry favor with all, of those who
desire to sleep, of those who advance to this
office as for repose. We have nothing to do
with these ; we speak of those who watch
for your souls, who consider the safety and
welfare of those under them before their own.
Tell me now: suppose a man has ten chil-
dren, always living with him, and constantly
under his control; yet is he solicitous about
them ; and a bishop, who has such numbers,
not living under the same roof with him, but
owing obedience to his authority—what does
he not need to be! But he is honored, you
will say. "With what sort of honor, indeed !
Why, the paupers and beggars abuse him
openly in the market-place. And why does
he not stop their mouths then? Yes, very
proper work, this, for a bishop, is it not?%
Then again, if he do not give to all, the idle
and the industrious alike, lo! a thousand
complaints on all sides. None is afraid to
accuse him, and speak evil of him. In the
case of civil governors, fear steps in; with
bishops, nothing of the kind. As for the fear
of God, it does not influence people, as re-
gards them, in the least degree. Why speak
of the anxiety connected with the word and
doctrine ? the painful work in Ordinations?
Either, perhaps, I am a poor wretched incom-
petent creature, or else, the case is as I say.
The soul of a Bishop is for all the world like
a vessel in a storm: lashed from every side,
by friends, by foes, by one’s own people, by
strangers. Does not the Emperor rule the
whole world, the Bishop a single city? Yet
a Bishop’s anxieties are as much beyond those
of the emperor, as the waters of a river simply
moved by the wind are surpassed in agitation
by the swelling and raging sea. And why?
because in the one case there are many to
lend a hand, for all goes on by law and by
rule ; but in the other there is none of this,
nor is there authority to command; but if
one be greatly moved, then he is harsh; if
the contrary, then he is cold! And in him
these opposites must meet, that he may
neither be despised, nor be hated. Besides,
the very demands of business preoccupy him :
how many is he obliged to offend, whether
he will or not! How many to be severe
with! I speak not otherwise than it is, but as


* Edd. Tavu ye. Ov yap émioxdmov d€yes Epyov. Read Iavy
ye (ov yap;) emok, A€y. Epyov.


Homiry IL] RHE ACTS OFTHE. APOSTLES. 23
I find it in my own actual experience. I do|it. But as things go, we run after this, just as


not think there are many among Bishops that
will be saved, but many more that perish:
and the reason is, that it is an affair that
requires a great mind. Many are the
exigencies which throw a man out of his nat-
ural temper; and he had need have a thou-
sand eyes on all sides. Do you not see what
a number of qualifications the Bishop must
have? to be apt to teach, patient, holding fast
the faithful word in doctrine (see rt Tim.
iii. 2-9. Tit. i. 7-9). What trouble and pains
does this require! And then, others do
wrong, and he bears all the blame. To pass
over every thing else: if one soul depart un-
baptized, does not this subvert all his own
prospect of salvation? The loss of one soul
carries with it a penalty which no language can
represent. For ifthe salvation of that soul was
of such value, that the Son of God became
man, and suffered so much, think how sore a
punishment must the losing of it bring! And
if inthis present life he who is cause of an-
other’s destruction is worthy of death, much
more inthe next world. Do not tell me, that
the presbyter is in fault, or the deacon. The
guilt of all these comes perforce upon the
head of those who ordained them. Let me
mention another instance. It chances, that a
bishop has inherited from his predecessor a
set of persons of indifferent character." What
measures is it proper to take in respect of
bygone transgressions (for here are two
precipices) so as not to let the offender go
unpunished, and not to cause scandal to the
rest? Must one’s first step be to cut him off?
There is no actual present ground for that.
But is it right to let him go unmarked? Yes,
say you; for the fault rests with the bishop
who ordained him. Well then? must one
refuse to ordain him again, and to raise him
to a higher degree of the ministry? ‘That
would be to publish it to all men, that he is a
person of indifferent character, and so again
one would cause scandal in a different way.
But is one to promote him to a higher degree ?
That is much worse.

If then there were only the responsibility of
the office itself for people to run after in the
€piscopate, none would be so quick to accept


_—-—


1 SupBatver tiva KAnpov dradeéacAar avdpwv poxOnpov. The
expression below, ore moxAypos tis eote Shows that the avd.
Hox@., ‘ill-conditioned men,’ are clerks. The offences meant
seem to have been before ordination: and the difficulty is,
How to deal with a clerk who ought not to have been ordained
at all? You cannot cut him off from the order of clergy, there
being no present actual delinquency to justify such a step.
Then suppose you do not call him to account for the past, on
the ground that the bishop who ordained him must be answer-
able: what are you to do, when this man should in the regular
course be advanced to a higher order of the ministry? To re-
fuse to ordain him, would be to publish his unworthiness, and
call attention to the scandal of his having been ordained in the
first instance: to advance him, would be even worse.


we do after the dignities of the world. That
we may have glory with men, we lose our-
selves with God. What profit in such honor?
How self-evident its nothingness is! When
you covet the episcopal rank,? put in the other
scale, the account to be rendered after this
life. Weigh against it, the happiness of a life
free from toil, take into account the different
measure of the punishment. I mean, that
even if you have sinned, but in your own
person merely, you will have no such great
punishment, nothing like it: but if you have
sinned as bishop, you are lost. Remember
what Moses endured, what wisdom he dis-
played, what good deeds he exhibited: but,
for committing one sin only,® he was bitterly
punished; and with good reason; for this
fault was attended with injury to the rest,
Not in regard that the sin was public, but be,
cause it was the sin of a spiritual Ruler {iepéwe)
cf. S.); for in truth we do not pay the same
penalty for public and for hidden faults. (Aug
in Ps. xcix. 6.) The sin may be the same, but
not the (¢yuia) harm of it; nay, not the sin it-
self; for it is not the same thing to sin in
secret and unseen, and to sin openly. But
the bishop cannot sin unobserved. Wel: for
him if he escape reproach, though he sin not;
much less can he think to escape notice, if he
dosin. Lethim be angry, let him laugh, or let
him but dream of a moment’s relaxation, many
are they that scoff, many that are offended, many
that lay down the law, many that bring to mind
the former bishops, and abuse the present
one; not that they wish to sound the praise
of those; no, it is only to carp at him that
they bring up the mention of fellow-bishops,
of presbyters. Sweet, says the proverb, is
war to the inexperienced; but* it may rather


2®Here the Edd. add avtiorncov thy yéervay, ‘put in the
other balance—hell:’’ which, however, is not found in any of
our Mss.

3 iva év auaptn Gmaptynma movov, exoAdceTo mixpas. On this pe-
culiar construction, see Field, Adzotat. zx Hom. in Matt. p.
404. E.—In the next sentence St. Chrys. in applying the term
iepevs to Moses, does not mean that Moses was a Priest, but
that he held a station similar in some regards to that of Bish-
ops afterwards. Aaron was properly the High Priest, but
Moses was a type of Christian Bishops, considered as Chief
Pastors and Rulers.

4 MaAdAov dé viv ovdSé peta Td ExBHVvar SHAOS TOis mOAAOIS* Ov
yap atv avTois TOAEMOS’ aAAa KaTa TOUS TOLMEVaS ExELVOUS, K. T. A.
Perhaps Chrys. is not fully reported here. The meaning seems
to be: ‘The proverb, yAuxis 0 woAeuos aretpors, may well be
applied here; it isa fine thing to be a bishop, to those who have
not tried it. Little do Cael think what this war is, before
they have entered into it. But in our times, not only zpod tov
é€upynvar, but even pera To exSyvac, after a good bishop has gone
through with it. the generality of people do not see that there
has been any war in the case. We bishops, in their view, are
like Ezekiel’s shepherds. And no marvel, for many among us
are such.’’ The author of the modern text has given a differ-
ent turn to the sentiment. Here itis: ‘The same may well
be said in the present case ; or rather, we do say it before we
have entered into the contest; but after we have embarked in
it, we become not even visible to the generality. For to us
now there is no war, against those who oppress the poor, nor
do we endure to battle in defence of the flock; but like those
shepherds, etc.”


24 THE WORKS


be said now, that even after one has come out
e it, people in general have seen nothing of

: for in their eyes it is not war, but like
qe shepherds in Ezekiel, we slay and de-
vour. (Ezek. xxxiv. 2.) Which of us has it in
his power to show that he has taken as much
care for the flocks of Christ, as Jacob did for
Laban’s? (Gen. xxxi. 40.) Which of us can
tell of the frost of the mght? For talk not to
me of vigils, and all that parade.* The contrary
plainly is the fact. Prefects, and governors
(irapyot kai roTapyac) Of provinces, do not enjoy
such honour as he that governs the Church.
If he enter the palace, who but he is first?
If he go to see ladies, or visit the houses of
the great, none is preferred to “him. The
whole state of things is ruined and corrupt.
I do not speak thus as wishing to put us
bishops to shame, but to repress your hanker-
ing after the office. For with what con-
science,? (even should you succeed in becom-
ing a bishop, having made interest for it either
in person or by another), with what eyes will
you look the man in the face who worked with
you to that end? What will you have to
plead for your excuse? For he that unwill-
ingly, by compulsion and not with, his own
consent, was raised to the office, may have
something to say for himself, though for the
most part even such an one has no pardon to
expect, * and yet truly he so far has something
to plead in excuse. Think how it fared with
Simon Magus. What signifies it that you give
not money, if, in place of money, you
court, you lay many plans, you set engines to
work? “Thy money perish with “thee!”
(Acts vili. 20.) Thus was it said to him, and
thus will it be said to these: your canvassing
perish with you, because you have thought to
purchase the gift of God by human intrigue!
But there is none such here? And God for-
bid there should be! For it is not thae I
wish any thing of what I have been saying to
be applicable to you: but just now the con-
nexion has led us on to these topics. In like
manner when we talk against covetousness,
we are not preaching at you, no, nor against
any one man personally. God grant it may
be the case,
pared by us without necessity. ‘The wish of
the physician is, that after all his pains, his
drugs may be thrown away because not


1 Vigils were celebrated in C.’s time with much pomp. A
grand ceremonial of this kind was held in the first year of his
episcopate, at the translation of the relics.

2 Tloiw yap ouverdore av (1. Kav) yevy amovdacas H, x. 7. A. The
meaning is strangely mistaken by the Lat. transl. Erasm. has,
Quem enim conscium adibis si vel, etc. Ben. Quo uteris
conscio si ambias vel, etc. The Toots opBadmors following
might have shown the meaning, not to mention the un-
grammatical rendering of av yevy orovdacas.

3 See de Sacerdot. lib. iv. in the opening, where this ques-
tion is considered at length.


OF Sf; CHRYSOSTOM


pay |


that these remedies were pre-|


| For where is our hope,
| progress? where our despondency, if you do


[Homity IIT.


wanted: and this is just what we desire, that
our words may not have been needed, and so
have been spoken to the wind, so as to be but
words. I am ready to submit to anything,
rather than be reduced to the necessity of
using this language. But if you like, we are
ready to leave off; only let our silence be
without bad effects. No one, I imagine,
though he were ever so vainglorious, would
wish to make a display of severity, when there
is nothing to call for it. I will leave the
teaching to you: for that is the best teaching,
which teaches by actions.* For indeed the
best physicians, although the sickness of their
patients brings them in fees, would rather
their friends were well. And so we too wish
all to be well. (2 Cor. xiii. 7.) It is not that
we desire to be approved, and you reproved.
I would gladly manifest, if it were possible,
with my very eyes, the love which I bear to
you: for then no one would be able to re-
proach me, though my language were ever so
rough. “For speech of friends, yea, were it
insult, can be borne;”® more “ faithful are
the wounds of a friend, rather than the ready
kisses of an,enemy. (Prov. xxvii. 6.) There
nothing I love more than you, no, not even
light itself. I would gladly have my eyes put
out ten thousand,times over, if it were possible
by this means to convert your souls; so much
is your salvation dearer to me than light itself.
For what profit to me in the rays of the sun,
when despondency on your account makes it
all thick darkness before my eyes? Light is
good when it shines in cheerfulness, to a sor-
rowful heart it seems even to be a trouble.
How true this is, may you never learn by ex-
perience! However, if it happen to any of
you to fall into sin, just stand by my bedside,
when I am laid down to rest and should be
asleep; see® whether I am not like a palsied
man, like one beside himself, and, in the
language of the prophet, “the light of mine
eves, it also is gone from me. (Ps. xxxviil. 10).
if you do not make
excellently? I seem to have wings, when I
hear any thing geod of you. “ Fulfil ye my
joy?) (Phil. ii. 2.) This one thing is the
burden of my prayers, that I long for your
advancement. But that in which I strive with
all is this, that I love you, that I am wrapped
up in you, that you are my all, father, mother,
brethren, children. Think not then that any


* Tlapaxwprjow tis dudackaAdcas vuiv: I will cede the teaching
to vou ; let it be yours to teach by your actions, which is the
more potent teaching.

® Ta yap mapa didwy Acyoueva, Kav iBpis 7, popyta.
ently a quotation.

® Edd. amvAoiuny et wn:
our Mss. have this word.


Appar-


‘“* May I perish if, etc.’’ but none of


Homity IV.]


thing that has been said was said in a hostile
spirit, nay, it is for your amendment. It is
written, ‘‘ A brother assisted by his brother is as
astrong city.” (Prov. xvili. 19.) Then do not
take it in disdain: for neither do I undervalue
what you have to say. I should wish even to


Tite nC ro OF? THE. APOSTLES: 25


be set right by you. For all (Edd. ‘all we’)
ye are brethren, and One is our Master: yet
even among brothers it is for one to direct,
while the others obey. Then disdain it not,
but let us do all to the glory of God, for to
Him belongs glory for ever and ever. Amen.


HOMILY. TV.


ACTS If. 1


“And when the day of Pentecost was fully come,
they were all with one accord in one place. And
suddenly there came a sound from heaven.”


Dost thou perceive the type? What is
this Pentecost? The time when the sickle
was to be put to the harvest, and the ingather-
ing was made. See now the reality, when the
time was come to put in the sickle of the
word: for here, as the sickle, keen-edged,
came the Spirit down. For hear the words
of Christ: “Lift up your eyes,” He said, “ and
look on the fields, for they are white already
to harvest.” (John iv. 35.) And again,
“The harvest truly is great, but the laborers
are few.” (Matt. ix. 38.) But as the first-
fruits of this harvest, He himself took [our


nature], and bore it up on high. Himself
first put in the sickle. Therefore! also He
calls the Word the Seed. “When,” it says,


“the day of Pentecost was fully come”
(Luke viii. 5, 11): that is, when at the Pente-
cost, while about it, in short.2. For it was
essential that the present events likewise
should take place during the feast, that those
who had witnessed the crucifixion of Christ,
might also behold these. “And suddenly
there came a sound from heaven.” (v. 2.)
Why did this not come to pass without sensi-
ble tokens? For this reason. If even when
the fact was such, men said, “They are full
of new wine,” what would they not have said,
had it been otherwise? And it is not merely,
“there came a sound,” but, “from heaven.”
And the suddenness also startled them, and &


1 i.e. in reference to the harvest. The modern text has,
“therefore He calls this the harvest:’’ missing the author’s
meaning, i. e. the allusion to the parable of the sower.

2 rovTéoTt, m™pos TH TEVvTnKOOTH Tept avTHny ws eimecy, Tlpos, as
in the phrase, elvac v. yiverOar pos tut. Hom. in Matt, 289.
B. Field, not. and similarly wepi as in etvac mepi te. Only CEcu-
men. has preserved the true reading, in his comment mpos Ty
™.5 3 Tept auTny dn ™my éopryv. A. B. C. read, ™po THS TEVTNKOT-
THS TEpi aumy @s €imetv: SO Cat. but with wept for mpo, The
others, ov mpo THs 7., aAAG TrEpi aUTHY, ws EiTetv.

$ In the Mss. and Edd. the order of the following sentences
is confused. It is here restored by bringing the clause, xat
TavTas eKxel ovvnyayev into what appears to be its proper con-
nection, and supplying the text to the comment 7oAAnpy Thy
evunv Aéyer tov Ilvevuatos.


brought all together to the spot. “As ofa
rushing mighty wind:” this betokens the
exceeding vehemence of the Spirit. “And it
filled all the house:” insomuch that those
present both believed, and (Edd. -soirove) in
this manner were shown to be worthy. Nor
is this all; but what is more awful still, “ And
there appeared unto them,” it says, “ cloven
tongues like as of fire.” (v. 3.) Observe how
it is always, “like as ;” and rightly: that you
may have no gross sensible notions of the
Spirit. Also, “as it were of a blast:”’ therefore
it was nota wind. “Like as of fire.” For
when the Spirit was to be made known to
John, then it came upon the head of Christ
as in the form of a dove: but now, when a
whole multitude was to be converted, it is
“like as of fire. And it sat upon each of
them.” This means, that it remained and
rested upon them.” For the sitting is signifi-
cant of settledness and continuance.

Was it upon the twelve that it came?
Not so ; but upon the hundred and twenty.
For Peter would not have quoted to no pur-
pose the testimony of the prophet, saying,
‘““And it shall come to pass in the last days,
saith the Lord God, I will pour out of My
spirit upon all flesh: and your sons and your
daughters shall prophesy, and your young
men shall see visions, and your old men shall
dream dreams.” (Joel ii. 28.) “And they
were all filled with the Holy Ghost.” (v.
4.) For, that the effect may not be to
frighten only, therefore is it both “with the
Holy Ghost, and with fire. And began to
speak with other tongues, as the Spirit
gave them utterance.” (Matt. iii. rz.) They
receive no other sign, but this first; for it was
new to them, and there was no need of any
other sign. ‘‘ And it sat upon each of them,”
says the writer. Observe now, how there is
no longer any occasion for that person to
grieve, who was not elected as was Matthias.
““And they were all filled,” he says; not
merely received the grace of the Spirit, but


26


“ were filled. And began to speak with other
tongues, as the Spirit gave them utterance.”
It would not have been said, 4//, the Apos-
tles also being there present, unless the rest
also were partakers. For were it not so,
having above made mention of the Apostles
distinctively and by name, he would not now
have put them all in one with the rest. For
if, where it was only to be mentioned that
they were present, he makes mention of the
Apostles apart, much more would he have
done so in the case here supposed.’ Observe,
how when one is continuing in prayer, when
one is in charity, then it is that the Spirit
draws near. It put them in mind also of
another vision: for as fire did He appear also
in the bush. *“‘As the Spirit gave: them
utterance, azodféyyecfa.” (Exod. iii. 2.) For
the things spoken by them were azodtéyyara,
profound utterances. ‘“ And,” it says, “there
were dwelling at Jerusalem Jews, devout
men.” (v. 5.) The fact of their dwelling
there was a sign of piety: that being of so
many nations they should have left country,
and home, and relations, and be abiding
there. For, it says, ‘There were dwelling at
Jerusalem Jews, devout men, out of every
nation under heaven. Now when this was
noised abroad, the multitude came together,
and were confounded. (v. 6.) Since the
event had taken place ina house, of course
they came together from without. The multi-
tude was confounded: was all in commotion.
They. marvelled; “ Because that every man
heard them speak in his own language. And
they were amazed,” it says, ‘and marvelled,
saying one to another, Behold, are not all
these which speak Galileans?” (v. 7-13.)
They immediately turned their eyes towards
the Apostles. ‘‘ And how” (it follows) “ hear
we every man in our own tongue, wherein we
were born? Parthians, and Medes, and Elam-
ites, and the dwellers in Mesopotamia, and
in Judea, and Cappadocia, in Pontus, and
Asia, Phrygia, and Pamphylia, in Egypt, and
inthe parts of Libya about Cyrene:” mark
how they run from east to west:? “and
strangers of Rome, Jews and proselytes, Cretes
and Arabians, we do hear them speak in our
tongues the wonderful works of God. And
they were all amazed, and were in doubt,


1 i. e. if the gift descended only upon the Twelve, there
would have been specific and distinctive mention of them in
this narrative, as there was in the former chapter; and with
much more reason here than there. The writer would not
have said merely, They were aé/ together: it sat upon each
one of them. they were ad/ filled: if he had meant that the
Spirit came only upon the Apostles.

2 i. e. Mark how the enumeration, “ Parthians, and Medes,”
etc., goes from east to west. This comment having been trans
posed to the end of v. 12, was misunderstood : and E. has in
stead of it, ‘“* Do you see how it was, that, as if they had
wings, they sped their way through the whole world?”


THE, WORKS. OF 1ST. (CHRYSOS TONE


| Homity IV.


saying one to another, What meaneth this?
Others mocking said, These men are full of
new wine.” O the excessive folly! O the
excessive malignity! Why it was not even
the season for that; for it was Pentecost.
For this was what made it worse: that when
those were confessing—men that were Jews,
that were Romans, that were proselytes, yea
perhaps that had crucified Him—yet these,
after so great signs, say, ‘They are full of
new wine!”

But let us look over what has been said
from the beginning. (Recapitulation.) ‘“ And
when the day of Pentecost,” etc. “It filled,”
he says, “the house.”’ That wind rvoy was a
very pool of water. This betokened the copious.
ness, as the fire did the vehemence. ‘This
nowhere happened in the case of the Prophets :
for to uninebriated souls such accesses are not
attended with much disturbance; but ‘“ when
they have well drunken,” then indeed it is as
here, but with the Prophets it is otherwise.’
(Ez. ili. 3.) The roll of a book: is given him,
and Ezekiel ate what he was about to utter.
“And it became in his mouth,” is is said, ‘‘ as
honey for sweetness.” (And again the hand
of God touches the tongue of another Prophet ;
but here it is the Holy Ghost Himself: (Jer.
i. 9) so equal is He in honor with the Father
and the Son.) And again, on the other hand,
Ezekiel calls it ‘“ Lamentations, and mourn-
ing, and woe.” (Hz. it. 10.) “Wo themmg
might well be in the form of a book; for they
still needed similitudes. Those had to deal
with only one nation, and with their own peo-
ple ; but these with the whole world, and with
men whom they never knew. Also Elisha


3 Ta yap rovadta vypovoay sev WuxX@v TpoorimtovTa, ov ToADE
Exel Tov OopvBov oTav SE peAVawoty TOTE MEV OUVTWS, TOLS TpOhy.
tas 6€ erépws. In the modern text, which here also is followed
by Erasm. and Edd. it is, aAAa ToTe pév oUTwS EKELVOLS, TOLE
mpopytats dé etepws. ‘But here indeed it is on this wise with
them (the disciples), but with the Prophets otherwise.’’—The
expression *‘ uninebriated ”’ relates to the Old Testament: na
such fire there, no mighty rushing wind, no vehement commo-
tion : this comes of ‘‘ the new wine”’ of the Spirit ; orav weAvc-
wotv, With allusion to John ii. ro. °

4 So de Sancta Pentecoste, Hom. i. t. it. 465. ‘‘ Why does
Ezekiel receive the gift of prophecy not by the likeness of
fire, but by a book, while the Apostles receive the gifts by
fire? For concerning him we read, that one gave him in his
mouth a roll of a book, etc.: but concerning the Apostles not
so, but ‘‘ there appeared unto them tongues as of fire.” Why is
it a book and writing there, here tongue and fire? Because
there the Prophet went his way to accuse sins, and to bewail ©
Jewish calamities ::whereas these went forth to consume the
sins of the whole world: therefore he received a writing, to
call to mind the coming calamities ; these fire, to burn up the
sins of the world, and utterly abolish them. Foras fire falling
among thorns will with ease destroy them, even so the grace
of the Spirit consumed the sins of men.”’

5 This, which we have marked as parenthesis, seems to be
out of its place: it interrupts what is said about Ezekiel,
and besides is not relevant to the matter immediately in hand,
“Evtavéa 5€ avro 7d Iv, ro”A. x. T. A. Would come in more suit-—
ably after the mention of the fire in the bush, in which God ©
appeared to Moses. And so CEcumenius seems to have taken ©
it. ‘* Butit is in the likeness of fire, because the Spirit also is —
God, and to prove by this also that the Spirit is of one Nature
(oxopves) with the Father, Who appears in this manner to —
Moses at the bush.”’


Homity IV.]


receives the grace through the medium of a
mantle (2 Kings xiii.); another by oil, as
David (1 Sam, xvi. 13); and Moses by fire, as
we read of him at the bush. (Exod. iii. 2.)
But in the present case it is not so; for the
fire itself sat upon them. (But wherefore did
the fire not appear so as to fill the house?
Because they would have been terrified.) But
the story shows, that it is the same here as
there.’ For you are not to stop at this, that
“there appeared unto them cloven tongues,”
but note that they were “of fire.’ Such a
fire as this is able to kindle infinite fuel.
Also, it is well said, Coven, for they were
from one root; that you may learn, that it
was an operation sent*from the Comforter.*

. But observe how those men also were first
shown to be worthy, and then received the
Spirit as worthy. ‘Thus, for instance, David :?
what he did among the sheepfolds, the same
he did after his victory and trophy, that it
might be shown how simple and absolute was
his faith, Again, see Moses despising royalty,
and forsaking all, and after forty years taking
the lead of the people (Exod. ii. 11); and Sam-
uel occupied there in the temple (1 Sam. iii. 3) ;
Elisha leaving all (1 Kings xix. 21); Ezekiel
again, made manifest by what happened
thereafter.? In this manner, you see, did
these also leave all that they had. They
learnt also what human infirmity is, by what
they suffered ; they learnt that it was not in
vain they had done these good works. (1 Sam.
ix.and xi.6.) Even Saul, having first obtained
Witness that he was good, thereafter received
the Spirit. But in the same manner as here


1 “Ore tovTO exetvd eat: i.e. The Spirit here given to» the
disciples, is the same that was given to those : but more intense
in operation; therefore it appears not merely under the em-
blem of cloven tongues, but as tongues of fre.

* Chrys. seems to understand by dvamepugouevar (v. 3), di-
vided, distributed among the members of the company, rather
than of a cloven form, a forked appearance, as indicating the
shape of the fire-like tongues. The former is the preferable
interpretation. (So the Rev. Vers. vs. A. V.). The latter
view =a explain the singular verb which follows, exa@icev.

2 wa SerxOn adtod yuuvy n mlotts. Not, ut palam fieret
fides ejus, Ben. but, guo ipsius nuda simplexque fides
declararetur,’’ Erasm. The meaning seems tobe: David after
the victory over Goliath, when the hearts of the people were
turned to him, and he might have taken possession of the
kingdom to which he was anointed, yet did not seek worldly
greatness, but chose rather to suffer persecutions, etc.: as de-
veloped in the Homilies de Davide et Saude, t. iv. 752. Below,
for avatpedopevoy (** Samuel drought up in the temple,”’) A.
has avactpepduevov, which we have adopted.

3 So C. and Cat. B. transposes Elisha and Ezekiel, A. omits
the clause. Chrys. elsewhere makes it a special praise of
Ezekiel, that he chose rather to accompany his people into
Captivity, than to remain in his own land : Interp. in Isai. i. t.
1. 2. and ad Stagyr. ti. t. ii. 228. In this manner then (he
would say here), Ez. ‘‘left all,’’ and having thus given proof
of his worth, received the gift of prophecy. The modern text
reads: ‘‘ Ezekiel again. And that the case was thus, is mani-
fest from what followed. For indeed these also forsook all
that they had. Therefore they then received the Spirit, when
‘hey had given proof of their own virtue. ’’—By ‘hese (obror)
we must understand the Old Test. saints just mentioned. It
should rather have been éxetvor, but Chrys. is negligent in the
ise oH these pronouns. See Hom. in Matt. Field. Adnot. p.
709,


THE VAG is “Ol *LHE APOSTLES.


27


did none of them receive. Thus Moses was
the greatest of the Prophets, yet he, when
others were to receive the Spirit, himself
suffered diminution. But here it is not so;
but just as fire kindles as many flames as it
will, so here the largeness of the Spirit was
shown, in that each one received a fountain
of the Spirit; as indeed He Himself had fore-
told, that those who believe in Him, should
have ‘‘a well of water springing up into ever-
lasting life.” (John iv. 14.) And good reason
that it should be so. For they did not go
forth to’ argue with Pharaoh, but to wrestle
with the devil. But the wonder is this, that
when sent they made no objections; they
said not, they were ‘‘ weak in voice, and of a
slow tongue.” (Exod. iv. 10.) For Moses had
taught them better. They said not, they
were too young. (Jer. i. 6.) Jeremiah had
made them wise. And yet they had heard of
many fearful things, and much greater than
were theirs of old time; but they feared to
object.—And because they were angels of
light, and ministers of things above [‘ Sud-
denly there came from heaven,” etc.] To
them of old, no one “ from heaven” appears,
while they as yet follow after a vocation on
earth; but now that Man has gone up on
high,. the Spirit also descends mightily from
on high. “As it were a rushing mighty
wind ;”’ making it manifest by this, that noth-
ing shall be able to withstand them, but they
shall blow away all adversaries like a heap of
dust. “And it filled all the house.” » The
house also was a symbol of the world. “ And
it sat upon each of them,” [etc.] and “the
multitude came together, and were con-
founded.” Observe their piety; they pro-
nounce no hasty judgment, but are perplexed:
whereas those reckless ones pronounce at
once, saying, ‘‘These men are full of new
wine.” Now it was in order that they might
have it in their power,’ in compliance with the
Law, to appear thrice in the year in the
Temple, that they dwelt there, these ‘‘ devout
men from all nations.” Observe here, the
writer has no intention of flattering them.
For he does not say that they pronounced any
opinion: but what? ‘ Now, when this was
noised abroad, the multitude came together,
and were confounded.” And well they might
be; for they supposed the matter was now
coming to an issue against them, on account
of the outrage committed against Christ.


**T will take of the


’


4 ’HAarrovro. Alluding to Numb. x1. 17.
Spirit that is upon thee, and will put it upon them.’

5 “Tya dé één. (Cat. wa SetEn.) CEcumen. tva éxwar, ‘ that
they may have it in their power, according to the law of their
fathers, to appear thrice in the ver etc.’’ The modern text
has, éret e€nv. . . Sta rovTo. ‘* Because it was permitted...
therefore.”


26


“ were filled. And began to speak with other
tongues, as the Spirit gave them utterance.”
It would not have been said, 4//, the Apos-
tles also being there present, unless the rest
also were partakers. For were it not so,
having above made mention of the Apostles
distinctively and by name, he would not now
have put them all in one with the rest. For
if, where it was only to be mentioned that
they were present, he makes mention of the
Apostles apart, much more would he have
done so in the case here supposed.' Observe,
how when one is continuing in prayer, when
one is in charity, then it is that the Spirit
draws near. It put them in mind also of
another vision: for as fire did He appear also
in the bush. “As the Spirit gave. them
utterance, drodféyyecta.”” (Exod. ill, 2.) For
the things spoken by them were azodtéyuara,
profound utterances. ‘ And,” it says, “there
were dwelling at Jerusalem Jews, devout
men.” (v. 5.) The fact of their dwelling
there was a sign of piety: that being of so
many nations they should have left country,
and home, and relations, and be abiding
there. For, it says, “‘ There were dwelling at
Jerusalem Jews, devout men, out of every
nation under heaven. Now when this was
noised abroad, the multitude came together,
and were confounded. (v. 6.) Since the
event had taken place ina house, of course
they came together from without. The multi-
tude was confounded: was all in commotion.
They. marvelled; ‘‘ Because that every man
heard them speak in his own language. And
they were amazed,” it says, “‘and marvelled,
saying one to another, Behold, are not all
these which speak Galileans?” (v. 7-13.)
They immediately turned their eyes towards
the Apostles. ‘ And how” (it follows) “ hear
we every man in our own tongue, wherein we
were born? Parthians, and Medes, and Elam-
ites, and the dwellers in Mesopotamia, and
in Judea, and Cappadocia, in Pontus, and
Asia, Phrygia, and Pamphylia, in Egypt, and
inthe parts of Libya about Cyrene:” mark
how they run from east to west:2 “and
strangers of Rome, Jews and proselytes, Cretes
and Arabians, we do hear them speak in our
tongues the wonderful works of God. And
they were all amazed, and were in doubt,


1 i. e. if the gift descended only upon the Twelve, there
would have been specific and distinctive mention of them in
this narrative, as there was in the former chapter ; and with
much more reason here than there. The writer would not
have said merely, They were aé/ together: it sat upon each
one of them. they were ad/ filled: if he had meant that the
Spirit came only upon the Apostles.

2 ij. e. Mark how the enumeration, “ Parthians, and Medes,”’
etc., goes from east to west. Thiscomment having been trans
posed to the end of v. 12, was misunderstood : and E. has in
stead of it, ‘* Do you see how it was, that, as if they had
wings, they sped their way through the whole world ?”’


THE. WORKS. OF ST: ‘CHRYSOSTOM


| Homity IV.


saying one to another, What meaneth this?
Others mocking said, ‘These men are full of
new wine.” O the excessive folly! O the
excessive malignity! Why it was not even
the season for that; for it was Pentecost.
For this was what made it worse: that when
those were confessing—men that were Jews,
that were Romans, that were proselytes, yea
perhaps that had crucified Him—yet these,
after so great signs, say, “‘ They are full of
new wine!”

But let us look over what has been said
from the beginning. (Recapitulation.) “ And
when the day of Pentecost,” etc. “It filled,”
he says, “the house.” That wind zvoy was a
very pool of water. This betokened the copious-
ness, as the fire did the vehemence. This
nowhere happened in the case of the Prophets :
for to uninebriated souls such accesses are not
attended with much disturbance; but “ when
they have well drunken,” then indeed it is as
here, but with the Prophets it is otherwise.®
(Ez. iii. 3.) The roll of a books is given him,
and Ezekiel ate what he was about to utter.
** And it became in his mouth,” is is said, “‘ as
honey for sweetness.” (Andé again the hand
of God touches the tongue of another Prophet ;
but here it is the Holy Ghost Himself: (Jer.
i. 9) so equal is He in honor with the Father
and the Son.) And again, on the other hand,
Ezekiel calls it ‘ Lamentations, and mourn-
ing, and woe.” (Ez. ii. 10) Yo themitag
might well be in the form of a book; for they
still needed similitudes. Those had to deal
with only one nation, and with their own peo-
ple ; but these with the whole world, and with
men whom they never knew. Also Elisha


8 Ta yap Toradta vyhovaay mév Wux@v tpoonrintovtTa, ov TOAVD
éxet Tov OopuBov: orTav SE peOicwarv TOTE MEV OUTWS, TOs TPOPH:
tats dé €rTépws. In the modern text, which here also is followed
by Erasm. and Edd. it is, aAAa ToTe prev oUTwS ExeEivoLs, TOLE
mpopytars dé étTépws. ‘* But here indeed it :s on this wise with
them (the disciples), but with the Prophets otherwise.’’—The
expression ‘‘ uninebriated ”’ relates to the Old Testament : na
such fire there, no mighty rushing wind, no vehement commo-
tion : this comes of ‘tthe new wine”’ of the Spirit ; orav we@va-
wow, with allusion to John ii. ro. Py

4 So de Sancta Pentecoste, Hom. i. t. it, 465. ‘* Why does
Ezekiel receive the gift of prophecy not by the likeness of
fire, but by a book, while the Apostles receive the gifts by
tire? For concerning him we read, that one gave him in his
mouth a roll of a book, etc.: but concerning the Apostles not
so, but ‘‘ there appeared unto them tongues as of fire.’? Why is
it a book and writing there, here tongue and fire ? Because
there the Prophet went his way to accuse sins, and to bewail
Jewish calamities ::whereas these went forth to consume the
sins of the whole world: therefore he received a writing, to
call to mind the coming calamities ; these fire, to burn up the
sins of the world, and utterly abolish them. For as fire falling
among thorns will with ease destroy them, even so the grace
of the Spirit consumed the sins of men.”’

5 This, which we have marked as parenthesis, seems to be
out of its place: it interrupts what is said about Ezekiel,
and besides is not relevant to the matter immediately in hand,
*Evravéa 6€ avro 7d Hy, ro”A. k. tr. A. Would come in more suit-
ably after the mention of the fire in the bush, in which God
appeared to Moses. And so C&cumenius seems to have taken
it. ‘* But itis in the likeness of fire, because the Spirit also is
God, and to prove by this also that the Spirit is of one Nature
(Omovés) with the Father, Who appears in this manner to
Moses at the bush.”


Homity IV.]


receives the grace through the medium of a
mantle (2 Kings xiii.); another by oil, as
David (1 Sam, xvi. 13); and Moses by fire, as
we read of him at the bush. (Exod. iii. 2.)
_ But in the present case it is not so; for the
fire itself sat upon them. (But wherefore did
the fire not appear so as to fill the house?
_ Because they would have been terrified.) But
the story shows, that it is the same here as
there.’ For you are not to stop at this, that
“there appeared unto them cloven tongues,”
/but note that they were “of fire.’ Such a
fire as this is able to kindle infinite fuel.
Also, it is well said, C/oven, for they were
from one root; that you may learn, that it
_ was an operation sent*from the Comforter.*
-. But observe how those men also were first
shown to be worthy, and then received the
Spirit as worthy. ‘Thus, for instance, David :?
what he did among the sheepfolds, the same
he did after his victory and trophy, that it
might be shown how simple and absolute was
his faith, Again, see Moses despising royalty,
_ and forsaking all, and after forty years taking
_ the lead of the people (Exod. ii. 11); and Sam-
uel occupied there in the temple (1 Sam. iii. 3) ;
Elisha leaving all (1 Kings xix. 21); Ezekiel
again, made manifest by what happened
thereafter.’ In this manner, you see, did
| these also leave all that they had. They
learnt also what human infirmity is, by what
they suffered ; they learnt that it was not in
vain they had done these good works. (1 Sam.
_ix.andxi.6.) Even Saul, having first obtained
witness that he was good, thereafter received
the Spirit. But in the same manner as here


1 “Ore tovTo exetvd eat: i.e. The Spirit here given tothe
_ disciples, is the same that was given to those : but more intense
in operation ; therefore it appears not merely under the em-
blem of cloven tongues, but as tongues of fre.

* Chrys. seems to understand by dtamepugouevar (v. 3), di-
vided, distributed among the members of the company, rather
than of acloven form, a forked appearance, as indicating the
shape of the fire-like tongues. The former is the preferable
interpretation. (So the Rev. Vers. vs. A. V.). The latter
view cannot explain the singular verb which follows, éxaéucev,


2 twa Sexy avtod yuuvn n miotts. Not, ut palam fieret
fides ejus, Ben. but, guo ipsius nuda simplexque fides
declararetur,’’ Erasm. The meaning seems tobe: David after
the victory over Goliath, when the hearts of the people were
turned to him, and he might have taken possession of the
kingdom to which he was anointed, yet did not seek worldly
greatness, but chose rather to suffer persecutions, etc.: as de-
veloped in the Homilies de Davide et Saule, t. iv. 752. Below,
for avatpepdpuevov (* Samuel drought up in the temple,”’) A.
has avactpefdpuevov, which we have adopted.

3 So C. and Cat. B. transposes Elisha and Ezekiel, A. omits
the clause. Chrys. elsewhere makes it a special praise of
Ezekiel, that he chose rather to accompany his people into
Captivity, than to remain in his own land : Interp. in Isai. i. t.
1. 2. and ad Stagyr. ii. t. ii. 228. In this manner then (he
«vould say here), Ez. ‘‘left all,’ and having thus given proof
of his worth, received the gift of prophecy. The modern text
reads: ‘‘ Ezekiel again. And that the case was thus, is mani-
fest from what followed. For indeed these also forsook all
that they had. Therefore they then received the Spirit, when
they had given proof of their own virtue. ’’—By ¢hese (odror)
we must understand the Old Test. saints just mentioned. It
should rather have been éxetvo., but Chrys. is negligent in the
use of these pronouns. See Hom. in Matt. Field. Adnot. p.


709, B


PHREVAGCTS (OF “I HE APOSTLES.


27


did none of them receive. Thus Moses was
the greatest of the Prophets, yet he, when
others were to receive the Spirit, himself
suffered diminution. But here it is not so;
but just as fire kindles as many flames as it
will, so here the largeness of the Spirit was
shown, in that each one received a fountain
of the Spirit; as indeed He Himself had fore-
told, that those who believe in Him, should
have ‘“‘a well of water springing up into ever-
lasting life.” (John iv. 14.) And good reason
that it should be so. For they did not go
forth to argue with Pharaoh, but to wrestle
with the devil. But the wonder is this, that
when sent they made no objections; they
said not, they were ‘“ weak in voice, and of a
slow tongue.” (Exod. iv. 10.) For Moses had
taught them better. They said not, they
were too young. (Jer. i. 6.) Jeremiah had
made them wise. And yet they had heard of
many fearful things, and much greater than
were theirs of old time; but they feared to
object—And because they were angels of
light, and ministers of things above [* Sud-
denly there came from heaven,” etc.] To
them of old, no one “ from heaven” appears,
while they as yet follow after a vocation on
earth; but now that Man has gone up on
high,. the Spirit also descends mightily from
on high. “As it were a rushing mighty
wind ;”” making it manifest by this, that noth-
ing shall be able to withstand them, but they
shall blow away all adversaries like a heap of
dust. ‘“ And it filled all the house.” The
house also was a symbol of the world. ‘ And
it sat upon each of them,” [etc.] and “the
multitude came together, and were con-
founded.” Observe their piety; they pro-
nounce no hasty judgment, but are perplexed :
whereas those reckless ones pronounce at
once, saying, ‘“‘These men are full of new
wine.” Now it was in order that they might
have it in their power,® in compliance with the
Law, to appear thrice in the year in the
Temple, that they dwelt there, these ‘‘ devout
men from all nations.” Observe here, the
writer has no intention of flattering them.
For he does not say that they pronounced any
opinion: but what? ‘Now, when this was
noised abroad, the multitude came together,
and were confounded.” And well they might
be; for they supposed the matter was now
coming to an issue against them, on account
of the outrage committed against Christ.


4 ’HaAarrovro. Alluding to Numb. x1.17. ‘I will take of the
Spirit that is upon thee, and will put it upon them.”

5 “Tva dé ef. (Cat. wa SecEy.) CEcumen. tva éexwar, ‘‘ that
they may have it in their power, according to the law of their
fathers, to appear thrice in the year, etc.’’ The modern text
has, éret e€nv. . . dua rouro, ‘* Because it was permitted...
therefore.”


30


THE WORKS: Of 57:


CHRYSOSTOM. [Homiy IV.


much more philosophical’ than their minds.
They were in truth children shifted about on
all sides by vain glory; but this man was a
philosopher, one apt to receive grace. If you
laugh at these words, it is no wonder; for
those aforetime laughed, and said, the men
were full of new wine. But afterwards, when
they suffered those bitter calamities, exceed-
ing “all others in misery ; when they saw their
city falling in ruins, and the fire blazing, and
the walls hurled to the ground, and those 1 mani-
fold frantic horrors, which no one can find
words to express, they did not laugh then.
And you will laugh then, if you have the mind
to laugh,-when the time of hell is close at
hand, when the fire is kindled for your souls.
But why do I speak of the future? Shall I
show you. what Peter is, and what Plato, the
philosopher? Let us for the present examine
their respectve habits, let us see what were
the pursuits of each. The one wasted his
time about a set of idle and useless dogmas,
and philosophical, as he says,’ that we may
learn that the soul of our philosopher be-
comes a fly.* Most truly said, a fly! not
sndeed changed into one, but a fly must have
entered upon possession of the soul which
dwelt in Plato ; for what but a fly is worthy of
such ideas! The man was full of irony, and
of jealous feelings against every one else, as
if he made it his ambition to introduce noth-
ing useful, either out of his own head or other
people’s. ‘Thus he adopted the metempsy-
chosis from another, and from himself pro-
duced the Republic, in which he enacted
those laws full of gross turpitude. Let the
women, he says, be in common, and let the
virgins go naked, and let them wrestle before
the eyes of their ‘lovers, and let there also be
common fathers, and let the children begotten


1 St. Chrysostom’s habitual use of the term philosophy is
thus explained in the index of Mr. Field’s edition of the Com.
on St. Matt. ‘‘ Philosophy, according to the custom of Chrys.
is not Christian piety, not the exercise of any virtue, not a
pious and chaste life, not virtue in general, but that part of
virtue, which consists in subduing the carnal appetites and
affections. Thus to Christian philosophy are to be referred:
forbearance and long suffering ; humblemindedness ; contempt
of wealth; an austere and monastic life; every other mortifi-
cation (ara@eva). Its contraries are: emulation (SnAotumia, see
below), envy and vainglory, and all other passions.”

2 Kat drdogopa, onoivy, iva. “ And * hilosophical,’ forsooth:”’
but perhaps it should be kat edcAocopycer iva - “* this was the
upshot of his philosophizing.’” ‘H tov ¢iAcaddov Wuxn-: “the
soul of the philosopher himself (A tov é&:dacKadov), viz. e ually
with the souls of. other men, becomes, for instance, a fly,”’ etc.
Comp. zz/fra; ‘‘our soul passes into flies and ‘dogs,”” ete:
and Hom. in Ev. Joann. t. viii. 8. Dd. ““they say that the souls
af men become flies, gnats, shrubs.’’—Edd. ‘‘ For what 1s the
benefit from learning that the soul of the philosopher,” etc.
The next sentence (6vTws wuta—ovK €is putay petemimtev (SC. 7
Wvxn), adn’ éméBatve (SC. wvia TH év IAar. oikdvon) Wux7y seems
to mean, ‘ He talks of the soul becoming a fly: and truly the
soul in Plato might be claimed by a fly:” émeB. 77 W. ase. g. is
emiBatvery TH €mapxia to step into possession of, etc. Lloias yap
TavTa ov uvias; Edd. sararodoyias ; adding, Ilopev 64 tovavta
Anpetv émeBadero ; ‘“ What could put it into his head to rave in
this fashion? '

* The author’s depreciation of Plato contrasts unfavorably
with the more generous estimates of a long line of Church
Fathers from Justin to Augustin.—G. B. S.


be common. But with us, not nature makes
common fathers, but the philosophy of Peter
does this; as for that other, it made away
with all paternity.® For Plato’s system only
tended to make the real father next to un-
known, while the false one was introduced.
It plunged the soul into a kind of intoxication
and filthy wallowing. Let all, he says, have
intercourse with the women without fear, The
reason why I do not examine the maxims of
poets, is, that I may not be charged with rip-
ping up fables. And yet I am speaking of
fables much more ridiculous than even those.
Where have the poets devised aught so por-
tentous as this? But (not to enter into the
discussion of his other maxims), what say you
to these—when he equips the females with
arms, and helmets, and greaves, and says that
the human race has no occasion to differ from
the canine! Since dogs, he says, the female
and the male, do just the same things in com-
mon, so let the women do the same works as
the men, and let all be turned upside down.
For the devil has always endeavored by their
means‘ to show that our race is not more
honorable than that of brutes; and, in fact,
some have gone to such a pitch of (kevodegiac)
absurdity, as to affirm that the irrational
creatures are endued with reason. And see
in how many various ways he has run riot in
the minds of those men! For whereas their
leading men affirmed that our soul passes
into flies, and dogs, and brite creatures ;
those who came after them, being ashamed of
this, fell into another kind of turpitude, and
invested the brute creatures with all rational
science, and made out that the creatures—
which were called into existence on our ac-
count—are in all respects more honorable
than we! They even attribute to them fore-
knowledge and piety. The crow, they say,
knows God, and the raven likewise, and they
possess gifts of prophecy, and foretell the
future ; there is justice among them, and
polity, and laws. Perhaps you ‘do not credit
the things I am telling you. And well may
you not, nurtured as you have been with
sound doctrine; since also, if a man were fed
with this fare, he would never believe that
there exists a human being who finds pleasure


S
4
in eating dung. The dog® also among them


3°Emei €xeivo ye kai avyper. Erasmus translates, Quando-
guidem et illud quod Plato docuit, sustulit: whence Ben.
Nam illud Platonis hic (Petrus) sustulit = i. e. for Peter’s
doctrine (of chastity) has made an end of that lewd dogma of
Plato’s. But the ollowing sentence rather implies that the
meaning is as above given.

4 Av avtav, Ben. fer zllas, which they seem to refer to
yuvaixes. Erasm, fer zd/os, which is doubtless right: by —
means of the philosophers, as below, év Tals exetvwy Wuxats.

5 Kai GnAot map avrots 0 KUwy kata IlAatwva. Edd. ee this
after “ polity and laws,” where it is clearly out of place, what-
ever it means.


HomI_y V.]


is jealous, according to Plato.
tell them that these things are fables, and are
full of absurdity, ‘ You do not enter (évojcare)
into the higher meaning,’ say they. No, we
do not enter into this your surpassing non-
sense, and may we never do so : for it requires
(of course!') an excessively profound mind,
to inform me, what all this impiety and confu-
sion would be at. Are you talking, senseless
men, in the language of crows, as the children
are wont (in play)? For you are in very deed
enildren, even as they:’ But. Peter never
thought of saying any of these things: he
uttered a voice, like a great light shining out
in the dark, a voice which scattered the mist
and darkness of the whole world. Again, his
deportment, how gentle it was, how consider-
ate (émecxéc); how far above all vainglory ;
how he looked towards heaven without all
self-elation, and this, even when raising up
the dead! But if it had come to be in the
power of any one of those senseless people (in
mere fantasy of course) to do anything like it,
would he not straightway have looked for an
altar and a temple to be reared to him, and
have wanted to be equal with the gods? since
in fact when no such sign is forthcoming, they
are forever indulging such fantastic conceits.
And what, pray you, is that Minerva of theirs,
and Apollo, and Juno? They are different
kinds of demons among them. And there is
a king of theirs, who thinks fit to die for the
mere purpose of being accounted equal with


But when we


Tis) yCrs/OR THE APOSTLES. 31


the gods. But not so the men here: no, just
the contrary. Hear how they speak on the
occasion of the lame man’s cure. “Ye men
of Israel, why look ye so earnestly on us, as
though by our own power or holiness we had
made him to walk? (ch. iii, 12.) We also
are men of like passions with you. (Ibid. xiv.
14.) But with those, great is the self-elation,
great the bragging; all for the sake of men’s
honors, nothing for the pure love of truth and
virtue. (gcAocogiac évexev.) For where an action
is done for glory, all is worthless. For
though a man possess all, yet if he have not
the mastery over this (lust), he forfeits all
claim to true philosophy, he is in bondage to
the more tyrannical and shameful passion.
Contempt of glory; this it is that is sufficient
to teach all that is good, and to banish
from the soul every pernicious passion.
I exhort you therefore to use the most strenu-
ous endeavors to pluck out this passion by
the very roots; by no other means can you
have good esteem with God, and draw down
upon you the benevolent regard of that Eye
which never sleepeth. Wherefore, let us use
all earnestness to obtain the enjoyment of
that heavenly influence, and thus both escape
the trial of present evils, and attain unto the
future blessings, through the grace and loving-
kindness of our Lord Jesus Christ, with
Whom to the Father and the Holy Ghost be
glory, power, honor, now and ever, and to all
ages. Amen.


EOpinisy Vv.


ACTS


“Ye men of Judea, and all ye that dwell at Jerusalem, be
this known unto you, and hearken to my words.”


[‘“ Ye men of Judea, and all ye that dwell
at Jerusalem,”] whom the writer above de-
scribed as strangers. Here he directs his dis-
course to those others, the mockers,” and
while he seems to reason with those, he sets
these right. For indeed it was divinely or-


itera.


dered that “some mocked,” that he might
have a starting-point for his defence, and by
means of that defence, might teach. [‘‘ And
all ye that dwell in Jerusalem.”] It seems
they accounted it a high encomium to dwell in
Jerusalem too? “Be this,” says he, “known
unto you, and hearken unto my words.” In
the first instance he made them more disposed


1 Edd. =ddpa ye: ov yap dpevos Babeias. Read =odpa ye (ov
yap): dp. B. as above, p. 22, note}, and 28, note ?.

2 The éxetvor, if the old text be correct, are the mockers, but
these are not “the devout men out of every nation under
heaven,” therefore ots f€vous ecitey avwtepw can hardly be
meant to refer to the following clause, ¢vtat@a mpos exelvous k. T.
A. The omission of the text-words, and the seeming antithesis
of avwrépw and évraid@a, caused a confusion which the modern
text attempts to remedy by transposing tovs dcaxA. to the place
of tovrovs. ‘Whom the writer above called strangers, to
those Peter here directs his speech, and he seems indeed to
discourse with those, but corrects the mockers.’’ This just


inverts Chrysostom’s meaning, which is clear enough from the
following context. He says: *‘ The ‘dwellers in Jerusalem’
are especially the devout men out of every nation mentioned
above, and to instruct these (rovrous) is the real aim of the dis-
course, which however is addressed in the first instance to the
others (éxe(vous), whose mockery gave occasion to it. St.
Peter stands up apparently for the purpose of defending him-
self and his brethren: but this is in fact quite a secondary
object, and the apology becomes a sermon of doctrine.”

3 Kat ro ev ‘I. oixecvy, Below he explains avdpes “Iovdator to
mean, ‘‘ dwellers in Judea:”’ therefore the xai seems to mean,
“to be not only such, but dwellers in Jerusalem also.”’


32 THE WORKS OF ‘SF. (CIR YSOSE@R


to attend to him. “For not as ye! suppose,”
says he, “are these drunken.” Do you ob-
serve the mildness of his defence? (v. 15.)
Although having the greater part of the peo-
ple on “his side, he reasons with those others
gently ; first he removes the evil surmise, and
then he establishes his apology, On this ac-
count, therefore, he does not say, “as ye
moek,” or, “as \ye-dende,” but, “as ye sup-
pose ;” wishing to make it appear that they
had not said this in earnest, and for the pres-
ent taxing them with ignorance rather than
with malice. “For these are not drunken, as
ye suppose, seeing it is but the third hour of
the day.” And why this? Is it not possible
at the third hour to be drunken? But he did
not insist upon this to the letter; for there
was nothing of the kind about them; the
others said it only in mockery.* Hence we
learn that on unessential points one must not
spend many words. And besides, the sequel
is enough to bear him out on this point: so
now the discourse is for all incommon. “But
this is that which was spoken by the prophet
Joel, And it shall come to pass in the Jast
days, saith the Lord God. (v. 16. 17. Joel ii.
28.) Nowhere as yet the name of Christ, nor
His promise: but the promise is that of the
Father. Observe the wisdom: observe the
considerate forbearance. (ovyxaréBacw.) He
did not pass on to speak at once of the things
relating to Christ; that He had promised this
after His Crucifixion ; truly that would have
been to upset all.
was sufficient to prove His divinity. True, it
was, if believed (and the very point was that
it should be believed); but if not believed, it
would have caused them to be stoned. ‘‘ And
I will pour out of My Spirit upon all flesh.”
He offers even to them excellent hopes, if
they would have them. And so far, he does
not leave it to be regarded as the exclusive
advantage of himself and his company ; which
would have made them be looked upon with
an evil eye; thus cutting off all envious feel-
ing. “And your sons shall prophesy.” And
yet, he says, not yours this achievement, this
distinction ; the gift has passed over to your
children. Himself and his company he calls


‘ Here our leading Ms. after ov yap ws vpeis, has amomAnpov-
Tat, PHoL, Kal VTOAauBavetar OTL medvovow. ‘For not as ye. Bs
It is fulfilled (he says) and it is supposed that they are
drunken!’’ which may have been said by Chrys., but cer-
oy not in this place.

There is no reason to doubt that the company who wit-
nessed the scenes at Pentecost really supposed the Christians
to be intoxicated. To this opinion they were, of course, the
more readily inclined because of their prejudice against the new
sect. The force of Peter’s refutation of the charge of
drunkenness: ‘‘Seeing it is but the third hour, etc.,’’ lies
partly in the fact that 9 a.m. was too early for any such gen-
eral intoxication, and still more in the fact that the third hour
was the first hour of prayer, at which time it would have been
sacrilege to drink to excess.—G. B. S.


And yet, you will say, here |


[HomiLy V.


their sons, and those [whom he is addressing] —
he calls. his and their fathers. ‘And your
young men shall see visions, and your old men
shall dream dreams; and on My servants and
on My handmaidens I will pour out in those
days of My Spirit; and they shall prophesy.”
So far he shows that he and his have found
favor, in that they had received (xaragwHévrac)
[the Spirit] ; not so they whom he is address-
ing; for that they had crucified [the Lord].
So Christ also, willing to mitigate their wrath,
said, “ By whom do your sons cast out dev-
ils?” (Matt. xii. 27.) He did not say, My
disciples ; for indeed it seemed a flattering
mode of expression. And so Peter also did
not say, ‘They are not drunk, but speak 2 by
the Spirit:’ but he takes refuge with the
prophet, and under shelter of him, so speaks.
As for the accusation [of drunkenness], he
cleared himself of that by his own assertion ;
but for the grace, he fetches the prophet as
witness. “I will pour out of My Spirit upon
all flesh.” [‘* And your sons,” etc.] To some
the grace was imparted through dreams, to
others it was openly poured forth. For indeed
by dreams the prophets saw, and received rev-
elations.
Then he goes on with the prophecy, which
has in it also something terrible. ‘ And I will
show wonders in heaven above, and signs”
[“in the earth beneath”]. (v. 19.) In these
words he speaks both of the judgment to come,
and of the taking of Jerusalem. ‘ Blood and
fire, and vapor of smoke.” Observe how he de-
scribes the capture. ‘“ The sun shall be turned
into darkness, and the moon into blood.”
(v. 20.) This results from the (d:aéécewe) inter-
nal affection of the sufferers. It is said, in-
deed, that many such phenomena actually did
occur in the sky, as Josephus attests. At the
same time the Apostle strikes fear into them,
by reminding them of the darkness which had
lately occurred, and leading them to expect
things to come. “ Before that great and not-
able day of the Lord come.” For be not con-
fident, he means to say, because at present
you sin with impunity. For these things are
the prelude of a certain great and dreadful
day. Do you see how he made their souls to ©
quake and melt within them, and turned their
laughter into pleading for acquittal : °*%- Form
these things are the prelude of that day, it fol- 7
lows that the extreme of danger is impending. —
But what next? He again lets them take |


2 Here the innovator, again mistaking his author’s meaning,
as if it were—Peter did not say,
what he did say was,
necessary
etc.

3 amoAoyiay, as in 2 Cor. vii. 11.
yourselves.”


“ They speak by the Spirit ’’—finds it
to add, Kat ovx amAws, And not merely so, but,


“Yea, what clearing of ©


‘These are not drunk,” but


Hominy V.]


breath, adding, “And it shall come to pass,
that whosoever shall call upon the name of
the Lord, shall be saved.” (Rom. x. 13.)
This is said concerning Christ, as Paul af-
firms, but Peter does not venture as yet to
reveal this.


Well, let us look over again what has been
said. It is well managed, that as against
men laughing and mocking, he starts up and
begins with, “Be this known unto you all
and hearken unto my words.” But he begins
by saying, ‘‘ Ye men of Judea.” By the ex-
pression ‘Iovdain, I take him to mean those
that lived in Judea.—And, if you please, let
us compare those expressions in the Gospel,
that you may learn what a sudden change has
taken place in Peter. ‘A damsel,” it is writ-
ten, “came out unto him, saying, Thou also
wast with Jesus of Nazareth.” And, says he,
“IT know not the Man.” And being again
questioned, ‘“‘ he began to curse and to swear.”
(Matt. xxvi. 69-72.) But see here his bold-
ness, and his great freedom of speech.—He
did not praise those who had said, ‘*We do
hear them speak in our tongues the wonderful
works of God;” but by his severity towards
those others, he made these more earnest, and
at the same time his address is clear from all
appearance of adulation. And it is well to
remark, on all occasions, however the Apos-
tles may condescend to the level of their hear-
ers (cvyxardBacrc), their language is clear from
all appearance both of adulation and of inso-
lence : which is a difficult point to manage.

Now that these things should have occurred
at “the third hour,” was not without cause.
For! the brightness of this fire is shown at the
very time when people are not engaged in
their works, nor at dinner; when it is bright
day, when all are in the market-place. Do
you observe also the freedom which fills his
speech? ‘ And hearken to my words.” And
he added nothing, but, “ This,” says he, “is
that which was spoken by the prophet Joel ;
And it shall come to pass in the last days.”
He shows, in fact, that the consummation is
nigh at hand, and the words, “In the last
days,” have a kind of emphasis. [I will
pour out,” etc.] And then, that he may not


1 i, e. The brightness of the miraculous fire appears at a
time when there would be many to see it, people not being en-
gaged in their works, nor within their houses at their noon-
tide meal. C£cumenius evidently had the old text before him,
for he gives the same sense with the slightest verbal altera-
tions. In the Catena the sense is altered by omission of the
negatives. “ When people are about their work, when about
their dinner, etc. The innovator (followed by Edd.) makes it
** For when the brightness of the light is shown, then men are
not occupied in the business of dinner (ov epi épya . . . Ta wept
apiorov), then the day is cheerful (#acépa, the brisk.agd stirring
time of dav), then all are in the market.’’ By 7d uympov tov
otros he seems to mean bright daylight.


PET AGES JOR. THE APOSTLES:


psp.
2D if


seem to limit the privilege to the sons only, he
subjoins, “And your old men shall dream
dreams.”’ Mark the sequence. First sons ;
just as David said, “Instead of thy fathers,
were begotten thy sons.” (Ps. xlv. 17.) And
again Malachi; “They shall turn the hearts
of the fathers to the children. And on my
handmaidens, and on my servants.”’ (Mal. iv.
6.) This also is a token of excellence, for we
have become His servants, by being freed
from sin. And great is the gift, since the
grace passes over to the other sex also, not as
of old, it was limited to just one or two indi-
viduals, as Deborah and Huldah.2 He did
not say that it was the Holy Ghost, neither
did he expound the words of the prophet ; but
he merely brings in the prophecy to fight its
own battle. As yet also he has said nothing
about Judas ; and yet it was known to all what
a doom and punishment he had undergone ;
for nothing was more forcible than to argue
with them from prophecy : this was more for-
cible even than facts. For when Christ per
formed miracles, they often contradicted Him.
But when Christ brought forward the prophet,
saying, ‘‘The Lord: said unto my Lord, Sit
Thou on my right hand,” they were silent, and
‘‘no man,” we read, “‘ was able to answer Him
a word.” (Ps. xc. 1.) Andon all occasions
He Himself also appealed to the Scriptures ;
for instance, “If he called them gods to whom
the word of God came.” (John x. 35.) And
in many places one may find this. On this
account here also Peter says, “‘ I will pour out
of my spirit upon all flesh ;”’ that is, upon the
Gentiles also, But he does not yet reveal
this, nor give interpretations; indeed, * it was
better not to do so: (as also this obscure say-
ing, “I will show wonders in heaven above,”
put them the more in fear because it was ob-
scure.) And it would have been more an of-
fence, had it been interpreted from the very
first. ‘Then besides, even as plain, he passes
over it, wishing to make them regard it as
such. But after all, he does interpret to them
anon, when he discourses to them upon the
resurrection, and after he has paved the way
by his discourse. (¢zfra v. 39.) For‘ since
the good things were not sufficient to allure
them, [it is added, ‘‘ And I will show wonders,


2 Here, after eis Sevrépav, C. has OAdav (marg. yp. kai AoBvav.
olov AcB. kai AoBvav. B. after AeB. kai ‘OASav adds 7H AoBvav)
It does not appear who is meant by this Lobna, unless it orig-
inates in some strange misconception of 2 Kings xxili. 31,
“daughter of Jeremiah of Libnah,’ LXX. ©. ‘I. é« AoBva.
Clem. Alex. S¢x. i. §. 136. has no such name in his list of Old
Testament prophetesses.

3 Edd. ‘For it was not expedient, because this also was
obscure. I will show,etc. For it frightened them more, be-
ing obscure. But if he had interpreted, it would even have
offended them more.”

4 What follows in the edited text is obscure and perplexed.
The original text seems to labor under some defects, besides
the omission of the passages commented upon.


34


etc.”]. Yet’ this has never been fulfilled.
For none escaped then [in that former judg-
ment], but now the faithful did escape, in
Vespasian’s time. And this it is that the Lord
speaks of, “ Except those days had _ been
shortened, not all tlesh should be saved.’’—
[“ Blood, and fire, and vapor of smoke.’|
(Matt. xxiv. 22.) The worst to come first;?
namely, the inhabitants to be taken, and then
the city to be razed and burnt. Then he
dwelt upon the metaphor, bringing before the
eyes of the hearers the overthrow and the tak-
ing. “The sun shall be turned into darkness,
and the moon into blood,” What means, the
moon turned into blood? It denotes the
excess of the slaughter. The language is
fraught with helpless dismay. (supra p. 32.)
‘“And it shall come to pass, every one who
shall call upon the name of the Lord shall be
saved. Every one,’ he says: though he be
priest (but he does not yet reveal the mean-
ing), though bond, though free. For? there is
no male nor female in Christ Jesus, no bond,
no free. (Gal. ili. 28.) Well may it be so,
for all these are but shadow. For if in king’s
palaces there is no high-born nor low-born,
but each appears according to his deeds; and
in art, each is shown by his works; much
more in that school of wisdom (@Agsogia).
“Every one who shall invoke.” Invoke: not
any how, for it is written, “ Not every one that
saith unto Me, Lord, Lord:” but with (d:aéé-
cewc) inward earnest affection, with a life more
than commonly good, with the confidence
which is meet. Thus far, however, he makes
the discourse light, by introducing that which
relates to faith, and that terrible which relates
to the punishment.* For in the invocation is
the salvation.

What, I pray you, is this you say? Do you
talk of salvation for them after the Cross?
Bear with me a little. Great is the mercy of
God. And this very fact does, no less than
the resurrection, prove him to be God, yea, no
less than His miracles—the fact that He calls
these to Him. For surpassing goodness is,
above all things, peculiarly God’s own. There-


1 Something seems wanting here: e. g. as above, ‘‘ There
were signs in heaven, as Josephus relates. This however, in
the full sense, has never been fulfilled.’” And then,a reference
to the Babylonian compared with the Roman judgment.

2 First blood, i. e. the taking and slaughter of the inhab-
itants: then, fire, etc., i. e. the burning of the cjty.

3 As B. has this sentence, which is in fact necessary to the
sense, the omission of it in C. A. may be referred to the
homeceoteleuton, €Aevdepos.

4 Kai (—=xalmep, or et Kal?) hoBepov To THs KoAdgEws. i. e. he
alleviates the severity of his discourse by speaking of the
effects of faith, at the same time that he shows the fearfulness
of the punishment. Edd. xac ov o8. xpimtwy 7d THs KoAagEws,
i. e. light... and not fearful, by withdrawing out of sight
what relates to the punishment: which however Ben. renders
as if it were ov 70 ¢o8. And not concealing the fearfulness,
(Sey


THE WORKS OF 'ST.“CHERYSOSTOM:-


fore also He says, ‘‘ None is good save one,
that is, God.” (Luke xviii. 19.) Only let us
not take this goodness for an occasion of
negligence. For He also punishes as God.
In fact, the very punishments here spoken of,
He brought them to pass, even He who said,
‘“‘ Every one who shall call on the name of the
Lord, shall be saved.” I speak of the fate of
Jerusalem ;* that intolerable punishment: of
which I will tell you some few of the partic-
ulars, useful to us in our contest, both with
the Marcionites and many other heretics.
For, since they distinguish between Christ a
good God, and that evil God [of the Old Tes-
tament], let us see who it was that effected
these things. The evil God, taking ven-
geance for Christ? or not so? How then alien
to Him? But was itthe good God? Nay,
but it is demonstrated that both the Father
and the Son did these things. The Father
in many places; for instance, when He says
in the parable of the vineyard,’ [“He will
miserably destroy those wicked husbandmen ”
(Matt. xxi. 41); again in the parable of the
marriage feast, the King is said] to send His
armies (ib. xxii. 7): and the Son, when He
says, ‘‘ But those Mine enemies, which would
not that I should reign over them, bring
hither, and slay them before Me.” (Luke
xix. 27.) *%° * % (8% And they sentpsaymaem
We will not have Thee to reign over us.
Would you like then to hear the things which
actually came to pass? Moreover, Christ
Himself also speaks of the future tribulations,
than which never any thing more dreadful
came to pass; never any thing more ruthless,
my beloved, than the deeds then done!?
And He Himself declared it.. “For whan
could you wish to see more grievous than
these? * * * probed them with their dag-


* It is extremely doubtful if Peter understood by ‘‘ the great
and terrible day of the Lord ”’ (20) the destruction of Jerusalem.
(Chrys.) It probably refers to the Parousia which is thought
of as imminent. The “last days’’ then would be the days
preceding the Messianic age which is to begin at the Parousza.
This view harmonizes with the Jewish conception and with


the Christian expectation that the then existing period (aiwy ~


ovTos) Was soon to pass into a new age (aiwy meAdAwv). The
scenes of Pentecost were thought to be the harbingers of this
consummation and were so significant both of the joys and
woes of the impending crisis, that the bold imagery of the
prophet Joel is applied to them. Cf. the prophetic terms in
which the destruction of Jerusalem is foretold—an event
closely associated with the personal return of our Lord in
Matt. xxiv.—G. B. S.

5 ws OTav A€yy ev TO GuTEAGVL TEUTELY TA OTPaTEVMaTA aUTOD.
Chrys. is misreported here, for the sending forth of the armies
belongs to the parable of the marriage of the king’s son.

§ Something must have been omitted here: viz. a brief ex-
position of the parable here referred to. The innovator en-
deavors to mend the text, by leaving out the following sen-
tence.

7*Ov ovdév @mdtepoy yéyovev, ayaTyTOl, TOV TOTE TETPAyLEVWV
mpayuatwv. This may be explained as a negligent construc-
tion, but perhaps some words are omitted. The next sentence,
Kai avtos arepyvato (which phrase is repeated below), refers
to Matt. xxiv. zr. ‘There shall be great tribulation, such
as has not been from the beginning of the world to this
time.’


|Homity V.


i
;


Homity V.|


ie ayer. Or Dan APOSTLES: 35


gers!1—* * * But shall I relate to you the
shocking case of the woman, that tragic tale?
ooo | * o(feseph. B.J.vi. 3.4. Did-not the
actual events cast all misery into the shade?
But shall I tell you of famines and _ pesti-
lences? One might speak of horrors without
number: nature was unknown; law unknown ;
they outdid wild beasts in ferocity. True,
these miseries came by the fate of wars; but
because God, because Christ so willed it to
be. These facts will apply both against the
Marcionites and against those who do not
believe that there is a_ hell: for they are
sufficient to silence their impudence. Are
not these calamities more severe than the
Babylonian?” Are not these sufferings more
grievous than the famines of that time? Yes,
for [“‘never was the like from the beginning
of the world” ] “no, nor ever shall be such.”
(Matt. xxiv. 21.) And this was Christ’s own
declaration. In what sense then, think ye, is
it said that Christ remitted them their sin ?3
Perhaps it seems a commonplace question:
but do ye solve it.—It is not possible to show
anywhere, even in fiction, any thing like what
the reality was here. And had it been a
Christian that wrote this history, the matter
might be regarded with suspicion: but if he
was a Jew, and a Jewish zealot, and after the
Gospel, how can the meaning of the facts be
otherwise than palpable to all men? For you
will see the man, how, everywhere, he- always
extols the concerns of the Jews.—There is


1 "OBeyioxors (dagger-blades, or spear-heads, or spits)
avtous dtémetpav. In Hom. vi. p. 43. 7z/ra, we have the phrase
tives OBeAloKor weTUpwmevor SiewELpav gwua. It is evident that
something is omitted, and no more probable supposition pre-
sents itself, than that Chrys. here read out from Josephus or
Eusebius the description of the famine among the besieged
(which the reporter of the sermon omitted at the time, intend-
ing to insert it at his leisure); and that the short sentence in
the text is the preacher’s own parenthetical explanation of
some part of the description. Thus, B. J. vi. 3. 3. speaking of
the cruelties practised upon dying wretches suspected of hav-
ing food concealed about their persons, Josephus says: ’AAAG
Kal TOUS ExmveovTas of Anatar Sunpevvwr, wyTLs UTO KOATOV ExwY
Tpodny oxymroto Tov Oavarov avtTw. Perhaps oBeAioKots adTtovs
dcémecpay is C.’s comment upon éuypevvwy.—Or, in like manner,
it may refer to the description in B. J. v. 12. 3. how the Anatat,
after ransacking the bodies of the dead, tried the edges of their
swords upon them, etc. Tas te axuas tav Evpwv edoxiuacov év
Tois TTWUacl, Kat TLVas TY EppipevwY ETL CwvTas SunAavVOY emt
retpa Tov atdnpov. Perhaps, however, the expression may be
taken in a metaphorical sense as in the phrase above cited:
‘they pierced themselves (€autovs for av’rovs) as with spits or
lancets.”’

2 Against the Marcionites, he says: You say that the God of
the Old Testament is a cruel God ; whereas Christ, the good
God, is all mildness. Yet was not the Roman judgment upon
the Jews inflicted by Him? And was it not beyond compar-
ison more ruthless (wpoTepov, above) than the Babylonian or
any former judgment, inflicted, as you say, by the God of the
Old Testament ?

3 Ilas ody daré pyaiv, i. e. as it is said in the text, “ Every
one that calleth on the name of the Lord shall be saved.’”’ The
question is the same as was put in the beginning of this sec-
tion: ** What? do you speak of salvation for them after cruci-
fying the Lord? And this, when you have shown us how
fearfully that sia was visited?’’ This question, as a very sim-
ple one, he leaves the hearers to answer for themselves, by
distinguishing between believers and unbelievers, the penitent
and the hardened.—The innovator quite alters the sense;
““How then say some that Christ remitted them their sin?”
which makes the next sentence idle.


therefore a hell, O man! and God is good.—
Aye, did you shudder at hearing these horrors ?
But these, which take place here, are nothing
in comparison with what shall be in that
world. Once more I am compelled to seem
harsh, disagreeable, stern. But what can I
do? Iam set to this: just as a severe school-
master is set to be hated by his scholars: so
are we. For would it not be strange indeed,
that, while those who have a certain post
assigned them by kings do that which is
appointed them, however disagreeable the
task may be, we, for fear of your censure,
should leave our appointed task undone?
Another has a different work. Of you, many
have it for their work, to show mercy, to act
humanely, to be pleasant and agreeable to the
persons to whom you are benefactors. But
to those to whom we do good, we seem stern
and severe, troublesome and _ disagreeable.
For we do good, not by the pleasure we give,
but by the pain we inflict. So it is also with
the physician: though he indeed is not exces-
sively disagreeable, for the benefit afforded by
his art is had immediately; ours hereafter.
So again the magistrate is odious to the dis-
orderly and seditious; so the legislator is
vexatious to them for whom he makes laws.
But not so he that invites to enjoyment, not
so he that prepares public festivities and enter-
tainments, and puts all the people in garlands:
no, these are men that win acceptance, feasting,
as they do, whole cities with all sorts of spec-
tacles; contributing largely, bearing all the
cost. And therefore those whom they have
treated, requite them for these enjoyments
with words of welcome and benediction, with
hanging (xapareracuara) Of tapestries, and a
blaze of lamps, and with wreaths, and boughs,
and brilliant garments. Whereas, at the
sight of the physician, the sick become sad
and downcast: at sight of the magistrate, the
rioters become subdued: no running riot then,
no gambolling, except when he also goes over
into their ranks.* Let us see, then, which
render the best service to their cities; those
who provide these festivities, and banquetings,
and expensive entertainments, and manifold
rejoicings; or those who restrain all those
doings, bearing before them stocks, scourges,
executioners, dreaded soldiers, and a _ voice
fraught with much terror: and issuing orders,


4 TIAnv orav Kaxeivos cis exetyny petaotn thy tagv. The
meaning is obscure: for it may be either, that he is displaced
from office (uetaorHvat, weTagTagts are COMmMoOn in this sense),
and makes one of the otag.agovtes; or, that he lays aside the
magistrate and demeans himself to take part in their excesses.
(Tags is the expression for the attendants of any high official,
and may perhaps be taken in that sense here). rasmus goes
wide of the text: mec exultint eo guod et tlle ad hoc opus
ordinatus est: and so Montf. mec exu/ltantes guod ille ad hoc
offictum sit constitutus.


36


THE: WORKS OF ST. (CHRYSOSTOM


[HomiLy V.


and making men hang down their heads, and
with the rod dispersing the idlers in the market-
place. Let us see, I say; these are the dis-
agreeable, those the beloved : let us see where
the gain rests. (Afde.) What comes then of
your pleasure-givers? A kind of frigid enjoy-
ment, lasting till the evening, and to-morrow
vanished ; mirth ungoverned, words unseemly
and dissolute. And what of these? Awe,
sobriety, subdued thoughts; reasonableness
of mind, an end of idleness; a curb on the
passions within; a wall of defence, next to
God, 1 against assailants from without. It is
by means of these we have each our property
but by those ruinous festivities we dissipate it.
Robbers indeed have not invaded it, but
vainglory together with pleasure acts the part
of robber. Each sees the robber carrying off
everything before his eyes, and is delighted
at it! A new fashion of robbery, this, to
induce people to be glad when one is plunder-
ing them! On the other part, there is nothing
of the kind: but God, as the common Father,
has secured us as by a wall against all [depre-
dators|, both seen and unseen.” For, “‘ Take
heed,” saith He, “that ye do not your alms
before men.” (Matt. vi. 1.) The soul learns
from the one, [excess ;? from the other] to
flee injustice. For injustice consists not
merely in grasping at more wealth than be-
longs to us, but in giving to the belly more
than its needful sustenance, in carrying mirth
beyond its proper bounds, and causing it to
run into frantic excesses. From the one, it
learns sobriety; from the other, unchastity.
For it is unchastity, not merely to have carnal
intercourse with women, but even to look upon
a woman with unchaste eyes. From the one,
it learns modesty ; from the other, conceited
self-importance. For, “All things,” says the
Apostle, “are lawful for me, but not all things
expedient.” (1 Cor. vi. 12.) From the one,
decent behavior; from the other unseemliness.
For, as to the doings in the theatres, I pass
these. But to let yousee that it is not even a
pleasure either, but a grief, show me, but a


1 eta Tov cov, omitted in the modern text,

2 Hom. in Matt. \xxi. p. 699. C. Chrys. describes cevodoéia
(vainglory) in almsgiving, as the thief that runs away with the
treasure laid up in heaven. And something of this sort seems
to have been in his thoughts here, where however his meaning
is evidently very imperfectly expressed. The texts cited show
that exet, exeiBev, refer to something more than, as above, good
laws and government in general; for here he speaks of the
Gospel discipline of the inner man. *‘‘ Where this restraint is.
no dissipation of our temporal or spiritual wealth has place:
for God, as common Father, has raised a wall to keep out all
robbers both seen and unseen, from all our possessions: from
the former He guards us, by law and good government; from
the latter, by the Gospel prohibition of all vainglory: ‘*Take
heed that ye do not your alms,” etc. ;

$ MavOaver Wuxi evredOev, opp. to éxeiMev as in the following
sentences; exetbev cwhpocvvny pavOaver, évtevOev axoAaciav—éex.
EMLELKELAV, EVT. TUHOV—EK. KOTULOTHTA, EVT. aaXnKOTVYnY. There-
fore either something is wanting: e. g. mAcovetiav: éxeiOev, or
for evr. we must read éxecdev.


single day after the festival, both those who
spent their money in giving it, and those who
were feasted with spectacles : and you shall see
them all looking dejected enough, but most
of all him, vour (éxeivov) famous man that has
spent his money for it. And this is but fair :
for, the day before, he delighted the common
man, and the common man indeed was in high
good humor and enjoyment, and rejoiced in-
deed in the splendid garment, but then not
having the use of it, and seeing himself stripped
of it, he was grieved and annoyed; and
wanted to be the great man, seeing even his
own enjoyment to be small compared with
his.* ‘Therefore, the day efter, they change
places, and now he, the great man, gets the
larger share in the dejection.

Now if in worldly matters, amusements are
attended with such dissatisfaction, while dis-
agreeable things are so beneficial, much more
does this hold in things spiritual. Why is it
that no one quarrels with the laws, but on the
contrary all account that matter a common
benefit? For indeed not strangers from some
other quarter, nor enemies of those for whom
the laws are made, came and made these
orders, but the citizens themselves, their
patrons, their benefactors: and this very
thing, the making of laws, is a token of
beneficence and good-will. And yet the laws
are full of punishment and restraint, and there
is no such thing as law without penalty and
coercion. ‘Then is it not unreasonable, that
while the expositors of those Jaws are called
deliverers, benefactors, and patrons, we are
considered troublesome and vexatious if we
speak of the laws of God? When we dis-
course about hell, then we bring forward
those laws: just as in the affairs of the world,
people urge the laws of murder, highway rob-
bery, and the like, so do we the penal laws:
laws, which not man enacted, but the Only-
Begotten Son of God Himself. Let him that
hath no mercy, He says, be punished (Matt.


4 The old text cai €BovAeTo éxeivos 0 avaAioKwy Kal THY olkeLay
eUmTpaylav mixpav opav mpos THv execvov, evidently requires cor-
rection, and the emendation assumed in the translation is, cat
eB. éxetvos eivac (0 avad. may perhaps be rejected as a gloss) kat
Thy oikelay Evmp. . Opwv 7. T. Exetvov. Thus the whole passage,
from Kalo pév iduwrys, refers to the (6. or person feasted, and ©
exetvos throughout is the entertainer. The edited text has: —
’Exetvos 6€ 0 avad, Kal THY Olkelay evmp. mikpay Opay eddKer 7. T. —
exetvov. of which Erasm. makes, ///e autem quz sumeptus tni-
pendit et suam felicitatem parvam cum ea quam ex sunpiu —
habebat conspicere putabat. But even if this sense lay in the —
words, it is not easy to see the connection of the following sen-
tence, Aca tovro, etc., Montf. translates, Quz vero sumptus —
Jecit, suam pre illius felicitate parvam putabat, as if éxetvos :
and éxeivov in the same sentence referred to two different and
contrasted persons. The meaning of the passage is, As, on the }
day before, the entertainer had 10 wAéov ths evOvgutas, it is but
fair that on the following day 70 wAéov tys abvutias should be
transferred to him. This is expressed by Aca tovTo TH vot.
avtT.d.deacty adAAyHAos. Which however, Erasmus renders, /dezrveo
seguenti die reddunt stbi vestes tterum-: Montf. redduntur
vestes. (Perhaps there is an allusion to the legal phrase
avtidoats. vy. Isocrat. wept avttd).


' Homity VI.]


Potter rOr THE APOSTLES.


5


=)


7


xviii. 23); for such is the import of the parable.
Let him that remembereth injuries, pay the
last penalty. Let him that is angry without
cause, be cast into the fire. Let him that
reviles, receive his due in hell. If you think
these laws which you hear strange, be not
amazed. For if Christ was not intended to
make new laws, why did He come? ‘Those
other laws are manifest to us; we know that
the murderer and adulterer ought to be pun-
ished. If then we were meant only to be
told the same things over again, where was
the need of a heavenly Teacher? ‘Therefore
He does not say, Let the adulterer be pun-
ished, but, whoso looketh on with unchaste
eyes. And where, and when, the man will
receive punishment, He there tells us. And
not in fine public monuments, nor yet some-
where out of sight,’ did He deposit His laws;
not pillars of brass did He raise up, and en-
grave letters thereon, but twelve souls raised
He up for us, the souls of the Apostles, and
in their minds has He by the Spirit inscribed
this writing. This cite we to you. If this
was authorized to Jews, that none might take
refuge in the plea of ignorance, much more is
it tous. But should any say, ‘I do not hear,
therefore have no guilt,” on this very score he
is most liable to punishment. For, were
there no teacher, it would be possible to take
refuge in this plea; but if there be, it is no


longer possible. Thus see how, speaking of
Jews, the Lord deprives them of all excuse ;
“If I had not come and spoken unto them,
they had not had sin:” (John xv. 22): and
Paul again, “ But I say, have they not heard?
Nay, but into all the earth went forth their
sound.” (Rom. x. 18.) For then there is ex-
cuse, when there is none to tell the man; but
when the watchman sits there, having this as
the business of his life, there is excuse no
longer. Nay, rather, it was the will of Christ,
not that we should look only upon these written
pillars, but that we should ourselves be such.
But since we have made ourselves unworthy of
the writing, at least let us look to those. For
just as the pillars threaten others, but are not
themselves obnoxious to punishment, nor yet
the laws, even so the blessed Apostles. And
observe; not in one place only stands this
pillar, but its writing is carried round about in
all the world. Whether you go among the
Indians, you shall hear this: whether into
Spain, or to the very ends of the earth, there
is none without the hearing, except it be of
his own neglect, Then be not offended, but
give heed to the things spoken, that ye may
be able to lay hold upon the works of virtue,
and attain unto the eternal blessings in Christ
Jesus our Lord, with Whom to the Father and
Holy Ghost together be glory, power, honor,
now and ever, world without end. Amen.


OMEN: “MI:


AGTS piles22:


“ Ye men of Israel, hear these my words.”


[Ye men of Isracl”]: it is not for flattery
that he uses this term; but, as he has borne
hard upon them, he relaxes a little, and puts
them in mind of their great ancestor? [Israel].
Here again he begins with an introduction,
that they may not become excited, now that
he is going to make express mention to them
of Jesus: for in what preceded, there was no


_ J) Ets ava@jnata ovdé eis xp¥Bdnv. The modern text has eis
afovas ovdé cis, xvpBers, alluding to the peculiar form of tables
on which the laws of Athens were written. On critical
grounds we retain the reading of the old text, which, as being
the more difficult one, is not likely to have been substituted for
the other. Ovx eis ava@juara; “not on public monuments for
display.” Laws of an Emperor, for instance, engraved on
handsome monuments, may be called ava@juata, Ovdé eis
kpvBSnv, (also an unusual expression), ‘nor yet where no one
would see them.’

2 zou mpomatopos, A. C. F. D. and Cat. but rod Aavié eixaipws,
B. E. Edd. Cécumenius fell into the same mistake and has
Tov mpomatopos Aavié. But it is evident that Chrys. is com-
menting on the address “Avépes “IopanAtrat.


]


reason why they should be excited, while the
Prophet was the subject of discourse : but the
name of Jesus would have given offence at
the very outset—And he does not say, “ Do
as I bid you,” but, Hear; as being not at all
exacting. And observe how he forbears to
speak of the high matters, and begins with
the very low: “Jesus,” he says: and then
straightway mentions the place He belonged
to, being one which was held in mean estima.
tion: ‘Jesus of Nazareth”: and does not say
anything great about Him, nor even such as
one would say about a Prophet, so far:
“‘ Jesus,” he says, ‘of Nazareth, a man proved
(to be) from God among you.” Observe ; what
great matter was this, to say that He was
sent from God?* For this was the point


3 “Opa, rotov hv ToUTO méya, TO etmety K. T. A. i. e. ‘He says
as yet ovdéy wéya, nothing great, concerning Christ: nothing
even that would be great if said of an ordinary Prophet. For,


38 THE WORKS \OP


which on all occasions both He and John and
the Apostles were studious to show. ‘Thus,
hear John saying: ‘The same said unto me,
On whom thou shalt see the Spirit descend-
ing, and abiding on him, this is He.” (John
i. 33.) But Christ Himself does this to an
extreme; Of Myself I am not come, He sent
Me. (ib. vii. 28.) And everywhere in the
Scriptures this seems the point most studi-
ously insisted upon. Therefore also this holy
leader of the blessed company, the lover of
Christ, the good shepherd, the man put in
trust with the keys of heaven, the man who
received the Spiritual Wisdom, when he has
first subdued the Jews by fear; and has shown
what great things have been vouchsafed to
the disciples, and what a right they have to
be believed, then first proceeds to speak con-
cerning Him. Only think what boldness it
was to say it, in the midst of the murderers—
that He is risen! And yet he does not all at
once say, He is risen; but what?—‘“ He
came,”’.says he, “from God: this is manifest
by the signs which”—he does not yet say,
Jesus Himself wrought: but what ?—“ which
God wrought by Him in the midst of you.”
He calls themselves as witnesses. “A man
proved (to be sent) from God among you, by
miracles and wonders and signs, which God
wrought by him in the midst of you, as also
ye yourselves know.” Then, having fallen
upon the mention of that their sacrilegious
outrage, observe how he endeavors to quit
them of the crime: “Him,” he says, “being
by the determinate counsel and foreknowl-
edge of God delivered up”: (v. 23) [adding
however,] “ye have taken, and by wicked
hands have crucified and slain:” for though
it was predetermined, still they were mur-
derers.! [“ By the determinate counsel and


observe: wotov veya, what sort of great thing was it, to say
that Christ was sent from God?’ In the following sentences
Chrys. seems to have been scarcely understood by his re-
porter. His meaning may be thus represented: ‘t And yet, so
it 1S: everywhere in the Scriptures we find examples of this
remarkable peiwors: ‘‘ Christ was sent from God,’ seems to be
the point most studiously inculcated (ro omovdagéuevov): nay,
we find it carried to the utmost (ue6’ drepBodAys) in some of
Christ’s own expressions. And so here: when Peter stands up
—he, the leader of the Apostles, the lover of Christ, the good
shepherd, the man entrusted with the keys of the kingdom of
heaven. the man who has received the deposit of the Wisdom
of the Spirit—after he has subdued the audience by the
terrors of the coming judgments, has shown that he and his
company have received wonderful gifts as foretold by the
Prophet, and has made it felt that they have a right to be
believed: you may well expect after all this that his first word
about Christ will be something great; that he will certainly
launch out boldly into the declaration, He is risen! Only
think, though, what boldness to say this in the midst of the
murderers !—Nothing of the kind. He begins with, ‘‘ Jesus
the Nazarene, aman proved to be from God unto you by
signs, etc. which—(He did? no, but) God did by Him, etc.
Wait awhile, however: the Orator will say all that needs to be
said in due time.”’

1 Et yap kai wpicpévor jv, dbyoiv, dws avdpopdvo joav. B.C.
after amadA. Tov éyxAjmatos,and before the text. As the sen-
tence so placed seemed to make Chrys. contradict himself, the
other Mss. and Edd. before Ben. omit it. Something is want-


ST: ‘CHIRY SOS@O RE. [Homity VI.


foreknowledge of God:”] all but using the
same words as Joseph did; just as he said to
his brethren; ‘‘ Be not angry one with an-
other by the way: God sent me hither.” (Gen.
xlv. 5, 24.) It is God’s doing. “What of us,
then?” (it might be said,) “it was even well
done on our part.’ That they may not say
this, therefore it is that he adds, “ By wicked
hands ye have. crucified and slain.”* Here
then he hints at Judas; while at the same time
he shows them that it was not from any
strength, of theirs, and would not have been,
if He had not Himself permitted it: it was
God that delivered Him up. He has trans-
ferred the evil entire upon the head of Judas,
now already parted from them ; for he it was
that delivered Him over to them by the kiss,
Or, “By wicked hands,” refers to the sol-
diers: for neither is it simply, “Ye have
slain,” but, By wicked men ye have done this.2
And observe how everywhere they make it of
great importance that the Passion should first
be confessed. WuHom GOD RAISED UP (Vv. 24),
says he. This was the great thing; and
observe how he sets it in the middle of his
discourse: for the former matters had been
confessed; both the miracles and the signs
and the slaying— ‘Whom God,” says _ he,
“raised up, having loosed the pains of death,
because it was not possible that He should be
kept in its power.” It is something great
and sublime that he has hinted at here. For
the expression, ‘‘ It. was not possible,” even
itself is that of one assigning something. It


ing, which perhaps may be supplied from Gfcumen. ‘AAdAa
Kal amadAacowy ovK adinow avTo’s TavTy TOU eyKAnmaTOs.
"Erayet yap, ore da Xelpo@v avopwy avetreETe,

* In v. 23, the preferable reading is dca YXerpos avouwr,
‘““through the hand of lawless men,’’ instead of dca xerpav
avouwy of the Text. Recep. So A,B,C, D, Tisch. W. and H.,
Lach. Treg. R. V. This reading is also to be preferred in
accordance with Bengel’s first rule of text-criticism—Lectio
adiffictlior principatum tenet.—G. B.S.

2 The confusion may be cleared up by supposing that Chrys.
here commented upon the words 61a xe.por avouwy as admitting
of a double connection: viz.: with exdotoy AaBovres and with
mpoom. avetAete. In the former, it refers to Judas: while at
the same time, it is shown that of themselves they had no
power against Him. He was delivered up by the predestina-
tion and will of God, by means of the wicked hands of Judas;
upon whom (already gone to his doom) the evil is shifted en-
tire. But again, as éxéoroy is not put simply and without
addition (adds), so neither (ovdé) is avetAere: but ‘‘ by wicked
hands ye slew.”’ i. e. by the soldiers.

3 The text seems to be corrupt: Kat avro did6vtos Eat T°
Setkvuow ore. B, omits éotiy ti. Perhaps cat avro is derived
from an abbreviation of cpareto@at adtov. and éid0vtos Eotey Te
may be, ‘‘ is (the expression) of one assigning something. i. e.
some special prerogative to Him:”’ or, possibly, *‘ For the
expression, Ka@ot. ovx qv dvvaroy even of itself implies the
granting of something (in His case):’’ viz. as a postulate. E.
kal autov 6.dovra éudaiver kaTagyetv Kai oT, i.e. “that it was
even He that gave death the power to hold Him:”’ this, which
is adopted by Edd. is, however, not a various reading, but
only an attempt to restore the passage. CEcumen. gives no
assistance: he has only, dca 5& tov, kaOore ovK Hv Suv. avTov Kpat.,
TO Meyadelov avToOU TaplaTyGt, Kal OTL OVKETL aTOOvHGKEL. In the
next sentence E. and Edd. have: ‘‘ For by ‘pains of death’
Scripture is everywhere wont to express ‘danger:’” but
CEcumen. and Cat. agree with the old reading, 7 TadAata.
Possibly the meaning of the whole passage may be somewhat
as follows. ‘It is something great and sublime that Peter has
darkly hinted in saying, ‘it was not possible that HE should


Homity VI] THE Acts OF THE APOSTLES. 39
shows that death itself in holding Him had|by his reverential expression towards the


pangs as in travail, and was sore bestead : *
whereas, by fais, or, travail-pangs, of death,
the Old Testament means danger and disaster :
and that He so rose as never more to die.
For the assertion, “ Seeing that it was not
possible that He should be holden of it,”
means this, that A/zs rising was not common
to the rest. Then, however, before their
thoughts can enter at all into his meaning, he
brings David upon them, an authority which
sets aside all human reasoning. ‘“ For David
saith (with reference) to Him.” (v. 25.) And
observe how, once more, the testimony is
lowly. For therefore he begins the citation
further up, with the matters of lowlier import :
therefore’ was death not in the number of
grievous things [because], says he, “I foresaw
the Lord always before my face, that He is on
my right hand that I should not be moved:”
(v. 25-27) and, “ that Thou wilt not leave my
soul in hell.” Then, having finished the cita-
tion from the Prophet, he adds; ‘ Men and
brethren.” (v. 29.) When he is about to say
anything great, he uses this opening address,
to rouse and to conciliate them. ‘‘ Let me be
allowed,” he says, ‘‘ to speak freely to you of
the patriarch David.”” Remarkable lowliness,
in a case where he was giving no_ hurt,
nor was there any reason why the hearers
should be angry. For he did not say, This
is not said concerning David, but concern-
ing the Christ. But in another point of view:


be holden of it.’ And the very expression xa@d7e implies that
there is something to be thought of (comp. Caten. in 1).
Then, in the Old. Test., the expression ®étves @avarov means
pains in which death is the agent; but here they are the pangs
inflicted upon death itself, travailing in birth with Christ
‘the first-begotten from the dead.’ It shows then both that
death could not endure to hold Him, and, that Christ being
raised from the dead dieth no more. For the assertion, etc.
But then, without giving them time to ponder upon the mean-
ing of what he has darkly hinted, he 08 off to the Prophet,”’
etc.—On the expression wétvas Ave Mr. Field, /zdex to Hom.
in Matt. s. v., remarks, that ‘‘ it is said sometimes of the child-
bearing woman herself, as p. 118. B., sometimes of the child
born, as p. 375. A., sometimes of the person aiding in the
delivery, as Job xxxix, 2. Hence the obscure passage Acts ii,
34 is to be expiained. See Theophylact in 1.”

* It is noteworthy that this interpretation of wdtvas tov
@avatov (24) is exactly that of Meyer who explains thus:
“Death travailed in birth-throes even until the dead was
raised again. With this event these pangs ceased, they were
loosed ; and because God had made Christ alive, God has
loosed the pangs of death.’”? Other interpretations are: (1)
‘The szares or éands of death, on the, ground that wédtves is
used in the Ixx. to translate the Hebrew San(e. g. Ps. xviii. 5),
which has this meaning. So Olsh. (2) That the pains of Jesus
connected with the whole experience of death are meant. He
is popularly conceived as enduring these pains until the res-
urrection when God loosed them, the conception being that he
was under their power and constraint. We prefer this view.
So Lechler, Gloag, Hackett.—G. B. S.

1 j, e. The former part of the passage cited, down to, ‘* Thou
wilt not leave my soul in hell,’’ as far as the words go, is no
more than David might say in reference to himself, or any
other saint: viz. he set God always before his face, etc. there-
fore (éta todro, referring to v. 26. d:a rovTo evdp.) death was
not in the number of things that cause grief. And St. Peter
instead of going at once to that in the prophecy which.is pe-
culiar to Christ, with wise management begins with what is
less exalted, are cigaywyixwrepwyv Adywv deonevors, ecumen.—
For 8a tovT0 ov Tav AvTOVVTwY O Bavaros, E. and Edd. have iva


Sein, oTc ov . . . *‘to show that death,” etc.


blessed David, he awed them; speaking of an
acknowledged fact as if it were a bold thing to
say, and therefore begging them to pardon
him for saying it. And thereupon his ex-
pression is not simply “concerning David,”
but “ concerning the patriarch David, that he
is both dead and buried:” he does not also
say, “and is not risen again,” but in another
way (though this too would have been no
great thing to say), “And his sepulchre is
with us unto this day,” he has said what
comes to the same thing. Then—and even
so he does not come to the mention of Christ,
but what next ?—he goes on with his enco-
mium upon David, “ Being therefore a prophet,
and knowing that with an oath God had sworn
unto him.” (v. 30.) But this he says, that
were it but on account of the honor shown
to David, and the descent from him, they may
accept what is said concerning Christ’s resur-
rection, as seeing that it would be an injury to
the prophecy, and a derogating from (ric eic
abvtove tyuyj¢) their honor, if this were not the
fact. ‘“ And knowing,” he says, “that with
an oath God had sworn unto him”—he does
not say simply ‘“ promised ”’—“ of the fruit of
his loins after the flesh to raise up Christ, to
seat Him upon his throne.” Observe how he
has again only hinted at what is sublime. For
now that he has soothed them with his expres-
sion, he confidently adds this: The prophet
[saith it] “of His resurrection, that neither
was His soul left in hell, nor did His flesh see
corruption.” (v.31.) This again is wonderful:
it shows that His resurrection was not like that
of other men. For though death laid hold on
Him, yet it did not its own work then.—And,
as regards the sin, he has spoken of that,
covertly and darkly; of the punishment, he
forbore to add anything; but that they had
slain Him, this he has spoken out; for the
rest he now comes to the sign given by God.
And when it is once proved, that He, the slain,
was just, was dear to God, then, though thou
be silent of the punishmnet, be sure that he
which did the sin will condemn himself more
than ever thou canst condemn him. So then,
that he refers all to the Father, is in order
that they may receive what is said: and that
assertion, ‘“‘ Not possible,” he fetches in from
the prophecy. Well then, let us again look
over what has been said.

“Jesus of Nazareth, a man proved (to be
sent) from God unto you.” (Recapitulation
of v. 22-31): one, of whom, by reason of His
works, there can be no doubt; but who, on
the contrary, is demonstrated. Thus also
Nicodemus said, ‘*No man can do these
miracles which Thou doest—By miracles, and


40 THE WORKS: OF


ST: CHEY SOS FORE [Homity VI.


wonders, and signs which God wrought by
Him in the midst of you” (John ili. 2): not
secretly. Setting out from facts notorious to
those whom he was addressing, he then comes
to things hidden. Thereupon [in saying,
“ By the determinate counsel and foreknowl-
edge of God,”’] (v. 23) he shows that it was
not because they had the power to do it, and
that there was a wisdom and a Divine arrange-
ment in the event, seeing it was from God.
He rapidly passes over the unpleasant part,
[adding, ‘Whom God raised up,” etc.] (v. 24).
For it is always a point of great importance
with them to show that He was once dead.
Though ye should deny it, says he, (éxeivoc)
those (present) will bear witness to the fact.
[‘‘ Having loosed the pangs of death.”] He
that gives Death trouble, may much more
give trouble to them that crucified Him: how-
ever, nothing of the kind is here said, as that
He had power to slay you. Meanwhile,? let
us also learn thus to hold. For one that is in
pain like a woman in travail, does not hold
the thing held, and is not active but passive ;
and makes haste te cast it off. And it is well
said: “ For David saith in reference to him”
(v.25); that you may not refer that saying to
the Prophet.—[“ Therefore being a Prophet,
and knowing,” etc.] (v. 30, 31.) Do you
observe how he now’ interprets the prophecy,
and does not? give it bare of comment? How
did He “seat Him upon ” David’s “ throne ?”
For the kingdom after the Spirit is in heaven.
Observe how, along with the resurrection, he
has also declared the kingdom in the fact of
His rising again. He shows that the Prophet
was under constraint: for the prophecy was
concerning Him. Why does he say, not, Con-
cerning His kingdom (it was a great matter),
but ‘Concerning His resurrection?” And
how did He seat Him upon his (David’s)
throne? Why, He reigns as King over Jews


also, yea, what is much more, over them that |


crucified Him, ‘“ For His flesh saw no cor-
ruption.”
rection, but it is the same thing.

“This Jesus ”’—observe how he does not


call Him otherwise—“hath God raised up;


1 Tews pavOavwuev kai nueis oUTW KaTexew, As the text stands,
this can only mean, ‘*‘ And here by the bye let us also learn
how to hold fast Christ; not to hold Him with pain, like one
in travail-pangs, who therefore cannot hold fast, but is in
haste to be delivered,’ etc. But this can hardly have been St.
Chrysostom’s meaning. Something seems to be omitted after
Kal nmeis OF oUTw.—Edd. Téws d€ pavOavomev Kat queis ba THY
EipyKevwy 7 €aTL TO KaTexerv. If this is: ‘* What is the meaning
of the expression xavéxew, the emphatic cat muecs is superflu-
ous; and besides, the word xaréyxetv does not occur in the text
commented upon. Cécum. and the Catena give no help.

2 Edd. cai yuuvyy 71Onor dyA@v mas. ‘ And gives it bare (of
comment), showing.’’ Montf. mistranslates yupryy 716, 2u-
dam exponat, and notices the old reading (A. B. C.) with
the remark, Unxus Codex mpod. ob yuurnv. Minus recte.
But Chrys. is now commenting on v. 30, 31. ‘‘ Above, St.
Peter gave the prophecy by itself: now he adds his own expo-
sition and reasoning, *‘ Being therefore a Prophet.” etc.


whereof all we are witnesses. Being there-
fore by the right hand of God exalted”
(v. 33, 34): again he takes refuge with the
Father, and yet it had been enough to say
what precedes: but he knows what a great
point this is. Here he has hinted at the
Ascension also, and that Christ is in heaven :
but neither does he say this openly. “ And
having received,” says he, ‘the promise of
the Holy Ghost.” Observe how, in the
beginning of his discourse, he does not say
that Jesus Himself had sent It, but
the Father: now, however, that he has men-
tioned His signs and the things done to Him
by the Jews, and has spoken of His resurrec-
tion, he boldly introduces what he has to say
about these matters, again adducing them-
selves as witnesses by both senses: [‘ He
hath shed forth this, which ye do see and
hear,”|] And of the resurrection he has made
continual mention, but of their outrageous
deed he has spoken once for all. ‘ And
having received the promise of the Holy
Ghost,” ' “This” again, is®S great. eieee
promise,” he says ; because [promised] before
His Passion. Observe how he now makes it
all His [‘‘He hath poured forth this ”’],
covertly making a great point. For if it was
He that poured it forth, it is of Him that the
Prophet has spoken above, “In the last days
I will pour forth of My Spirit on My Ser-
vants, and on Mine handmaids, and I will do
wonders in the heaven above. (sufra, v. 17.)
Observe what he secretly puts into it! But
then, because it was a great thing, he again
veils it with the expression of “ His having
received of the Father.” He has spoken of
the good things fulfilled, of the signs; has
said, that He is king, the point that touched
them ; has said, that it is He that gives the
Spirit. (Arist. Rhet. 1. 3.) (For, however
much a person may say, if it does not issue
in something advantageous, he speaks to no


/purpose.) Just as John: “The same,” says
This seems to be less than resur-


he, “shall baptize you with the Holy Ghost.”
(Matt. iii. 11.) And it shows that the Cross
not only did not make Him less, but rendered
Him even more illustrious, seeing that of old
God promised it to Him, but now has given
it. Or [it may be], “the promise ” which He
promised to us. He so foreknew it about |
to be, and has given it to us greater after the
resurrection. And, “hath poured it out,” he
Says; not*® requiring worthiness: and not


8 "Efexee, byoiv, oix atiwmua Cnt@v, Kai ovx awd@s. Edd.’Eé.,
. ‘Evrav0a to akimma éudaiver, kat bt ovy amwAws. ‘Here he
intimates the dignity: and that,’ etc. But the meaning is,
‘He poured it forth, not requiring merit: i. e. not giving
here and there to the most deserving, but as the phrase im-
plies, with unsparing liberality.”’ era dayrdeias. N. med”
umepBoAjs.


Homity VI.]


WHE eons OP THE APOSTLES:


4I


simply gave, but with abundance. Whence?
does this appear? Henceforth after the
mention of His giving the Spirit, he con-
fidently speaks also of His ascension into
heaven; and not only so, but again adducing
the witness, and reminding them of that
Person concerning Whom Christ once spake.
(Matt. xxii. 43) ‘‘ For not David,” says he “‘as-
cended into the heavens. (v. 34.) Here he no
longer speaks in lowly phrase,* having the
confidence which results from the things said ;
nor does he say, “Be it permitted me to
speak,” or the like : “ But he saith himself ; The
Lord said unto my Lord, Sit Thou on My
right hand, until I make Thine enemies Thy
footstool.” Now if He be David’s Lord,
much more shall they not disdain Him.
“Sit thou on My right hand ;” he has set the
whole matter here; “until I make Thine
enemies Thy footstool:” here also he has
brought upon them a great terror, just as in
the beginning he showed what He does to
His friends, what to his enemies. And again,
as to the act of subjugation, not to provoke
unbelief, he ascribes it to the Father. Since
then these are great things that he has
uttered, he again brings his discourse down to
lowly matters. ‘“ Let therefore,” he says, “ the
whole house of Israel know assuredly: 1. e.
question ye not, nor doubt ye: then also in
the tone of command it follows; “that God
hath made Him both Lord—” this he says
from David—“ and Christ,” (v. 36), this from
the Psalm:* For when it would have been
rightly concluded, “‘ Let therefore the whole
house of Israel know assuredly that” He
sitteth on the right hand of God, this, which
would have been great, he forbears, and


brings in a different matter which is much
more humble, and the expression ‘“ Hath


made;”’ i. e. hath ordained: so that there is
nothing about (oiciwewc) Communication of
substance here, but the expression relates to
this which has been mentioned. “ Even this
Jesus, Whom ye crucified.” He does well to
end with this, thereby agitating their minds.
For when he has shown how great it is, he
has then exposed their daring deed, so as to
show it to be greater, and to possess them
with terror. For men are not so much


1 760ev tovTo; Edd. ‘‘ Wherefore also to prove this very
thing, he adds what follows.” The connection is, ‘‘ He has
shed forth. How so? It must be He; for not David as-
cended,”’ etc.

2 Here five of our Mss. have we” vrepBodjs, ‘ hyperbolically: ”
but the reading of E. «e@ vroarodAjs is attested by CEcumen,
and the Catena.

$ i. e. the expression ‘“* Lord” is derived from David's, ‘*‘ My
Lord:”’ the expression ‘‘ Christ,”’ or rather cai Xpiorov 0 Geds
éroing ev, is from the Psalm: meaning perhaps the second
Psalm. Edd. have, ‘‘this he says from David and from the
Psalm,” after the text.


attracted by benefits as they are chastened by
fear.

But the admirable and great ones, and
beloved of God, need none of these motives :
men, such as was Paul: not of the kingdom,
not of hell, made he account. For this is
indeed to love Christ, this to be no hireling,
nor to reckon ita matter of trafficking and
trading, but to be indeed virtuous, and to
do all for the love of God. (Rom. ix. 3.) Then
what tears does it not deserve, when, owing
so large a measure, we do not even like
traders seek the kingdom of heaven! He
promises us so great things, and not even so
is He worthy to be heard? What can come
up to this enmity!* And yet, they are mad
after money-making, though it be with
enemies, though it be with slaves, though it
be with persons most hostile to them, that
they come in contact, though it be with
persons utterly evil, if only they expect that
they shall be enabled by their means to make
money, they will do everything, will flatter,
and be obsequious, and make _ themselves
slaves, and will esteem them more to be
revered than all men, to get some advantage
out of them: for the hope of money does not
allow them to give a thought to any such con-
siderations as these. But the Kingdom is not
so powerful as money is; nay, rather, not in
the smallest proportion as powerful. For? it
is no ordinary Being that promises: but this
is greater than even the Kingdom itself that
we receive itfrom such a Giver! But now the
case is the same as if a king, wishing, after
ten thousand other benefits, to make us his
heirs and coheirs with his son [should be
despised]: while some captain of a band of
robbers, who has done ten thousand wrongs
to us and to our parents, and is himself
fraught with ten thousand wickednesses, and
has utterly marred our honor and our wel-
fare, should, on presenting a single penny,


* The two Old Test. pp. (Joel ii. 28-32; Ps. xvi. 8-11) which
occur in this chapter are quoted from the Ixx., the former
freely, the latter with great exactness. The following pecul-
iarities of phraseology are noticeable in the first passage. (1)
‘“In the last days,’’ more definite expression for the Heb. and
Ixx. ‘‘afterward.’’ (2) The partitive expression: **I will pour
out of my Spirit,’ is after the Ixx. vs. the original which
reads: ‘‘I will pour out my spirit.’* (3) The phrases: ‘saith
God ”’ and ‘‘they shall prophesy ”’ (17, 18) are added to both
Heb. and Ixx. (4) ‘‘ Vapor” is from Ixx. for Heb. ‘‘ columns.”
(5) If we read kat émidavy at the end of v. zo(as Mey., W. and
H.) it is from the Ixx. an inaccurate trans. of Hebrew for
“*fearful,’’ occasioned by misunderstanding on the part of the
Seventy of the derivation of the Heb. word. The second pp.
follows the Ixx. exactly and in several deviations from the
original.—G. B. S.

4 Alluding to the Psalm above cited, ‘“‘ Until I make Thine
enemies Thy footstool.”’

5 In the modern text the connection is supplied, and the
thought expanded. ‘And yet neither is it any ordinary being
that promises it: but One who is beyond comparison greater
than the Kingdom itself. Now when the promise isa King-
dom, and God the Giver thereof, it is a great thing, the very


| receiving from such a Giver.


42


THE WORKS OF ‘ST. -CHRYSOSTOM


[HomiILy VI.


God promises a King-
dom, and is despised: the Devil helps us to
hell, and he is honored! Here God, there
Devil. But let us see the difference of the
tasks enjoined. For if there were none of
these considerations in the case: if it were
not, here God, there Devil; not, here one
helping to a kingdom, there to a hell: the
nature itself of the tasks enjoined were suffi-
cient to induce us to comply with the former.
For what does each enjoin? The one,? the


receive our worship.


things which make glorious; the other,
the things which put to shame: one, the
things which involve in ten thousand
calamities and disgraces; the other, the
things which have’ with them abundant
refreshment. For look: the one saith,


“ Learn ye of Me, for I am meek and lowly of
heart, and ye shall find rest unto your
souls,” (Matt. xi. 29): the other saith, Be
thou savage, and ungentle, and passionate,
and wrathful, and more a wild beast than a
man. Let us see which is more useful, which,
I pray you, more profitable. ‘“ Speak not of
this,” say you.” But consider that
he is the devil: above all indeed, if that be
shown: there is need also to undergo toils,
and, on the other hand, the prize of victory
will be greater. For not he that enjoins easy
tasks is the kind (kydeudv) benefactor, but he
that enjoins what is for our good. Since


fathers also enjoin disagreeable tasks; but
for this* they are fathers: and so again do
masters to slaves: but kidnappers and


destroyers (Avueovec) on the other hand, do


1 In the original the pronouns are éxetvos (God), obtos (the
Devil; for which however our Mss. have ov ta and avra): then
inversely, éxecvos (the Devil), otros (God). The modern text
reduces the antithesis to regularity by transposing the first
and second clause, with éecvos, otros, in each member. Mr.
Field, however, Hom. in Matt. 709 B. not. has remarked, that
St. Chrys. is negligent in his use of these pronouns, and this
passage may be added to those cited.

2 "Tdwpev Te xpnoirwmtepov, Ti dai (de, A. N.) aberuwrepov.

- (Here N. adds: My rovto dapev ri Xpngimutepovs Ti dé wmpertmu-
‘TEpov;) My TOUTO onow elmys* aAN” evvonoov ore dtaBodos eat"
padtota pev av éxervo SerxOn* Set kai movous UmooTHvat Kat madry,
«.7. A. The addition in N. is perhaps the result of uninten-
tional repetition. If meant for emendation, it supposes an
antithesis of xpno. and wheAtuwrepov - “let us grant which is
more serviceable (to others): but (the question is) which is
more profitable (to one’s self).” This, however, is not what the
context requires. Rather it seems that something is omitted
after elmys © e. g. aan’ idwuev TL evkoAWTepov, ** But let us see
which is more easy. In the following sentence, it is not
clear whether padtota nev belongs to det cai 7m. v. ‘Sof course,
if the former appear to be the case, it is necessary,”’ etc. or, to
the preceding clause, as in the translation: ‘‘ above all (con-
sider that it is the devil who gives the bidding), if that appear
to be the case (i. e. that it is the easier of the two): it is need-
ful,”’ etc.—Edd. “But not only this, but bethink you that he
indeed is the devil: for above all if that be shown, again the
prize of victory shall be greater.’

3 6a TovTO, i. e. by enjoining Ta cuudépovta, although ¢goprikxa,
are fathers and masters shown to be truly such, whereas kid-
nappers who steal away children, seduce them’ by promising
pleasure, and Avyeoves, masters who ruin their servants, let
them have their own w ay. —Morel. Ben. ’Execvor 5€ avdpar. Kai
Avp., Kal wavta Ta evavtia - “* but the others are kidnappers and
destroyers, and all that is contrary (to fathers and masters).”’
Savil. as above.


just the reverse. And* yet that the commands
of Christ are attended with a pleasure, is
manifest from that saying. For to what sort
do you take the passionate man to belong,
and to what the forbearing and meek? Does
not the soul of the (éeivov) one ® seem to be
in a kind of solitary retreat, enjoying exceed-
ing quiet; while that of (roirov) the other is
like a market-place and tumult and the midst
of cities, where great is the clamor of those
going out, the noise of camels, mules, asses:
of men shouting loud to those that meet them,
that they may not be trodden under foot:
and again, of silver-beaters, of braziers, of
men thrusting and pushing this way and that
and some overborne, some overbearing? But
the soul of (roirov) the former is like some
mountain-top, with its delicate air, its pure
sunshine, its limpid gushing fountains, its
multitude of charming flowers, while the
vernal meads and gardens put on their
plumage of shrubs and flowers, and glance
with rilling waters : and if any sound is heard
there, it is sweet, and calculated to affect the
ear with a sense of much delight. For either
the warbling birds perch on the outermost
spray of the branching trees, and cicadas,
nightingales and swallows, blended in one
harmony, perform a kind of concerted music;
or the zephyr gently stirring the leaves, draws
whistling tones from pines and firs, resem-
bling oft the notes of the swan: and roses,
violets, and other flowers, gently swayed,
and (xvavifovra) dark-dimpling, show like a sea
just rippled over with gentle undulations.
Nay, many are the images one might find.
Thus, when one looks at the roses, one shall
fancy that he beholds in them the rainbow;
in the violets a waving sea; in the lilies, the
sky. But® not by the spectacle alone, and
the beholding, does such an one then cause
delight: but also in the very body of him
that looks to the meadow, rather it refreshes
him, and causes him to breathe freely, so that
he thinks himself more in heaven than on


4 TIAny ote Kat ndovny Exer, SyAov exeiBev. We have supplied
the interpretation in the translation. “ExetOev, i. e. from that
saying, ‘Come unto Me,” etc. D. has, évrevbev : i.e. “is man-
ifest from the following consideration.’

§ Here is another instance of the negligent use of the pro-
nouns exetvos and odtos noticed above (note 1). In the modern
text this is altered, besides other changes intended as im-
provements upon the ornate description following. We have
retained the original text throughout.

8 Ov ry ea dé HOvov ovdé TH bye Tépmet (Say. TepTo.to av) TOTE
0 TOLOUTOS, GANG Kal (ev B. C.) t@ caépate avTe Tov Tpos TOY Keres
@va opavtos, (Tov 7. T. A, Oo. OM. Sav. with ‘full stop at avr@.}
éxewvov (yap add. B. Sav.) maAdov avinatk. 7. A. Savile’s read-
ing, adopted by Ben. rests on the sole authority of the New
College Ms. and is manifestly a correction, as the Paris Edito:
remarks. (This Ms. has the clause tod ... . op@vtos, bul
dotted for correction or omission, and the yapis added by<
later hand.) But the passage seems to be incurably corrupt,
and only so much of the sense can be guessed at, that the de-
light is said not only to affect the eye, but to be felt through
the whole frame of the beholder.


Homi y VI.]


earth. There is withal a sound of a different
kind, when water from the mountain-steep,
borne by its own force through ravines,
gently plashes over its pebbly bed with lulling
‘noise, and so relaxes our frame with the
pleasurable sensations, as quickly to draw
over our eyes the soft languor of slumber.
You have heard the description with pleas-
ure: perhaps also it has made you enamored
of solitude. But sweeter far than this soli-
tude is the soul * * of the long-suffering.
For it was not for the sake of describing a
meadow, nor for the sake of making a display
of language, that we have broached this simili-
tude: but the object was, that, seeing how
great is the delight of the long suffering, and
how, by converse with a long suffering man,
one would be far more both delighted and
benefited, than by frequenting such spots,
ye may follow after such men. For when not
even a breath of violence proceeds from such
a soul, but mild and engaging words, then
indeed does that gentle softness of the zephyr
find its counterpart: entreaties also, devoid
of all arrogance, but forming the resemblance
to those winged warblers,—how is not this
far better? For not the body is fanned by
the soft breeze of speech; no, it refreshes
our souls! heated and glowing. A physi-
cian, by ever so great attention, could not so
speedily rid a man of the fever, as a patient
man would cool, by the breath of his own
words, a person who was passionate and burn-
ing with wrath. And why do I speak of a phy-
sician? Not even iron, made red-hot and
dipped into water, so quickly parts with its
heat, as does the passionate man when he
comes in contact with the soul of the long-
suffering. But as, if it chance that singing
birds find their way into the market, they
go for nothing there, just so is it with our
precepts when they light upon souls addicted
to wrathful passions. Assuredly, sweeter is
gentleness than bitterness and frowardness.
—wWell, but the one was God’s bidding, the
other the devil’s. Do you see that it was
not for nothing that I said, even if there
were no devil or God in the case, the
things enjoined would be enough in them-
selves to (darocrjcar) revolt us? For the one
is both agreeable to himself, and serviceable
to others, the other displeasing to himself,
and hurtful to others. Nothing is more un-
pleasant than a man in a passion, nothing
more noisome, more odious, more shocking,


1 GAAa Wuxas avinow Bepnatvopevn Kat Céovca. (Béovga A.)
The latter words, ‘‘heated and glowing,’ as manifestly un-
suitable to avpa are omitted in the modern text. They seem to
be a fragment of asentence describing the heat of fever, or of
passion.


ideas Or LHe APOSTLES.


43


as also nothing: more pleasing than one who
knows not what it is to be in a passion.
Better dwell with a wild beast than with a
passionate man. For the beast, when once
tamed, abides by its law; but the man, no
matter how often you have tamed him, again
turns wild, unless? however he should of
himself settle down into some such habit (of
gentleness). For as a bright sunny day and
winter with all its gloom, so are the soul of
the angry and that of the gentle. However,
let us at present look not to the mischievous
consequences resulting to others, but to
those which affect the persons themselves :
though indeed it is also no slight mischief (to
one’s self) to cause ill to another: for the
present, however, let that be the considera-
tion. What executioner with his lash can so
lacerate the ribs, what red-hot lancets (63e/icxor)
ever so pierced the body, what madness can
so dispossess a man of his natural reason, as
anger and rage do? I know many instances
of persons engendering diseases by giving
loose to anger: and the worst of fevers are
precisely these. But if they so injure the
body, think of the soul! For do not argue
that you do not see the mischief, but rather
consider, if that which is the recipient of the
malignant passion is so hurt, what must be
the hurt sustained.by that which engenders it !
Many have lost their eyes, many have fallen
into most grievous disease. Yet he that
bears bravely, shal] endure all things easily.
But, however, both such are the troublesome
tasks the devil enjoins, and the wages he
assigns us for these is hell. He is both devil
and foe to our salvation, and we rather do his
bidding than Christ’s, Saviour as He is, and
Benefactor and Defender, and speaking as
He does such words, which are both sweeter,
and more reverend, and more profitable and
beneficial, and are both to ourselves and
to those who live in our company the greatest
of blessings. Nothing worse than anger, my
beloved, nothing worse than unseasonable
wrath. It will not have any long delay; it is
a quick, sharp passion. Many a time has a
mere word been blurted out in anger, which
needs for its curing a whole lifetime, and a
deed been done which was the ruin of the
man for life. For the worst of it is this, that
in a little moment, and by one act, and bya
single word, full oft has it cast us out from
the possession of eternal good, and brought


2 Any ci my eis Eéwy EavToY Tiva ToLa’THY KaTagTygee. Edd.
dmat els ef... . Kxataotyoas. “having settled himself
down into some such habit‘’” But the old reading is prefera-
ble. ‘“ You may pacify him again and again, but the fit is sub-
dued for the time, not the temper changed. There will bea
fresh outbreak by and bye, unless indeed by self-discipline
(éavrov cat.) he bring himself into a habit,” etc.


44


THE WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOnE


{Homity VII.


to nought a world of pains. Wherefore I
beseech you to do all you can to curb this
savage beast. Thus far, however, I have
spoken concerning meekness and. wrath; if
one should take in hand to treat of other
Opposites, as covetousness and the mad
passion for glory, contrasted with contempt of
wealth and of glory; intemperance’ with
sobriety; envy with benevolence; and _ to
marshal them each against its opposite, then


Behold how from the very things enjoined it
is plainly shown, that the one master is God,
the other the devil! Why then, let us do
God’s bidding, and not cast ourselves into
bottomless pits; but while there is time, let
us wash off all that defiles the soul, that we
may attain unto the eternal blessings, through
the grace and mercy of our Lord Jesus Christ,
with Whom to the Father and Holy Ghost
together be glory, power, honor, now and


one would know how great the difference. | ever, and world without end. Amen,


HOMME Vals


ACTS


“ Now when they heard these words (E. V. ‘this,’) they
were pricked in their heart, and said unto Peter
and to the rest of the Aposties, Men and brethren,
what shall we do?”


Do you see what a great thing gentleness
is? More than any vehemence, it pricks our
hearts, inflicts a keener wound. For as in the
case of bodies which have become callous,
the man that strikes upon them does not
affect the sense so powerfully, but if he first
mollify them and make them tender, then he
pierces them effectually; so in this instance
also, it is necessary first to mollify. But that
which softens, is not wrath, not vehement ac-
cusation, not personal abuse ; it is gentleness.
The former indeed rather aggravate the cal-
lousness, this last alone removes it. If then
you are desirous to reprove any delinquent,
approach him with all possible mildness. For
see here; he gently reminds them of the out-
rages they have committed, adding no com-
ment ; he declares the gift of God, he goes on
to speak of the grace which bore testimony to
the event, and so draws out his discourse to a
still greater length. So they stood in awe of
the gentleness of Peter, in that he, speaking
to men who had crucified his Master, and
breathed murder against himself and his com-
panions, discoursed to them in the character of
an affectionate father and teacher. Not merely
were they persuaded; they even condemned
themselves, they came to a sense of their past
behavior. For he gave no room for their an-
ger to be roused, and darken their judgment,
but by means of humility he dispersed, as it
were, the mist and darkness of their indigna-
tion, and then pointed out to them the daring
outrage they had committed. For so it is;
when we say of ourselves that we are injured,
the opposite party endeavor to prove that they


W337:


have not done the injury; but when we say,
we have not been injured, but have rather
done the wrong, the others take the contrary
line. If, therefore, you wish to place your
enemy (cic ayava) in the wrong, beware of ac-
cusing him; nay (ayévca), plead for him, he
will be sure to find himself guilty. There is a
natural spirit of opposition in man. Such was
the conduct. of: Peter. He did notjacense
them. harshly; on the contrary, he almost en-
deavored to plead for them, as far as was
possible. And this was the very reason that
he penetrated. into their souls. You will ask,
where is the proof that they were pricked? In
their own words; for what say they? “Men
and brethren, what shall we do?” Whom
they had called deceivers, they call ‘“breth-
ren:” not that hereby they put themselves
on an equality with them, but rather by way
of attracting their brotherly affection and
kindness: and besides, because the Apostles
had deigned to call them by this title. And,
say they, “What shall we do?” ‘They did
not straightway say, Well then, we repent;
but they surrendered themselves to the disci-
ples. Just as a person on the point of ship-
wreck, upon seeing the pilot, or in sickness
the physician, would put all into his hands,
and do his bidding in everything; so have
these also confessed that they are in extreme
peril, and destitute of all hope of salvation.
They did not say, How shall we be saved?
but, “‘What shall we do?”’ Here again Peter,
though the question is put to all, is the man to
answer. ‘ Repent,” says he, “and be bap-


1 This is strangely rendered by Ben. At alioguin, post-
guam illos sic appellare dignati fuerant, et dixerant. Eras-
mus rightly, £¢ aditer: guoniam illi eos primum ita appellare
dignati fuerunt. CEcumen. ‘And because Peter in the be-
ginning of his discourse had so addressed them, hence they
themselves had a handle for so addressing the Apostles.”


Hominy VII.] THE


Oa One PEL ee OST LES:


wn


tized every one of you, in the name of Jesus
Christ.” (v. 38.) He does not yet say, Be-
neve: but; “ie baptized every one of you.’

For? this ‘they received in baptism. Then he
speaks of the gain; ‘“ For the remission of
sins, and ye shall receive the gift of the Holy
Ghost.” If you are to receive a gift, if bap-
tism conveys remission, why delay? He next
gives a persuasive turn to his address, adding,

“For the promise is unto you” (v. 39):
for he had spoken of a promise above.

““ And to your children,” he says: the gift is
greater, when these are to be heirs of the
blessings. ‘ And to all,” he continues, “that
are afar off: ” if to those that are afar off,
much more to you that are near: “even as
many as the Lord our God shall call.” Ob-
serve the time he takes for saying, ‘‘’To those
that are afar off.” It is when he finds them
conciliated and self-accusing. For when the
soul pronounces sentence against itself, no
longer can it feel envy. “And with many
other words did he testify, and exhort, say-
ing.” (v. 40.) Observe how, throughout, the
writer studies brevity, and how free he is from
ambition and display. ‘“ He testified and ex-
horted, saying.” This is the perfection of
teaching, comprising something of fear and
something of love. “Save yourselves from
this untoward generation.” He says nothing
of the future, all is about the present, by
which indeed men are chiefly swayed; he
shows that the Gospel releases from present ?
evils as well. ‘Then they that gladly re-
ceived his word were baptized ; and the same
day there were added unto them about three
thousand souls.” (v. 41.) Think you not this
cheered the Apostles more than the miracle ?
“And they continued steadfastly and with one
accord in the Apostles’ doctrine and fellow-
ship.” * (v. 42.) Here are two virtues, per-
severance and concord. “In the Apostles’
doctrine,” he says: for they again taught


1 Tovto yap év TO Barticuate mapédaBov. St. Chrysostom
cannot mean to say ‘that they received the gift of faith in bap-
tism, not having it before: (see Mark xvi. 16, Acts viii. 37.)
But the meaning seems to be, with allusion to the ¢radztio
syméolz in baptism, ‘‘ He does not as yet say, “* Believe:”’ the
question, ** Dost thou believe ?’’ would be put to them in their
baptism, when the Creed was delivered to them. So that the
mnypction ““Believe”’ is in fact included in the ‘‘Be bap-
tized ve
2 We adopt the reading of A. N. The other Mss. have kai
TOV TapovTwY Kal TMY weAAOVTWY amradAaTTeEL Kaka@v, ‘both from
present and from future evils.” Below, v. 42, o“o0@vuador,
which Chrys. seems to have had in his copy, was probably de-
rived into this verse after mpooxapr. from mpogxapr. 04.09. v. 46.

* The exact force of xowwwvia here has been much disputed.
By many it is thought to mean communication (to the needy)
in the having all things common (xowa), Ols., Lechler, et al.
By others it is understood to refer to the Lord’s Supper, but
against this view is the fact that co.wwvia did not become a
name for the sacrament until the third or fourth century.
Others render: /¢d/owshzp understanding either the participa-
tion in common meals Givieas) or the enjoyment of mutual
Caeetan’ helpfulness and encouragement—the fellowship of

hristian friendship. So Bene, Mey., Hack., Gloag. his
view is the preferable one.—G. B. S.


them; ‘‘and fellowship, and in breaking of
bread, and in prayer.” All in common, all
*|with perseverance. “And fear came upon
every soul”’ (v. 43): of those that believed.
For they did not despise the Apostles, like
common men, nor did they fix their regard on
that which was visible merely. Verily, their
thoughts were kindled into a glow. And as
Peter had before spoken much, and declared
the promises, and the things to come, well
might they be beside themselves with fear.
The wonders also bore witness to the words :
‘““Many wonders and signs were done by the
Apostles.” As was the case with Christ; first
there were signs, then teaching, then wonders ;
so was it now. “And all that believed were
together, and had all things common.” (v. 44.)
Consider what an advance was here immedi-
ately! For the fellowship was not only in
prayers, nor in doctrine alone, but also in
(rodcreia) social relations. “And sold their
possessions and goods, and parted them to all
men, as every man had need.” See what
fear was wrought inthem! ‘“ And they parted
them,” he says, showing the (7a oikovouikov) Wise
management: ‘‘As every man had need.”
Not recklessly, like some philosophers among
the Greeks, of whom some gave up their land,
others cast into the sea great quantities of
money; but this was no contempt of riches,
but only folly and madness. For universally
the devil has made it his endeavor to dispar-
age the creatures of God, as if it were impossi-
ble to make good use of riches. ‘And con-
tinuing daily with one accord in the temple ”
(v. 46), they enjoyed the benefit of teaching.
Consider how these Jews did nothing else
great or small, than assiduously attend at the
temple. For, as having become more earnest,
they had increased devotion also to the place.
For the Apostles did not for the present pluck
them away from this object, for fear of injur-
ing them. ‘“ And breaking bread from house
to house, did take their portion of food with
gladness and singleness of heart, praising
God, and having favor with all the people.”

(v. 47.) It seems to me that in mentioning
“bread,” he here signifies fasting and hard
life; for they “took their portion of food,”
not of dainty fare. ‘‘With gladness,” he says.
Seest thou that not the dainty fare, but the
(rpodiye ov tpvenc) food made the enjoyment.
For they that fare daintily are under punish-
ment and pain; but not so these. Do you see
that the words of Peter. contain this also,
namely, the regulation of life? [And single-


3 Of our Mss. N. E. have the true reading, remvpwro, which
is attested by the Catena: the rest, memwpwro ‘* were hard-
ened.”’


46


THE ‘WORKS ‘OF UST: /\CHRBXSOSTOM:


[HomiLy VIT.


ness of heart.”] For no gladness can exist
where there is no simplicity. How had they
“favor with all the people?” On account of
their alms deeds. For do not look to the fact,
that the chief priests for envy and spite rose
up against them, but rather consider that
“they had favor with the people.”—‘“ And
the Lord added to the Church daily (é7i ra aire)
[together] such as should be saved.—And_!? all
that believed were together.” Once more,
the unanimity, the charity, which is the cause
of all good things ! *

[““ Now when they heard this,” etc. ‘‘ Then
Peter said unto them,” etc.] (Recapitulation,
v. 37.) What had been said was not enough.
For those sayings indeed were sufficient to
bring them to faith ; but these are to show
what things the believer behooves to do. And
he said not, In the Cross, but, ‘‘In the name
of Jesus Christ let every one of you be bap-
tized.” (v. 38.) And he does not put them
continually in mind of the Cross, that he may
not seem to reproach them, but he says sim-
ply, ‘“ Repent: and why? That we may be
punished? No: “And let each of you be
baptized in the name of Jesus Christ, for the
remission of sins.” And yet quite other is the
law of this world’s tribunals: but in the case
of the Gospel proclamation (kypiyyaroc) ; when
the delinquent has confessed, then is he
saved! Observe how Peter does not instantly
hurry over this, but he specifies also the con-
ditions, and adds, “ Ye shall receive the gift
of the Holy Ghost;”’ an assertion accredited
by the fact, that the Apostles themselves had
received that gift. [‘‘ For the promise,” etc. |
(i30:) ) “he profitise,”i..e. «the gift ofthe
Holy Ghost.? So far, he speaks of the easy


1 This citation from v. 44. is not misplaced: it refers to the
words éwt 79 av7o with which in Chrysostom’s copy and many
considerable authorities, this verse ended. (‘O Kuptos mpoce. T.
ow. Kad nuépav emi 70 avTd. Tlétpos dé Kai “I. avéBavvov kc. T. A.
Lachm.)—In the opening of the next paragraph, the modern
text has: ‘‘ And with many other words he testified. This he
says, showing that what had been said,” etc. But it is evident
that the recapitulation begins here, with v. 37. and ra Aex@€vra,
and éxetva, mean the preceding discourse, v. 14-36. ; TadtTa, not
eae ‘many other words,’ v. 40. but, ‘‘ Repent and be bap-
tized...’

* The main lines of the picture which Luke here draws of
the Apostolic community are: (1) Constant teaching and ex-
hortation on the part of the Apostles. (2) Christian fellowship,
with prayer and the regular observance of the Lord’s Supper.
(3) The doing of miracles. (4) The contribution of all to the
common fund—not all at once, but gradually and as occasion
required—as the imperfects and ka@drt ay tis yxpelay évxev (Vv. 44)
show. (5) The confident hope and exultant joy with which
the work of the new kingdom was carried forward in the con-
viction that the Bospel was for all (v. 39). The macwy tots eis
“akpav must, we think, refer to the heathen (Calv., Beng., Lech.,
De W., Lange, Alf., Hack., Gl.) and not merely to distant mem-
bers of the Jewish nation (Baumg., Mey.).—G. B. S.

2 In the old text (Mss. and Catena) after ra@v 7Acté6vev Adywv
To kehadavov comes the clause tovrTo éa7, dyaiv, 7 Swpea Tod
“A. Ilv, where it is clearly misplaced; for 7d evKoAov x. 7. A. is,
sf Be baptized, and ye shall receive,’ etc., and réte émt Tov Biov
ayet refers to v. 40.: ‘‘ And with many other words,”’ of which
TAcLovwY Adywv the kedadarov is, ** Save yourselves,” etc.
Hence the clause must belong to v. 39. and accordingly the
Catena gives the whole passage from “Agwémiaros 6 Adyos to émi
To Bart. ef€pxovrar. as the comment on v. 38, 39. We have re-


part, and that which has with it a great gift; —
and then he leads them to practice : for it will —
be to them a ground of earnestness, to have
tasted already of those so great blessings
[“‘and with many other words did he testrfy,”
etc.] (v. 40). Since, however, the hearer
would desire to learn what was the sum and,
substance of these further words, he tells us
this: [‘‘Saying, save yourselves from this —
untoward generation.”| [“ They then, that
gladly received his words,” etc.] (v. 41) they
approved of what had been said, although
fraught with terror, and after their assent
given, proceed at once to baptism.2 ‘“ And
they continued” it is written, “ steadfastly in
the doctrine” (or, “teaching ”’) “ of the Apos-
tles” (v. 42): for it was not for one day, no
nor for two or three days that they were
under teaching as being persons who had.
gone over to a different course of life.+
[‘‘ And they continued with one accord in the
Apostles’ doctrine,” etc.] The expression is
not, duo “together,” but duofyuador, “ with
one accord ;” (“and daily,” he says [after-
wards], “they were continuing with one ac-
cord in the temple,”’) #. e. with onesoul.®° And
here again in his conciseness, he does not relate
the teaching given ; for as young children, the
Apostles nourished them with spiritual food.
“‘And fear came upon every soul” (v. 43):
clearly, of those, as well, who did not believe ;
namely, upon seeing so great a change all at
once effected, and besides in consequence of —
the miracles. [‘’ And all that believed were to- —
gether, and had all things in common,” etc.]
(v. 44.) They are all become angels on a sud-
den ; all of them continuing in prayer and hear-
ing, they saw that spiritual things are common,
and no one there has more than other, and
they speedily came together (ézi 70 aia), to the
same thing in common, even to the imparting
to all.° ‘And all the believing ” (v. 44), it says,


stored the proper order, and supplied the omitted citations.—
The modern text after 70 xehadatov, has kat tovtTo mpoatidnor,
Secxvis, O71 Swpea Tod ‘A. Ilv. ‘Since the hearer, etc. this
also he adds, showing that it is the gift of the Holy Ghost.’’—
But the ‘‘hearer”’ is the person hearing or reading the narra-
tive. :

3 Here E. strangely inserts the formula of recapitulation,
"AAN’ Ldwuev avwhev Ta Aeyoueva-: received by Sav., Ben. but
bracketted by Morel.

4 Here the Mss. have: ‘‘ And fear came,” etc., v. 43, with its
comment, which we have restored to its proper place.

5 Obxt Ouod dé, GAA’ Ouobvmadoy Hoav: ‘kaé’ nucpav Te Hyatv,
TpookapT. O“0Ovm. Ev TH Lepw@,’’ TOVTETTL, La WuX7. =
St. Chrys. here returns to v. 42. in which he read in his copy
the word ouobvuadov. Commenting on that expression, he
refers to v. 46 (as his remark on that verse above was that they
were taught, tys éidacxadias améAavov, in the Temple). Or
perhaps this clause may have been added by the scribe, be-
cause he did not find mpooxapr. o08. in v. 42, but did find it in
v. 46.—E. ** But he says not opov, but o“08@ since it is possible
to be o“od yet not ouo08., when people are divided in opinion.
And with words he exhorted. And here again,’’ etc. So Edd.

6 Emi rovrTo, émt To mace petadovvac B. C. D. F. N. Cat. on v.
46, but on v. 45, Cat. has émi 76 avto, which is doubtless the
true reading ; for which the innovator, not understanding it,
has ei 70 Ta avT@v mace Stadodvar. On emi 70 avTo compare the
comment on ch. iv. 32. in Hom. xi. §. 1.


Homity VIL] THe ACES OF

were ézi rdaird: and to see that this does not
mean that they were together in place, observe
what follows [“ And had all things common”).
“ All,” it says: not one with the exception of
another. This was an angelic common-
wealth, not to call anything of theirs their
own. Forthwith the root of evils was cut out.
By what they did, they showed what they had
heard: this was that which he said, “ Save
yourselves from this untoward generation.”

“ And daily continuing with one accord in the
temple.” (v. 46.) Since they are become
three thousand, they take them abroad now:
and! withal, the boldness imparted by the
Spirit being great: and daily they went up as
to asacred place, as frequently we find Peter
aud John doing this: for at present they dis-
turbed none of the Jewish observances. And
this honor too passed over to the place; the
eating in the house. In what house? In the
Temple Observe the increase of piety. They
cast away their riches, and rejoiced, and had
great gladness, for greater were the riches
they received without labor (azova Cat. al.
ayaa). None reproached, none envied, none
grudged; no pride, no contempt was. there.
As children they did indeed account them-
selves to be under teaching: as new born
babes, such was their disposition. Yet why
use this faint image? If you remember how
it was when God shook our city with an earth-
quake, how subdued all men were. (/n/ra,
Hom. xli. § 2.) Such was the case then with
those converts. No knavery, no villany
then: such is the effect. of fear, of affliction !
Not. talk .of “‘mine”-and “thine” then.
Hence gladness waited at their table; no one
seemed to eat of his own, or of another’s ;—
I grant this may seem a riddle. Neither did they
consider their brethren’s property foreign to
themselves; it was + the property of a Master ;
nor again deemed they aught their own, all
was the brethren’s. The poor man knew no
shame, the rich no haughtiness. This is glad-
ness. The latter deemed himself the obliged
and fortunate party; the others felt them-
sélves as honored herein, and closely were
they bound together. For indeed, because


1 aua tis tovTwy (N. and Cat. tov Lvevmaros) mappnoias
(mapovaias B.) moAARs ovans, Kad’ nuépav te x. T.A. B.C. D. F.N.
Cat. We have adopted the reading preserved by N. and the
Catena.—E. and Edd. ‘* Who also with boldness, seeing there


was great boldness now, daily went up and continued in the |


Temple.”

2 Kat avTH (l, auTy oe 7 TUN | €is Tov TOToy d€Bawve TO Ev TH OLlKW
egbieww* Toiw otk 5 ev ta Lep@ B. C. D. F. Cat. This y: eating
in the house” refers to the clause KA@vtes Te Kat’ olkov apTov.
If the passage be sound, Chrys. here represents that the Tem-
ple was poner by the breaking of bread (the Holy Eu-
charist ?), there—Edd. from E. kat airy S€ 7 €is Tov ToTOV TLLH
SveBarve mpos Tov Tod iepov Acomotynyv: ‘And the honor itself
paid to the place passed over to the Lord of the Temple.”

3 Edd. add, 76 Wuxpov pjua, ‘‘ That cold expression.”

4 Aeorotixa, i. e. of Christ their common Master.
Erasm. Erant enim ut dominorum, and so Ben.


But


PELE APOSTLES:


47


when people make doles of money, there are
apt to be insults, pride, grudging; therefore

says the Apostle, “Not grudgingly, or of
necessity.”—(2 Cor. ix. 7.) [‘‘ With gladness
and simplicity of heart,” etc.] See of how
many things he bears witness tothem! Gen-
uine faith, upright conduct, perseverance in ,
hearing, in prayers, in singleness, in cheerful-
ness.| -(“ Praising God.”] .(@yv\s47:) : Two
—|things there were which might deject them ;
their abstemious living, and the loss of their
property. Yet on both these accounts did
they rejoice. [And having favor with all

the people.”] For who but must love men of
this character, as common fathers? They
conceived no malice toward each other; they
committed all to the grace of God. [“ With
all the people.”] Fear there was none; yea,

though they had taken their position in the
midst of dangers.’ By szmgleness, however, he
denotes their entire virtue, far surpassing
their contempt of riches, their abstinence, and
their preseverance in prayer. For thus also
they offered pure praise to God: this is to
praise God. But observe also here how they
immediately obtain their reward. “ Having
favor with all the people.” They were en-
gaging, and highly beloved. For who would
not prize and admire their simplicity of char-
acter; who would not be linked to one in
whom was nothing underhand? ‘To whom
too does salvation belong, but to these? To
whom those great marvels? Was it not to
shepherds that the Gospel was first preached ?
and to Joseph, *-being a man of simple mind,
insomuch that he did not let a suspicion of
adultery frighten him into doing wrong?
Did not God elect rustics, those artless men ?
For it is written, ‘‘ Blessed is every simple
soul.” (Prov. xi. 25.) And again, “ He that
walketh simply, walketh surely.”” (Prov. x.
g.), “ True,” you will say, “but prudence also
is needed.” Why, what is simplicity, I pray
you, but prudence? For when you suspect
no evil, neither can you fabricate any: when
you have no annoyances, neither can you re-
member injuries. Has any one insulted you ?
You were not pained. Has any one reviled
you? You were nothing hurt. Has he envied
you? Still you had no hurt. Simplicity is a
high road to true philosophy. None so beau-
tiful in soul as the simple. For as in regard
of personal appearance, he that is sullen, and
downcast, and reserved (civvovc), even if he


5 cai tavTa ev pecas Kivdvvots eu BeBAnKoTwr avtT@v. Erasm.
omits the two last words: Ben. in media pericula conjectis.
The meaning is: ‘‘ Not even in the midst of dangers, which
they themselves had boldly charged, or, invaded.’

8 Although he speaks below of Joseph the Patriarch,
seems that the husband of Mary is meant here.


48


THE. WORKS -OF ST.) CHRYSOSTOse


[Homity VII.


be good-looking, loses much of his beauty ;
while he that relaxes his countenance, and
gently smiles, enhances his good looks ; so in
respect of the soul, he that is reserved, if he
have ten thousand good points, disfigures
them; but the frank and simple, just the re-
verse. A man of this last description may be
safely made a friend, and when at variance
easily reconciled. No need of guards and
outposts, no need of chains and fetters with
such an one; but great is his own freedom,
and that of those who associate with him.
But what, you will say, will such aman do if
he fall among wicked people? God, Who
has commanded us to be simple-minded, will
stretch out His hand. What was more guile-
less than David? What more wicked than
Saul? Yet who triumphed? Again, in
Joseph’s case; did not he in simplicity ap-
proach his master’s wife, she him with wicked
art? Yet what, I pray, was he the worse?
Furthermore, what more simple than was
Abel? what more malicious than Cain? And
Joseph again, had he not dealt artlessly with
his brethren? Was not this the cause of his
eminence, that he spoke out unsuspiciously,
while they received his word sin malice? He
declared once and again his dreams unreserv-


edly ; and then again he set off to them carry-
ing provisions ; he used no caution ; he com-
mitted all to God: nay, the more they held


him in the light of an enemy, the more did he
treat them as brothers. God had power not
to have suffered him to fall into their hands ;
but that the wonder might be made manifest,
how, though they do their worst, he shall be
higher than they: though the blow do come
upon him, it comes from another, not from
himself. On the contrary, the wicked man
strikes himself first, and none other than him-
sel. ** Kor?) alone,’ itcis: Said)“ shall <he
bear his troubles.” (Prov. ix. 12.) Ever in
him the soul is full of dejection, his thoughts
being ever entangled: whether he must hear
aught or say aught, he does all with com-
plaints, with accusation. Far, very far from
such do friendship and harmony make their
abode: but fightings are there, and enmities,
and all unpleasantness. They that are such
suspect even themselves. To these not even
sleep is sweet, nor anything else. And have
they a wife also, lo, they are enemies and at
war with all: what endless jealousies, what
unceasing fear! Aye, the wicked, zxovypic
has his name from -zoveiv, “‘ to have trouble.”
And, indeed, thus the Scripture is ever calling

“ wickedness ” by the name of labor; as, for


A. omits this and the
‘so is he even to himself an en-
Of such an one the soul is,’’ etc. so Edd.


1 Movos yap, dyaiv, avrAnoet Ta Kaka,
next clause: E. substitutes,
emy.


“Under his tongue is toil and
ae

and again, “In the midst of them
OO (ES Gael a 3 seh einen


instance,
labors?;
is toil and labor.
lyst}

Now if any one should wonder, whence
those who had at first been of this last class,
now are so different, let him learn that afflic-
tion was the cause, affliction, that school-
mistress of heavenly wisdom, that mother of
piety. When riches were done away with,
wickedness also disappeared. True, say
you, for this is the very thing I am asking
about; but whence comes all the wickedness
there is now? How is it that it came into
the minds of those three thousand and five
thousand straightway, to choose virtue, and
that they simultaneously became Christian
philosophers, whereas now hardly one is to be
found? how was it that they then were in such
harmony? What was it, that made them res-
olute and active? What was it that so sud-
denly inflamed them? The reason is, that
they drew near with much piety; that honors
were not so sought after as they are now; that
they transferred their thoughts to things
future, and looked for nothing of things pres-


ent. This is the sign of an ardent mind, to
encounter perils; this was their idea of
Christianity. We take a different view, we


seek our comfort here. The result is, that
we shall not even obtain this, when the time
iscome. ‘‘What are we to do?” asked those
men. We, just the contrary—‘ What shall
we do?” What behooved to be done, they
did. We, quitc the reverse,? Those meng
condemned themselves, despaired of saving —
themselves. This is what made them such as
they were. They knew what a gift they had
received. But how can you become like them,
when you do everything in an opposite spirit ?
They heard, and were forthwith baptized.
They did not speak those cold words which
we do now, nor did they contrive delays
(p. 47, note 3); and yet they had heard all
the requirements: but that word, “Save
yourselves from this generation,’ made them
to be not sluggish; rather they welcomed the
exhortation; and that they did welcome it,
they proved by their deeds, they showed what


2 We adopt the reading preserved by A. N. (what is aiso
contained in the modern text with additions meant for expla-
nation.) *‘ Té rowjowpmev ;’’ npwrwv exetvor. “Huets dé 70 évavtiov*
Tc worjocomev ; “Amep eder yevéoOar emoiovy. ‘Hyets de rovvartiov.
The modern text, after np. exetvor, inserts, amoyivwoxKortes
éavtwy: ‘‘ despairing of themselves:’’ and, after the second
question, A€youev, ETFLOELKVULEVOL m™pos Tovs TapovTas, Kal péeya
dpovoayres ed éavtois: ‘*Say (we), showing off ourselves to
those present, and thinking great things of ourselves.’’ B.C.
omit, perhaps by oversight, the clauses between, Ti rorjowpev
(B. tt worjgomev); and, ‘ ‘Amrep edeu. In the following sentences,
the force of the verbs xateyywoav, aréyvwoav, éyvwoav might ©
be rendered thus: ‘t They knew themselves guilty, knew that
in them was no power to save themselves—knew what a gift
they received.”’


Ilomity VIL]


manner of men they were. They entered at
once the lists, and took off the coat; whereas
we do enter, but we intend to fight with our
coat on. This is the cause that our antag-
onist has so little trouble, for we get entangled
in our own movements, and are continually
thrown down. We do precisely the same
thing as he who, having’ to cope with a man
frantic, breathing fire; and seeing him, a
professed wrestler, covered with dust, tawny,
stripped, clotted with dirt from the sand and
sun, and running down with sweat and oil and
dirt; himself, smelling of perfumes, should
put on his silken garments, and his gold
shoes, and his robe hanging down to his heels,
and his golden trinkets on the head, and so
descend into the arena, and grapple with him.
Such a one will not only be impeded, but
being taken up with the sole idea of not
staining or rending his fine clothes, will
tumble at the very first onset, and withal will
suffer that which he chiefly dreaded, the
damage of those his fond delights. The time
for the contest is come, and say, are you
putting on your silks? It is the time of
exercise, the hour of the race, and are you
adorning yourself as for a procession? Look
not to outward things, but to the inward.
For by the thoughts about these things the
soul is hampered on all sides, as if by strong
cords, so that she cannot let you raise a hand,
or contend against the adversary; and makes
you soft and effeminate. One may think him-
self, even when released from all these ties,
well off, to be enabled to conquer that impure
power. And on this account Christ too did
not allow the parting with riches alone to
suffice, but what saith He? “Sell whatso-
ever thou hast, and give to the poor, and come
and follow Me.” (Mark x. 21.) Now if,
even when we cast away our riches, ‘we are
not yet in a safe position, but stand still in
need of some further art and close practice ;
much more, if we retain them, shall we fail
to achieve great things, and, instead thereof,
become a laughing-stock to the spectators,
and to the evil one himself. For even though
there were no devil, though there were none
to wrestle with us, yet ten thousand roads on
all sides lead the lover of money to hell.
Where now are they who ask why the devil
was made (dari 6 0. yéyovev;)? Behold here the
devil has no hand in the work, we do it all our-
selves. Of a truth they of the hills might have
a right to speak thus, who after they had given
proof of their temperance, their contempt of
wealth and disregard of all such things, have


E. F. D. and Edd.


! mpos avdpa marvouevoy Exwv, TIP TVEOVTA,
omit these words.


4


cre et oor. Litt APOSTLES:


49


infinitely preferred to abandon father, and
houses, and lands, and wife, and children. Yet,
they are the last to speak so: but the men who
at no time ought to say it, these do say it.
Those are indeed wrestlings with the devil;
these he does not think worth entering into,
You will say, But it is the devil who instils
this same covetousness, Well, flee from it, do
not harbor it, O man. Suppose now, you
see one flinging out filth from some upper
story, and at the same time a person seeing it
thrown out, yet standing there and receiving it
all on his head: you not only do not pity him,
but you are angry, and tell him it serves him
right ; and, “ Do not be a fool,” everyone cries
out to him, and lays the blame not so much
on the other for shooting out the filth, as on
him for letting it come on him. But now, you
know that covetousness is of the devil; you
know that it is the cause of ten thousand evils;
you see him flinging out, like filth, his noisome
imaginations ; and do you not see that you
are receiving on your bare head his nastiness,
when it needed but to turn aside a little to
escape it altogether? Just as our man by
shifting his position would have escaped; so,
do you refuse to admit such imaginations,
ward off the lust. And how am [ to do this?
you will ask. Were you a Gentile, and had
eyes for things present alone, the matter per-
haps might be one of considerable difficulty,
and yet even the Gentiles have achieved as
much; but you—a man in expectation of
heaven and heavenly bliss—and you to ask,
‘“* How am I to repel bad thoughts?” Were I
saying the contrary, then you might doubt :
did I say, covet riches, ‘‘ How shall I covet
riches,’ you might answer, “seeing such
things as I do?” Tell me, if gold and
precious stones were set before you, and I
were to say, Desire lead, would there not be
reason for hesitation? For you would say,
How can I? But if I said, Do not desire it;
this had been plainer to understand. I do
not marvel at those who despise, but at those
who despise not riches. ‘This is the character
of a soul exceeding full of stupidity, no
better than flies and gnats, a soul crawling
upon the earth, wallowing in filth, destitute of
all highideas. What is ityou say? Are you
destined to inherit eternal life; and do you
say, how shall I despise the present life for
the future? What, can the things be put in
competition ?2 You are to receive a royal
vest ; and say you, How shall I despise these
rags? You are going to be led into the king’s


2 uy yap audypicta Ta mpayuato; Erasm. negligently, ox
sunt eque amabiles tlle res: Ben. num res sunt mutuo com-
parabiles ?


50


palace; and do you say, How shall I despise
this present hovel? Of a truth, we ourselves
are to blame in every point, we who do not
choose to let ourselves be stirred up ever so
little. For the willing have succeeded, and
that with great zeal and facility. Would that
you might be persuaded by our exhortation,


THE WORKS OF) ST.. CHRYSOST@GM:


[Homity \ [.f.


and succeed too, and become imitators of
those who have been successful, through the
grace and mercy of our Lord Jesus Christ,
with Whom to the Father and the Holy
Ghost together be glory, and power, and
honor, now and ever, and world without end.
Amen.


ROVE ys ehiae


ACTS


“Now Peter and John went up together into the tem-
ple, at the hour of prayer, being the ninth hour.”


EVERYWHERE we find these two Apostles in
great harmony together. “To him Simon
Peter beckoned.” (John xiii. 24.) These two
also “came together to the sepulchre. (Ib.
xx. 3 ef seg.) And concerning John, Peter
said unto Christ, “‘ And what shall this man
do?” (Ib. xxi. 21.) Now as for the other
miracles, the writer of this book omits them ;
but he mentions the miracle by which they
were all’ putin commotion. Observe again
that they do not come to them purposely ; so
clear were they of ambition, so closely did
they imitate their Master. Why now did they
go up to the temple? Did they still live as
Jews? No, but for expediency (ypyciuwc).* A
miraculous sign again takes place, which both
confirms the converts, and draws over the rest ;
and such, as they were a sign for having
wrought.” The disease was in the nature of
the man, and baffled the art of medicine.
He had been forty years lame (ch. iv. 20),
as the writer says afterwards, and no one
during all that time had cured him. And the
most obstinate diseases are those which are
born with men. It was a great calamity,
insomuch that even to provide for himself his
necessary sustenance was impossible for him.


1 Gécumen, has preserved the true reading: ad’ ob mavtes
exuvnycav. Mss. and Cat. éxivnoev. (N. in the margin, by a
later hand, evikynge.) E. and Edd. 6 d€ roAAny eixe Thy ExmAnéw
Kal mavtas ef€vice, TOUTO A€yet.

* There is no evidence that Peter and John attended upon
the Jewish worship simply ‘‘ for expediency.’’ There is much
to the contrary. he early Christians had no idea of ceasing
to be Jews. Peter at this time supposed it to be necessary for
the Gentile converts to be circumcised (Gal. ii.). It was inci-
dent to the gradual separation of Christianity from Judaism
that those who had been zealous adherents of the latter should
suppose that its forms were still to be the moulds of the new
system. They were not for this reason less honestly and gen-
uinely Christian, but had not yet apprehended the principle of
Christian liberiy as Paul afterward expounded it. The point
of difficulty was not so much the entrance of the Gentiles into
the Kingdom of God as the question whether they should
enter through the gate of Judaism —G. B. S.

2 kai olov onuetoy joav moijoavtes. FE. ‘* And a miracle such
as they had not yet wrought.’’ So Edd.


WO ott


The man was conspicuous both from the
place, and from his malady. Hear how the
matter is related. “And a certain man, lame
from his mother’s womb, was carried, whom
they laid daily at the gate of the temple which
is called Beautiful, to ask alms of them that
entered into the temple.” (v. 2.) He sought
to receive alms, and he did not know who the
men were. “Who seeing Peter and John
about to go into the temple, asked an alms.
And Peter, fastening his eyes upon him, with
John, said, Look on us.” (v. 3, 4.) Yet, not
even so were the man’s thoughts elevated, but
he persisted in his importunity. For such is
poverty; upon a refusal, it compels people
still to persist. Let this put us to shame who
fall back in our prayers. But observe, I pray
you, Peter’s gentleness: for he said, “ Look
on us.” So truly did their very bearing, of
itself, betoken their character. “And he
gave heed unto them, expecting to receive some-
thing of them. Then Petersaid, Silver and gold
have I none; but such as I have I give thee.”
(v. 5, 6.) He did not say, I give thee some-
thing much better than silver or gold: but
what? “In the name of Jesus Christ of
Nazareth, rise up and walk. And he took
him by the right hand, and lifted him up.”
(v. 7.) Such was also the way of Christ.
Often He healed by word, often by an act, often
also He stretched forth the hand, where men
were somewhat weak in faith, that the cure
might not appear to be spontaneous. “ And
he took him by the right hand, and lifted him
up.” This act made manifest the Resurrec-
tion, for it was an image of the Resurrection.
“And immediately his feet and ankle bores
received strength. And he leaping up stood,
and walked.” (v. 8.) Perhaps it was by way
of trying himself that he put it thus to further
proof, whether perchance the thing done
might not be to no purpose. His feet were
weak; it was not that he had lost them.


Homiry VIII.]


Some say that he did not even know how to
walk.! “And entered with them into the
temple.” Of a truth it was marvellous. The
Apostles do not urge him ; but of his own ac-
cord he follows, by ‘the act of following point-
ing out his benefactors. “ And leaping and
praising God;” not admiring them, but God
that wrought by them. The man was grateful.
bs Now® Peter and John went up together
into the temple,” etc.] You observe. how
they continued in prayer. ‘“ The ninth
hour:” there they prayed together. [‘ And
a certain man,” etc.] The man was in the act
of being carried at that instant. [‘‘ Whom
they laid daily:”] (his bearers carried him
away :) [‘“‘at the gate,” etc.] just when people
went into the temple. And that you may not
suppose that they carried him for some other
purpose, but that it was in order that he
might receive alms, hear what the writer says
‘so that he might receive alms of those enter-
ing into the temple.” (Recapitulation of vv.
1-8.) And this is the reason why he>~ also
makes mention of the places, to give evidence
of what he relates. ‘* And how was it,” you
may ask, “that they did not present him to
Christ ?”’ Perhaps they were certain unbeliev-
ing men, that haunted the temple, as in fact
neither did they present him to the Apostles,
when they saw them entering, after having
done such great miracles. ‘“ He asked,” it is
written, “to receive an alms.” (v. 3.) Their
bearing marked them as certain devout and
righteous men. [‘‘And Peter fastening his
eyes upon him, with John, said,” etc.] (Wv. 4,
5.) And observe how John is everywhere
silent, while Peter makes excuse for him also;
“Silver and gold,” he says, “have I none.”
(v. 6.) He does not say, I have none here,
as we are wont to speak, but absolutely, I
havenone. “What then?” he might say, “ do
you take no notice of me, your suppliant ?”
Not so, but of what I have, receive thou. Do
you remark how unassuming Peter is, how he
makes no display even to the object of his
beneficence? [‘In the name,” etc. “ And
he took him by the hand,” etc.] (v. 7.) And
the mouth and the hand did all. Such® sort
of persons were the Jews ; lame, and the right


1 @cumen. ‘That he leaped was either because he was
incredulous of what had percuat or, by way of trying his
power of stepping more sure and firmly, or, the man did not
know how to walk.’

2 E.and Edd. “ But let us look over again what has been
said. ‘They went up,’ he says, ‘at the hour of prayer, the’ninth
hour.’ Perhaps just at that time they carried and laid the lame
man, when people,” etc. In the old text the clause avrov
Baarécovres amnveykay (which should be oi Baor. avrov) seems
meant to explain xaé” yuepav-
same persons carried him away.

3 E.and Edd. rovovrtot twes joav Kai
xwAevorvtes . . . of de (for avTol) wadAov xpymata aitovar . . . ot
kai dca tovto . . . ‘*Such sort of people were also [the] Jews,
being lame (i e. like many beggars among ourselves): even


Sjovsaior (for ot ’I.)


TEE ACTS OF TE


they bore him daily, and the |
| found it difficult to believe that it was he, and yet they could


| this word, emi Tov moAts yywpiCouevwr:


APOSTLES. 5


thing being to ask for health, these same ask
for money, grovelling on the ground: for this
it was that they beset the temple—to get
money. What then does Peter? He did not
despise him ; he did not look about for some
rich subject; he did not say, If the miracle is
not done to some great one (eic éxeivov), noth-
ing great is done: he did not look for some
honor from him, no, nor heal him in the
presence of people ; for the man was at the
entrance, not where the multitude were, that
is, within. But Peter sought no such object;
nor upon entering did he proclaim the matter:
no, it was by his bearing that he attracted the
lame man to ask. And the wonder is, that
he believed so readily. For those who are
set free from diseases of long standing, hardly
believe their very eyesight. Once healed, he
remains with the Apostles, giving thanks to
God. “And he entered,” it is said, “ with
them into the temple, walking, and leaping,
and praising God.” (v. 8.) Observe how
restless he is, in the eagerness of his delight,
at the same time shutting the mouths of the
Jews. Also, that he leaped, was to prevent
the suspicion of hypocrisy; for after all, this
was beyond the possibility of deception. For
if previously he was totally unable to walk,
even when hunger pressed hard (and indeed
he would not have chosen to share with his
bearers the proceeds of his begging, if he had
been able to manage for himself), this holds
still more in the present case. And how
should he have feigned in behalf of those who
had given him no alms? But the man was
grateful, even after his recovery. And thus
on either side his faith is shown, both by his
thankfulness, and by the recent event.

He was so‘ well known to all, that “ they
recognized him. And all the people,” it says,
“saw him walking and praising God; and
they recognized (ézeyivwoxov) that it was he
which sat for alms at the Beautiful gate of the
temple.” (v.g.) It is well said, “ they recog-
nized,” inasmuch as he was one unknown now
by reason of what had happened: for we use
this term with regard to objects, which we
find a difficulty in recognizing. [And they
were filled with wonder and amazement at


when they have only to ask for health, yet they rather ask for
money . .. who even for this reason beset the temple,” etc.
But the meaning seems rather to be: ‘‘ See here an emblem of
the Jews. Lame, and needing but,” etc.

4 oUTw TagL yywpimos Hy OTe ereyivwoxov, A. B. C. D. F. Sav.
Morel. Ben. But Commelin. and Ed. Par. Ben. 2. after Erasm.
adopt the reading of E. ov win mace yrwptmos jv o8ev kat; be-
cause of the following comment on emeyivwoKov. But the
meaning is: They were all acquainted with him (it could not
be otherwise): but seeing him walking and leaping, they
not doubt it. This is well denoted by emeyivwoxov - for we use
strange as it was, they
were satisfied thatit was he, the man whom they all knew so
well.


52


THE WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOsSTOM


[Homity VIII.


that which had happened unto him.’’] Needs
must it be believed that’ the name of Christ
remits sins, seeing it produces even such
effects as this. (‘And as he held Peter and
John, all the people came together at the
porch that is called Solomon’s, greatly won-
dering.” (v. 11.) From his good feelings
and love towards the Apostles, the lame man
would not leave them; perhaps he was thank-
ing them openly, and praising them. ‘“ And
all the people,” it is said, ‘‘ran together unto
them. And when Peter saw them, he an-
swered.” (v. 12.) Again it is he who acts,
and addresses the people.

And in the former instance, it was the cir-
cumstance of the tongues that aroused them
to hearing, now it was this miracle ; then, he
took occasion to speak from their accusations :
now, from their supposition. Let us then con-
sider, in what this address differs from the
former, and in what it agrees with that. The
former was held in a house, before any one
has come over, and before they themselves
have wrought anything; this, when all are
wondering, and the healed man is standing
by; when none doubt, as in the other case,
where some said ‘** These men are full of new
wine.” (Acts xii..13.) At the one, he was
surrounded by all the Apostles as he spoke ;
but at this, he has John alone; for by this
time he is bold, and become more energetic.
Such is the nature of virtue; once started, it
advances, and never stops. Observe also
how it was divinely ordered, that the miracle
should take place in the temple, that others
also might wax bold, while the Apostles work,
not in holes (ei¢ xaradicece) and corners, and in
secret : though not in the interior of the temple
either, where the greater number were. How
then, I pray you, was it believed? The man
himself who was healed proclaimed the bene-
fit. For there was no reason why he should
lie, nor why he should have joined a different
set of people. ? Either then it was because of
the spaciousness of the place, that he there
wrought the miracle, or because the spot was
retired. And observe the event. They went
up for one object, and they accomplished
another. Thus also did Cornelius: he prayed
ace tasted 2). * *)-*) . Buti hitherto.) they


1 "Eder mearevOnvar dud71, B. C. dt ore A. This seems to be the
comment on the remaining clause of v. ro, which we have sup-
plied: but the meaning is obscure. The modern text has édec
your 7, ort.

2 ovde yap av eWevoato, ovd’ av én’ aAAous Twas HAGev. It is
not clear who are the adAdAou tives - and something is wanting.
In fact, this part of the Homily is very defective. The next
sentence seems to refer to the mention of the porch called Sol-
omon’s, but evidently supposes something preceding: e. g.
“The miracle was performed at the Beautiful Gate, beside
which was the Porch called Solomon’s.”’

SE. and Edd. KopvyAtos adda vyotevwy nixero, kal dAAa Opa.
‘Cornelius prayed with fasting. for one object: and sees a
vision of something other than he thought for,”


always call Him, “of Nazareth.” “In the
name of Jesus Christ of Nazareth,” said Peter,
walk, For in the first instance, the thing
required was, that He should be believed in.
Let us not, I pray you, give over at the
beginning of the story:* and if one has
named some particular achievement of virtue,
and then has dropped it for awhile, let us begin
over again. If we get into the right mood
(év ége-), we Shall soon arrive at the end, soon
reach the summit. For earnestness, it is said,
begets earnestness, and dulness begets dulness.
He who has effected some little reformation,
thereby receives encouragement to approach
greater things, and thence again to go on
something more than that; and just as it is
with fire, the more wood it lays hold on, the
more vehement it becomes, so likewise zeal,
the more pious reflections it kindles, the
more effectually is it armed against their
opposites. As, for example: There are set
in us, like so many thorns, perjury, falsehood
hypocrisy, deceit, dishonesty, abusiveness,
scoffing, buffoonery, indecency, scurrility ;
again under another head, covetousness,
rapacity, injustice, calumny, insidiousness ;
again, wicked lust, uncleanness, lewdness,
fornication, adultery ; again, envy, emulation,
anger, wrath, rancor, revenge, blasphemy,
and numberless others. If we effect a refor-
mation in the first instances, not only in them
will the success have been achieved, but
through them in the following cases also.
For reason has then gained more strength to
overthrow those other vices. For instance, if
he, who has frequently sworn, once extirpates
that satanic habit, he has not only gained this
point, but a habit of piety in other respects
will have been brought in. For no one, I
suppose, averse to swearing would easily con-
sent to do any other wicked act; he will feel
a reverence for the virtue already acquired.
Just as the man who wears a beautiful robe,
will blush to roll himself in the mire; so is it
also here. From this beginning he will come.
to learn not to be angry, not to strike, not to
insult. For if once he has come right in little
matters, the whole affair is done. Often,
however, something of this sort takes place,
that a person has once reformed, and then
again through carelessness falls back into the
old sins but too readily, so that the case be-
comes irremediable. For instance, we have


_ 4 It can hardly be imagined that St. Chrysostom’s meaning
is correctly reported here. “Ev apxy tov dimynuatos, can only
mean, In the beginning of the narrative (of this miracle). It
seems that the case of this man, who at first lies at the gate of
the temple, unable,to stir, and in the end, enters with the
Apostles walking and leaping and praising God, furnished the
theme for the ethical part of the discourse. ‘There is the like
cure for our souls: let us not give over for want of success in
the first attempt, but begin again after every failure.’’


Homity VIII.]


made it a law to ourselves not to swear; we
have got on well, for some three, or even four
days; after that being hard put to it, we
scattered away the whole of our collected
gain ; we then fall into indolence and reckless-
ness. Still itis not right to give over; one
must set to work zealously again. For it is
said, he that has built up a house, and then
sees his building pulled down, will have less
spirit for building again. Yes, but for all this,
one must not be dispirited, but must once more
set to work zealously.

Let us then lay down daily laws for our-
selves. For a time let us begin with the
easier. Let us retrench all that superfluity of
paths, and put a bridle on our tongues ; let no
one swear by God. Here is no outlay, here
is no fatigue, here is no cost of time. It is
sufficient to will, and all is done. It is a
matter of habit. I beseech and entreat you,
let us contribute thus much of zeal. Tell me,
if I had bid you contribute your money, would
not each one of you readily cast in according
to his ability? If you saw me in extreme
danger, would you not, if it had been possible,
have cut off your own flesh to give me?
Well, I am in danger now, and in great dan-
ger, such indeed that, were I withal confined
to a'dungeon, or had I received ten thousand
stripes, or were a convict in the mines, I
could not suffer more. Reach me then the
hand. Consider how great is the danger, that
I should not have been able to reform this
which is least: I say “ least” in regard to the
labor required. What shall I have to say
hereafter, when thus called to account?
“Why did you not remonstrate? why did you
not enjoin? why did you not lay the law be-
fore them? why did you not check the diso-
bedient?” It will not be enough for me to
say, that Ididadmonish. It will be answered,
“You ought to have used more vehement
rebuke ; since Eli also admonished.” (1 Sam.
ii. 24.) But God forbid I should compare
you with Eli’s sons. Indeed, he did admonish
them and say, “ Nay, my sons, do not so;
evil is the report that I hear of you.” (1 Sam.
ili. 13.) But subsequently the Scripture saith,
that he did not admonish his sons: since he
did not admonish them severely, or with
threats. For is it not strange indeed, that in
the synagogues of the Jews the laws are in
such force, and whatever the teacher enjoins
is performed ; while here we are thus despised
and rejected? It is not my own glory that I
care for (my glory is your good report), but
it is for your salvation. Every day we lift up
our voice, and shout in your ears. But there
is none to hear. Still we take no strong
measures. I fear we shall have to give an


Viva to Ol THE “APOSTLES.


=


account at the coming Day of this excessive
and unseasonable leniency.

Wherefore, with a loud and clear voice, I
proclaim to all and testify, that those who are
notorious for this transgression, who utter
words which come “of the evil one,”
(Matt. v. 37.) (for such is swearing,) shall not
step over the threshold of the Church. Let
this present month be the time allowed you
for reforming in this matter. ‘Talk not to me,
“Necessity of business compels me to use
oaths, else people do not believe me.” To
begin with this, retrench those oaths which
come merely of habit. I know many will
laugh, but it is better to be laughed at now,
than wept for hereafter. They will laugh, who
are mad. For who, I ask, in his right mind
would laugh at the keeping of the command-
ment ? But suppose they do; why, it will not
be at us, but at Christ, that such men will
Jaugh. You shudder at the word! I knew
you would. Now if this law were of my mak-
ing, at me would be the laughing ; but if
Another be the Lawgiver, the jeering passes
over to Him. Yes, and Christ was once spit
upon, and smitten with the palm, smitten upon
the face. Now also He bears with this, and
it is no wonder (oidév azexdc)! For this, hell
is prepared ; for this, the worm that dieth not.
Behold, again I say and testify; let him laugh
that will, let him scoff that listeth. Hereunto
are we set, to be Jaughed at and mocked, to
suffer all things. We are “the offscouring”’
(1 Cor. iv. 13) of the world, as blessed Paul
says. If any man refuse to conform to this
order, that man I, by my word, as with a
trumpet’s blast, do prohibit to set foot over
the Church’s threshold, be he prince, be he
even the crowned head. Either depose me
from this station, or if I am to remain, ex-
pose me not to danger. I cannot bear to
ascend this throne, without effecting some
great reformation. For if this be impossible,
itis better to stand below. Nothing more
wretched than a ruler who does his people
no good. Do exert yourselves, and attend to
this, I entreat you; and let us strive, and
of a surety more will come of it. Fast, entreat
God (and we will do the same with you)
that this pernicious habit may be eradicated.
It is no great matter, } to become teachers to
the world; no small honor to have it said
everywhere, that really in this city there is
not a man that swears. If this come to pass,


1 Ovdév peya éoti yer. Sidack. THs oik. OV pixpov x. Tt. A. The
passage is manifestly corrupt, and the Mss. lend no assistance.
Ben. conjecturally, Vik7zl majus est guam esse doctores orbis:
nec parum, etc. Ed. Par. Ben. 2. Fortasse, ovxovv péya. Eut
it is more likely that something is wanting, e. g. ‘It is no
great matter [to be free from the vice of swearing. But to set
an example to others would be a great thing], to be teachers
herein of the whole world,” etc.


54 THE WORKS OF


you will receive the reward not only of your
own good works; indeed what I am to you,
this you will become to the world. Assuredly
others also will emulate you; assuredly you
will be a candle set upon a candlestick.

And is this, you will say, the whole matter?
No, this is not all, but this is a beginning of
other virtues. He who swears not, will cer-
tainly attain unto piety in other respects,
whether he will or not, by dint of self-respect
and awe. But you will urge that most men
do not keep to it, but fall away. Well, better
one man that doeth the will of the Lord, than
ten thousand transgressors. In fact, hereby
is everything subverted, everything turned
upside down, I mean, because after the
fashion of the Theatre we desire numbers,
not a select number. For what indeed will a
multitude be able to profit? Would you learn
‘that it is the saints, not the numbers, which
make the multitude? Lead out to war ten
hundred thousand men, and one saint, and let
us see who achieves the most? Joshua the
son of Nun went out to war, and alone
achieved all; the rest were of no_ use.
*Wouldest thou see, beloved, that the great
multitude, when it does not the will of God, is
no better than a thing of naught? I wish
indeed, and desire, and with pleasure would
be torn in pieces, to adorn the Church with a
multitude, yea, but a select multitude; yet if
this be impossible, that the few should be
select, is my desire. Do you not see, that it
is better to possess one precious stone, than
ten thousand farthing pieces? Do you
not see that it is better to have the eye sound,
than to be loaded with flesh, and yet deprived
of sight? Do you not see that it is better to


oT. CHRY SOSTOM [Homity IX.


have one healthy sheep, than ten thousand
with the murrain; that fine children, though
few, are better than many children diseased
withal; that in the Kingdom there will be
few, but in hell many? What have I to do
with a multitude? what profit therein?
None. Rather they are a plague to the rest.
It is as if one who had the option of ten
healthy persons of ten thousand sick folks,
should take to himself the latter in addition to
the ten. The many who do nothing well, will
avail us only for punishment hereafter, and
disgrace for the time being. For no one will
urge it asa point in our favor that we are
many; we shall be blamed for being unprofita-
ble. In fact, this is what men always tell us,
when we say, We are many; “aye, but bad,”
they answer.

Behold again: I give warning, and proclaim
with a loud voice, let no one think it a laugh-
ing matter: I will exclude and prohibit the
disobedient ; and as long as I sit on this
throne, I will give up not one of its rights. If
any one depose me from it, then I am no
longer responsible ; as long as I am responsi-
ble, I cannot disregard them; on account not
of my own punishment, but of your salvation.
For I do exceedingly long for your salvation.
To advance it, I endure pain and vexation.
But yield your obedience, that both here and
hereafter you may receive a plentiful reward,
and that we may in common reap eternal
blessings; through the grace and mercy of
the only-begotten Son of God; to Whom with
the Father and the Holy Ghost be glory,
power, and honor, now and ever, world with-
out end. Amen.


AMOMiLY ix:


NCA S) Vo: 194.


“ And when Peter saw it, he answered unto the people,
Ye men of Israel, why marvel ye at this, or why
look ye so earnestly on us, as though by our own
power or holiness we have made this man to
walk?”


THERE is greater freedom of speech in this
harangue, than in the former. Not that he
was afraid on the former occasion, but the
persons whom he addressed there, being jest-


Hence in the beginning of that address he
also bespeaks their attention by his preamble ;
‘Be this known unto you, and hearken to my
words.” (ch. ii. 14.) But here there is no
need of this management. (karacxevjc.) For
his hearers were not in a state of indifference.
The miracle had aroused them all; they were
even full of fear and amazement. Wherefore
also there was no need of beginning at that


ers and scoffers, would not have borne it.| point, but rather with a different topic; by


i *AAAa mod OéAets idetv. ayarnré, Ste 6 TOAUS OxAos Kk. T.
The modern text, ‘O moAvs dxAos, dyamnté, K. T.A.


A. |


which, in fact, he powerfully conciliated them,
namely, by rejecting the glory which was to


Homity [X.]


LHe ACTS, OF "THE APOSTLES.


be had from them. For nothing is so advan-
tageous, and so likely to pacify the hearers, as
to say nothing about one’s self of an honorable
nature, but, on the contrary, to obviate all
surmise of wishing to do so. And, in truth,
much more did they increase their glory by
despising glory, and showing that what had
just taken place was no human act, but a Di-
vine work; and that it was their part to join
with the beholders in admiration, rather than
to receive it from them. Do you see how
clear of all ambition he is, and how he repels
the honor paid to him? In the same manner
also did the ancient fathers; for instance,
Daniel said, ‘‘ Not for any wisdom that is in
me.” (Dan. ii. 30.) And again Joseph, “Do
not interpretations belong to God?” (Gen.
xi. 8.) And David, “When the lion and the
bear came, in the name of the Lord I rent
them with my hands.” (1 Sam. xvii, 34.) And
so likewise here the Apostles, ‘‘ Why look ye
so earnestly on us, as though by our own
power or holiness we had made this man to
walk?” (v. 13.) Nay, not even this ;’ for
not by our own merit did we draw down the
Divine influence. “The God of Abraham,
and of Isaac, and of Jacob, the God of our
fathers.” See how assiduously he thrusts
himself (cicw#ei) upon the fathers of old, lest he
should appear to be introducing a new doc-
trine. In the former address he appealed to
the patriarch David, here he appeals to Abra-
ham and the rest. ‘ Hath glorified His Ser-
vant? Jesus.” Again a lowly expression, like
as in the opening address.

But at this point he proceeds to enlarge
upon the outrage, and exalts the heinousness
of the deed, no longer, as before, throwing a
veil over it. This he does, wishing to work
upon them more powerfully. For the more
he proved them accountable, the better his
purpose were effected. ‘Hath glorified,” he
says, ‘His Servant Jesus, Whom ye delivered
up, and denied Him in the presence of Pilate,
when he was determined to let him go.” The
charge is twofold: Pilate was desirous to let
Him go; you would not, when he was willing.


1 AAXN’ ovde TovTo: ov yap, x. T A. This seems to refer to
<voeBeia: ‘* but not by our holiness any more than by our own
power.”’ The modern text: Ovdé todTo nueTepov, Hyaty* ov yap,
«.7. A, ‘* Not even this is our own, he says; for not,” etc.

2 or, Child, tov wacda. CEcumen. seems to have considered
this as a lowly title, for he says: ‘‘And of Christ he speaks
lowly, T@ mpogGervat, Tov Iaida.’’ But to this remark he adds,
“For that which in itself is glorified, can receive no addition
of glory.””"—Below, xa@ws év r@ wpoointw may refer to the pref-
atory matter (after the citation from Joel) of the sermon in
ch, ii.: see below, in the Recapitulation, whence we might
here supply, avwrépw éAeyer, “ ’Ingodv Tov Nag. x. 7. A.”” “As
in the opening address [above, he said: ‘Jesus of Nazareth, a
™man approved of God,’ etc.].’’ Or, ‘‘ like as in the opening
words of this discourse he speaks in lowly manner of them-
selves.’ CEcumen. ‘ He still keeps to lowlier matters, both
as to themselves, and as to Christ. As to themselves, in saying
that not by their own power they wrought the miracle. As to
<Christ,’! etc.


“But ye denied the Holy One and the Just,
and desired a murderer to be granted unto
you; and killed the Prince (or Author) of
Life : Whom God hath raised from the dead;
whereof we are witnesses.” (v. 14,15.) Ye
desired a robber instead of Him. He shows
the great aggravation of the act. Ashe has
them under his hand, he now strikes hard,
“The Prince’ of. Life,’ he saysiw an thiese
words he establishes the doctrine of the Res-


urrection. ‘*Whom God hath raised from the
dead.” (ch. il. 26.) ‘Whence doth this ap-
pear?” He no longer refers to the Prophets,


but to himself, inasmuch as now he has a
right to be believed. Before, when he
affirmed that He was risen, he adduced the
testimony of David; now, having said it, he
alleges the College of Apostles. ‘ Whereof
we are witnesses, he says.

“And His name, through faith in His
name, hath made this man strong, whom ye
see and know: yea, the faith which is by
Him hath given him this perfect soundness in
the presence of you all.” Seeking to declare
the matter (Sntov TO Tpaypya elev), he straightway
brings forward the sign: “In the presence,”
he says, “of you all.” As he had borne hard
upon them, and had shown that He Whom
they crucified had risen, again he relaxes, by
giving them the power of repentance; ‘“ And
now, brethren, I wot that through ignorance
ye did it, as did also your rulers.” (v. 17.)
This is one ground of excuse. The second is
of a different kind. As Joseph speaks to his
brethren, “God did send me before you
(Gen. xlv. 5); what in the former speech he
had briefly said, in the words, “‘ Him, being
delivered by the determinate counsel and fore-
knowledge of God, ye have taken,’’—this he
here enlarges upon: ‘‘ But what God before
had showed by the mouth of all His Prophets,
that His Christ should suffer, He hath so ful-
filled.” (v. 18.) At the same time showing,
that it was not of their doing, if this be
proved, that it took place after God’s counsel.
He alludes to those words with which they
had reviled Him on the Cross, namely. “ Let
Him deliver Him, if He will have Him; for
He said, I am the Son of God, If* He trust
in God, let Him now come down from the
cross.” (Matt. xxvii. 42, 43.) O foolish men,
were these idle words? It must needs so
come to pass, and the prophets bear witness


3 y Sevrépa érépa, A. B. C. (N. om.) Cat. Namely, the first,
“Ve did it ignorantly, as did also your rulers.” he second,
‘“Tt was ordered by the counsel of God:” as below, ** And he
puts this by way of apology,” etc. The Edd. have adopted
the absurd innovation, ‘*‘ Through ignorance ye did it:’ this
is one ground of excuse: the second is, ‘As did also your
rulers, ats. be

4 El werocdev, A. C. F. D. N. Cat. and viv after xaras. om.
CPs D, N: Cat.


56 THE: WORKS” OF


oT: CHRYSOSTOM


[Homity IX.


thereunto. Therefore if He descended not, it
it was for no weakness of His own that He
did not come down, but for very power. And
Peter puts this by way of apology for the Jews,
hoping that they may also close with what he
says. ‘He hath so fulfilled,” he says. Do
you see now how he refers everything to that


Source: .; * Repent ,;ye| therefore, he says,
“and be converted.” He does not add,
“from your sins;” but, “that your sins,


may be blotted out,” means the same thing.
And then he adds the gain: “So shall the
times of refreshing come from the presence of
the Lord.” (v.1 9.) This betokens them in a
sad state, brought low by many wars.* Forit is
to the case of one on fire, and craving com-
fort, that the expression applies. And see
now how he advances. In his first sermon,
he but slightly hinted at the resurrection, and
Christ’s sitting in heaven; but here he also
speaks of His visible advent. ‘ And He shall
send Jesus the Christ ordained? (for you),
“Whom the heaven must (2. e. must of neces-
sity) receive, until the times of the restitution
of all things.” The reason why He does
not now come is clear. ‘ Which God hath
spoken,” he continues, ‘by the mouth3 of
His holy prophets since the world began.
For Moses truly said unto the fathers, A
Prophet shall the Lord your God raise up
unto you of your brethren, like unto me; him
shall ye hear in all things whatsoever he shall
say unto you.” Before, he had spoken of
David, here he speaks of Moses. “OF all
things,” he says, “which He hath spoken.”
But he does not say, “which Christ,’ but,
““which God hath spoken* by the mouth of all
His holy prophets since the world began.”
(v. 20, 21.) Then he betakes him to the
ground of credibility, saying, “A Prophet shall
the Lord your God raise up unto you of your


1 TloA€uors attested by Cat. and CE&c. but A. has zévots, E.
and Edd. xaxois. In the following sentence, IIpos yap tov


Aoyos, B. and CE&c. read cAavaouevov, C. F. D. N. kAavoovpevor,
(“to him that shall weep,”’) A. cavoauevoy, Cat. cxavoovuevor,
the true reading. The scribes did not perceive that Chr. is
commenting on the word avawvéews, “refrigeration,” as im-
plying a condition of burning: hence the alteration, cAavodpe-
vov, or in the ** Doric” form (Aristoph.) cAavoovmevov. E. and
Edd. Avo cai ovtws elev eidias OTe mpds TOY Tag XOVTA Kai Tapauré.
¢ntovvTa x. Tt. A. ‘* Wherefore also he speaks thus, knowing
that it is to the case of one who is suffering,”’ etc.—In the text
here commented upon, 6mws av EA@wor Katpot ava., E. V.
makes ows av temporal, ‘‘ When the times of refreshing,” etc.
But here and elsewhere in the N. T. Matt. vi. 5; Luke ii. 35:
Acts xv. 17; Rom. iii. 4; the correct usage is observed, accord—
ing to which, ows av is nearly equivalent to ‘so (shall):” i. e.
“that (67ws) they may come, as in the event of your repent-
ance (av) they certainly shall.’’ And so Chrys. took the pas-
sage: Eira ro xépdos émayer: “Orws av x. 7. dA. ‘Then he adds
the gain: So shall the times,” etc.

2 Tov mpoxexerprouévov, Other Mss. of N. T. read mpoxexypu-
yeHevov, whence Vulg. E. V. ** which was before preached.”’

3 E. V. has ‘‘all,’”’ and so some Mss. wavtwyv, and St. Chrys.
gives it a littie further on.

4 Instead of this clause, ‘‘ by the mouth,” etc. the Edd. have
from E. ‘Still by keeping the matter in the shade, drawing
them on the more to faith by gentle degrees.”


| all things.”


brethren, like unto me; Him shall ye hear in
And then the greatness of the
punishment: “ And it shall come to pass, that
every soul which will not hear that Prophet,
shall be destroyed from among the people.
Yea, and all the prophets, from Samuel and
those that follow, after, as many as have spoken
have likewise foretold of these days.” (v. 23, 24.)
He has done well to set the distinction here.
For whenever he says anything great, he ap-
peals to them of old. And he found a text
which contained both truths; just as in the
other discourse he said, “ Until He put His
foes under His feet.” (ch.ii. 35.) The re-
markable circumstance is, that the two things
stand together; that is, subjection and dis-
obedience, and the punishment. “ Like unto
me,” he says. Then why are ye alarmed?
‘Ye are the children of the prophets” (v. 25) :
so that to you they spake, and for your sakes
have all these things come to pass. For as
they deemed that through their outrage they
had become alienated (and indeed there is no
parity of reason, that He Who now is cruci-
fied, should now cherish them as His own), he
proves to them that both the one and the
other are in accordance with prophecy. ‘Ye
are the children,” he says, “of the Prophets,
and of the covenant which God made with
our fathers, saying unto Abraham, ‘ And in
thy seed shall all the kindreds of the earth be
blessed.’ Unto you first,” he continues,
“God having raised up His Son (rév Taida) sent
Him.” “To others indeed also, but to you first
who crucified Him.” ‘ To bless you,” he adds,
“in turning away every one of you from his
iniquities.” (v. 26.)


Now let us consider again more minutely
what has been read out. (Recapitulation.)
In the first place, he establishes the point that
the miracle was performed by them® ; saying,
‘“Why marvel ye?”? And he will not let the


assertion be disbelieved: and to give it more


Kavoovpevov Kal TapanuOlay éminTovvTa oTOs av apyoce.ey 0 |


| weight, he anticipates their judgment.


“ Why
look ve,” he says, ‘‘so earnestly onus, as though
by our own power or holiness we had made
this man to walk?” (v. 12.) If this troubles
and confounds you, learn Who was the Doer,
and be not amazed. And observe how on all
occasions when he refers to God, and says
that all things are from Him, then he fear-
lessly chides them: as above where he said,


® Tews katackevager Ott avToi éroinoav Td Oadua. i. e. ‘by
saying, Why marvel ye? he makes this good at the very out-
set: You see that a miracle has been wrought, and by us (as
the instruments), not by some other man (this is the force of
the avroi here). This he will not allow them to doubt for a
moment: he forestalls their judgment on the matter: you see
that it is done by us, and you are inclined to think it was by
our Own power or holiness,’’ etc. There is no need to insert
the negative, 67: ovx avrot: Erasm. and Ben. Lat.


Homity IX.]


Pepto litky AROSTIEES;


a


“ A man approved of God among you.” (ch.
ii, 22.) And on all occasions he reminds
them of the outrage they had committed, in
order that the fact of the Resurrection may be
established. But here he also subjoins some-
thing else; for he no more says, “of Naza-
reth,’ but what? ‘The God of our fathers
hath glorified His Servant Jesus.” (v. 13.)
Observe also the modesty. He reproached
them not, neither did he say at once, ‘‘ Believe
then now: behold, a man that has been forty
years lame, has been raised up through the
name of Jesus Christ.” This he did not say,
for it would have excited opposition. On the
contrary, he begins by commending them
for admiring the deed, and again calls them
ater their aneéstor: “Ye men of Israel.”
Moreover, he does not say, It was Jesus that
healed him: but, “The God of our fathers
hath glorified,” etc. But then, lest they
should say, How can this stand to reason—
that God should glorify the transgressor?
therefore he reminds them of the judgment
before Pilate, showing that, would they but
consider, He was no transgressor; else Pilate
had not wished to release Him. And he does
not say, ‘when Pilate was desirous,” but, “* was
determined to let Him go.” “ But ye denied
the Holy One,” etc. (v. 13, 14.) Him who
had killed others, ye asked to be released ;
Him Who quickeneth them that are killed, ye
did not wish to have! And that they might
not ask again, How should it be that God now
glorifies Him, when before He gave no assist-
ance? he brings forward the prophets, testify-
ing that so it behooved to be. “ But those
things which God before had showed,”’ etc.,
(7ufra v. 18.) Then, lest they should suppose
that God’s dispensation was their own apology,
first he reproves them. Moreover, that the
denying Him “to Pilate’s face,” was no ordi-
nary thing; seeing that he wished to release
Him. And that ye cannot deny this, the man
who was asked in preference to Him is wit-
ness against you. This also is part of a deep
dispensation. Here it shows their shameless-
ness and effrontery ; that a Gentile, one who
saw Him for the first time, should have dis-
charged Him, though he had heard nothing
striking; while they who had been brought up
among His miracles, have done the very
opposite! For, as he has said, ‘‘ When he
(Pilate) had determined to let Him go,” that
it may not be imagined that he did this of
favor, we read, ‘‘ And he said, It is a custom
with you to release one prisoner: will ye
therefore that I release unto you this man?
(Matt. xxvii. 15.) “‘ But ye denied the Holy One
and the Just.” (Mark xv. 6.) He does not
say, “ Ye delivered up;” but everywhere, ‘‘ Ye


denied.” For, said they, “We have no king
but Czesar.” (John xix. 15.) And he does
not say only, Ye did not beg off the innocent,
and, “ Ye denied’ Him ; but, ‘*‘ Yeslew”’ Him.
While they were hardened, he refrained from
such language; but when their minds are
most moved, then he strikes home, now that
they are in a condition to feel it. For just as
when men are drunk we say nothing to them,
but when they are sober, and are recovered from
their intoxication then we chide them; thus
did Peter: when they were able to understand
his words, then he also sharpened his tongue,
alleging against them many charges; that,
Whom God had glorified, they had delivered
up; Whom Pilate would have acquitted they
denied to his face; that they preferred the
robber before Him.

Observe again how he speaks covertly con-
cerning Christ’s power, showing that He raised
Himself: just as in his first discourse he had
said, “‘ Because it was not possible that He
should be holden of it” (ch. ii. 24), so here
he says, “And killed the Prince of Life.”
(v. 15.) It follows that the Life He had was
not from another. ‘The prince (or author) of
evil would be he that first brought forth evil;
the prince or author of murder, he who first
originated murder; so also the Prince (or
Author) of Life must be He Who has Life
from Himself.* “Whom God raised up,” he
continues: and now that he has uttered this,
he adds, ‘And his name, upon faith in his
name, hath made this man strong, whom ye
see and know; yea, the faith which is by Him
hath given Him this perfect soundness.
[The faith which is by Him 7 6 ciron riote. |
And? yet it was 7 ei¢ abrov riot, “the faith which
is in Him” (as its object) that did all. For
the Apostles did not say, “‘ By the name,” but,
“In the name,” and it was in Him (cic airdv)
that the man believed. But they did not yet
make bold to use the expression, “ The faith
which is in Him.” For, that the phrase “ By
Him” should not be too low, observe that
after saying, ‘Upon the faith of His name,”
he adds, ‘‘ His name hath made him strong,”
and then it is that he says, ‘ Yea, the faith
which is by Him hath given him this perfect
soundness.” Observe how he implies, that in


* Peter sharpens his accusation of them by the following
contrasts: (1) This healing at which you wonder is to the glory
of Christ, not of us. (2) God has glorified whom you have be-
trayed and denied. (3) This you did though Pilate himself
would have released him. (4) You preferred to kill the Aody
and just one and let a murderer go free. (5) You sought to
put to death the Author of L7/e. ‘vy. 12-15.—G. B.S.

1 The meaning of the following passage is plain enough, but
the innovator has so altered it as to make it unintelligible.
Yet the Edd. adopt his reading (E. D. F.) without notice of
the other and genuine reading. ‘* And yet if it was 7 eis avrov
miotts that did all, and that (orc) it was eis avrov that the man
| believed, why did (Peter) say, not Aca Tod dvouaros, but "Ev to
| 6véuaze? Because they did not yet,” ete.


58


THE WORKS. OF? SF: CHEYSOSP@0r


[Homity IX.


the xai éxeivo former expression also “ Whom
God raised up,” he did but condescend to
their low attainments. For that Person
needed not Another’s help for His rising
again, Whose Name raised up a lame man,
being all one as dead. Mark how on all occa-
sions he adduces their own testimony. Thus
above, he said, ‘tf As ye yourselves also know; ”
and, “In the midst of you:” and here again,
“Whom ye see and know: in the presence of
you all.” (ch. ii. 22.) And yet that it was,
“In His name,” they knew not: but they did
know that the man was lame, that he stands
there whole.1 They that had wrought the
deed themselves confessed, that it was not by
their own power, but by that of Christ. And
had this assertion been unfounded, had they
not been truly persuaded themselves that
Christ had risen again, they would not have
sought to establish the honor of a dead man
instead of their own, especially while the eyes
of the multitude were upon them. Then,
when their minds were alarmed, immediately
he encourages them, by the appellation of
Brethren, “‘And now, brethren, I wot, etc.”
For in the former discourse he foretold ? noth-
ing, but only says concerning Christ, ‘‘ There-
fore let all the house of Israel know as-
suredly:” here he adds an admonition.
There he waited till the people spoke : here,
he knew how much they had already effected,
and that the present assembly was better dis-
posed toward them. “That through igno-
rance ye did it.” And yet the circumstances
mentioned above were not to be put to the
score of ignorance. ‘To choose the robber, to
reject Him Who had been adjudged to be
acquitted, to desire even to destroy Him—
how should this be referred to ignorance?
Nevertheless, he gives them liberty to deny
it, and to change their mind about what had
happened. ‘“ Now this indeed, that you put
to death the innocent, ye knew: but that
you were killing “the Prince of Life,” this,
belike, ye did not know.” And he exculpated
not them alone, but also the chief contrivers
of the evil, “ye and your rulers:” for
doubtless it would have roused their opposi-
tion, had he gone off into accusation. For
the evil-doer, when you accuse him of some
wickedness that he has done, in his endeavor
to exonerate himself, grows more vehement.
And he no longer says, “ Ye crucified,” ‘Ye


1 E. has ore vyins €otnxev after ovx 7decav instead of after
touTo ydecav. So Commel. Erasm. Ed. Par. Hence D. F.
have it in both places, and so Morel. Ben. All these omit ore
before €v 7@ ov, *‘ And yet in His name they knew not that he
stands whole: but this they knew, that he was lame, (that he
stands whole).’’ Savile alone has retained the genuine read-
ing.

2 ovdév mpoetmev, A. B. C. N. i. e. foretold nothing concern-
ing them. Edd, ovéév repi éavtay eirev, ‘said nothing concern-
ing (the hearers) themselves.”


killed,” but, “Ye did it;” leading them to
seek for pardon. If those rulers did it
through ignorance, much more did these pres-
ent.* ‘But these things which God before
had showed,” etc. (v. 18.) But it is remark-
able, that both in the first and in the second
discourse, speaking to the same effect, that is,
in the former, ‘“ By the determinate counsel
and foreknowledge of God;” and in this,
‘““God before had showed that Christ should
suffer ;” in neither does he adduce any par-
ticular text in proof. The fact is, that each
one of such passages is accompanied with
many accusations, and with mention of the
punishment in store for them [as]; “I will
deliver up,” says one, ‘the wicked in requital
for His grave, and the rich in return for His
death.” (Is. Ini. 9:) > And Vacain, ee
“Those things,” he says, “ which God before
had showed by the mouth of all His prophets,
that Christ should suffer, He hath so ful-
filled.” It shows the greatness of that “ coun-
sel,” ? in that a/7 spoke of it, and not one
only. It does not follow, because the event
was through ignorance, that it took place irre-
spectively of God’s ordinance. See how great
is the Wisdom of God, when it uses the
wickedness of others to bring about that
which must be. ‘“ He hath fulfilled,” he says :
that they may ‘not imagine that anything at
all is wanting; for whatsoever Christ must
needs suffer, has been fulfilled. But do not
think, that, because the Prophets said this,
and because ye did it through ignorance, this
sufficeth to your exculpation. However, he
does not express himself thus, but in milder
terms says, “ Repent ye therefore.” (v. 19.)
“Why? For‘ either it was through ignorance,
or by the dispensation of God.” ‘That your
sins may be blotted out.” I do not mean the
crimes committed at the Crucifixion ; perhaps
they were through ignorance; but so that
your other sins may be blotted out: this ® only.
“So shall the times of refreshing come unto


* There is one extenuating circumstance: they did it in ig-
norance (Cf. Luk. xxiii. 34; 1. Cor. ii. 8 ; Acts xiii. 27). This
fact forms the transition-point to the presentation of a differ-
ent side of the death of Jesus. It was their crime, but it was
also God’s plan. They did it from motives of blindness and
hate, but God designed it for their salvation. So that Peter,
in effect, says: There is hope for you although you have slain
the Lord, for his sacrificial death is the ground of salvation,
To this view of the death of Christ he now appeals as basis of
hope and a motive to repentance (ovv v. 19).—G. B. S.

S weyadnv detxvuce thy BovAnvy, meaning the determinate
counsel of God above spoken of. Above, after cat maAw, some
other citation is wanting, in illustration of his remark that the
prophecies of the Passion are all accompanied with denuncia-
tions of punishment.

4 i) yap kata ayvo.ay, ) kata oikovoutay, Edd. omit this inter-
locution, Sav. notes it in the margin. ‘‘ Repent ye therefore.”
Why repent? for either it was through ignorance, or it was
predestinated. (Nevertheless, you must repent, to the blot-
ting out of your sins, etc.)

5 rov7To povorv, B. C. N. ‘this is all:”’ {. e. no more than this:
he does not impute that one great sin to them, in all its hein-
ousness: he only speaks of their sins in general, A. and the
other Mss. omit these words.


Homity IX.]


you.” Here he speaks of the Resurrection,
obscurely.* For those are indeed times of
refreshing, which Paul also looked for, when
he said, “We that are in this tabernacle do
groan, being burthened.” (2 Cor.v. 4.) Then
to prove that Christ is the cause of the days
of refreshing, he says, “And He shall send
Jesus Christ, which before was for you


ordained.” (v. 20.) He said not, “ That
your sin may be blotted out,” but, “ your
sins;” for he hints at that sin also. “He


shall send.” And whence?* ‘Whom the
heaven must receive.” (v. 21.) Still [‘‘ must ”
“receive ?”? And why not simply, Whom the
heaven hath received? ‘This, as if discours-
ing of old times: so, he says, it is divinely
ordered, so it is settled: not a word yet of
His eternal subsistence.—‘ For Moses indeed
said unto the fathers, A Prophet shall the
Lord raise up for you:” “ Him shall ye hear
in all things that He shall speak unto you: ”’
and having said, “All things which God
hath spoken by the mouth of all His holy
Prophets,” (v. 22) now indeed he brings in
Christ Himself. For, if He predicted many
things and it is necessary to hear Him, one
would not be wrong in saying that the Prophets
have spoken these things. But, besides, he
wishes to show that the Prophets did predict
the same things. And, if any one will look
closely into the matter, he will find these
things spoken in the Old Testament, obscurely
indeed, but nevertheless spoken. ‘ Who was
purposely designed,” says he: in Whom? there
is nothing novel. Here he also alarms them,
by the thought that much remains to be ful-


* The reference is hardly to the resurrection, but to the
Parousia. To the hope of this event, always viewed as immi-
nent, all the expressions: ‘times of refreshing,’’ *‘ times of
restitution ’’ and “these days’’ (vv. 19-24) undoubtedly refer.
So Olshansen, Meyer, rie Hackett, Gloag, Lechler and
most recent critics.—G. B. S.

1 The modern text; “Saying this. he does not declare,
Whence, but only adds,” etc.—Axpny defar@ar, Ben. Utigue
suscipere. Erasm. adhuc accipere. It means, Is this still to
take place, that he should say ov dec deFarGar, as if the event
were yet future? And the answer is, ‘‘ He speaks in reference
to former times, i.e. from that point of view. (So CEcumen. in
loc. 70 Set avri rod éSet.) And then as to the necessity; this dec
is not meant in respect of Christ’s Divine Nature (for of that
he forbears to speak), but the meaning is, So it is ordered,’’
etc. The report, however, is very defective, especially in
what follows. He is commenting upon the words, ** Until the
time of restitution (or making good) of all that God spake,”
etc, tavTwy oy e€AaAnoev o Meds, Which expression he compares
with what is said of the Prophet like unto Moses, tavtwv ova
av AaAnon. Christ is that Prophet: and what He spake, the
Prophets, obscurely indeed, spake before. He adds, that St.
Peter’s mention of the yet future fulfilment of all that the
Prophets have spoken is calculated also to alarm the hearers.
See the further comment on these verses at the end of the re-
capitulation.

2 OD ovdév vewrepov. Meaning perhaps, that as Christ was
from the first designed for the Jews, the Gospel is no novelty,
as if nothing had been heard of sucha Saviour before, E. Dah:
wate ovdev vewrepov, which is placed before the citation tov
mpoxex.—Below, A. B. C. *EmAnpwoev & dec mabetv; “EnAn-
pwOn a dec yevér Bac EXpnY ovdérw, which is manifestly corrupt.
We restore it thus: "ErAnpwoev; “A det mabey erAnpwOn, a de
yeverOar Expny ovderw. The modern text: "Er Ajpwoev a& eee
mabeiv ; "ErAnpwoer, eizev, ov éAnpwOn: Secxvus oTe & mev expnv
arapery;, emAjpwoev: a dé (Seo. add. F. D.) yever@ar Aetretat Er,
ovderrw.


Peewee, Gr” PHE «APOSTLES:


59
filled. But if so, how says he, ‘ Hath ful-
filled?” (v. 18.) The things which it was


necessary “that Christ should suffer,” are ful-
filled: the things which must come to pass,
not yet. ‘A prophet shall the Lord God
raise up for you from among your brethren,
like unto me.” This would most conciliate
them. Do you observe the sprinkling of low
matters and high, side by side,—that He Who
was to go up into the heavens should be like
unto Moses? And yet it was a great thing
too. For in fact He was not simply like unto
Moses,’ if so be that “every soul which will
not hear shall be destroyed.” And one might
mention numberless other things which show
that He was not like unto Moses; so that it is
a mighty text that he has handled, “God
shall raise Him up unto you,” says Moses,
“from among your brethren,” etc.: conse-
quently Moses himself threatens those that
should not hear. “Yea, and all the proph-
ets,” etc.: all this* is calculated to attract
“Yea, and all the prophets,” says the Apostle.
“from Samuel.” He refrains from enumer,
ating them singly, not to make his discourse
too long; but having alleged that decisive
testimony of Moses, he passes by the rest.
Vie?) hes isays,. ““are: the children) ef samme
Prophets, and of the covenant which God
made.” (v.25) “Children of: the cove
nant;” that is, heirs. For lest they should
think that they received this offer from the
favor of Peter, he shows, that of old it was
due to them, in order that they may the rather


believe that such also is the will of God.
“Unto you first,” he continues, “God having
raised up His Son Jesus, sent Him.” (v. 26.)


He does not say simply, ‘‘ Unto you He sent
His Son,” but also, after the resurrection, and
when He had been crucified. For that they
may not suppose that he himself granted them
this favor, and not the Father, he says, “ To
bless you.” For if He is your Brother, and
blesses you, the affair is a promise. ‘* Unto
you first.” That is, so far are you from hav-
ing no share in these blessings, that He would
have you become moreover promoters and
authors of them to others. For® you are not


3 C. N. Ov yap &n Kara Mwoea hv, €t yap Tas oO My aK. €£oA08pe-
vOynoeTar, mupta Sé elev ta Secxvivta OTe oVK égTL KaTa Mwgea.
B. omits ov yap . . hv, inadvertently passing from 4: ov yap
to the subsequent iw et yap. A. omits the words mupia.. .
orc, which disturb the sense of the passage. In the translation
we have rejected the second yap. For eiev, Sav. marg. gives
elmot Tis av, Which we have adopted. The modern text substi-
tutes To, cal, €orac for et yap, and inserts cai adda after pupia de.

4 Tatra oAa éraywya is strangely rendered by Ben. sec
omnia adjecta sunt. But this is the comment, not upon the
threatening in v. 23, but upon the matters contained in the
following verses, 24-2 26.

° Mn yap. ws aTepptmevor diaxeiade, B. N. ovKovy my yap, A.
maAdw wy yap, C. wn otv, F. D. cai yap, Cat. ovKouv py. E. and
Edd., which also add at the end of the sentence, 7 atoBeBAnpe-
voc, where the other Mss. have, IlaAcv 7 avagracts, as comment
On avagTycas.


ST. GHRYSOSTOM


[HomiLy IX.


60 THE (WORKS /OF
‘to feel like castaways. ‘“ Having raised
up”: again, the Resurrection. “In turning


away,” he says, “every one of you from his
iniquities.”” In this way He blesses you: not
in a general way. And what kind of blessing
is this? A great one. For of course not the
turning a man away from his iniquities is it-
self sufficient to remit them also. And if it is
not sufficient to remit, how should it be to
confer a blessing? For it is not to be sup-
posed that the transgressor becomes forthwith
also blessed; he is simply released from his
sins. But this, 1 “Like unto me,” would no
wise apply. “Hear ye Him,” he says; and
not this alone, but he adds, “And it shall
come to pass, that every soul, which will not
hear that Prophet, shall be destroyed from
among the people.” When he has shown
them that they had sinned, and has imparted
forgiveness to them, and promised good
things, then indeed, then he says, ‘“ Moses
also says the same thing.”” What sort of con-
nection is this: ‘* Until the times of the resti-
tution ;” and then to introduce Moses, saying,
that ? all that Christ said shall come to pass?
Then also, on the other hand, he says, as
matter of encomium (so that for this reason
aiso ye ought to obey): ‘“ Ye are the children
of the prophets and of the covenant :” i. e,
heirs. Then why do you stand affected
towards that which is your own, as if it were
another’s? ‘True, you have done deeds worthy
of condemnation; still you may yet obtain
pardon. Having said this, with reason he is
now able to say, ‘“‘ Unto you God sent his Son
Jesus to bless you.” He says not, To save
you, but what is greater; that the crucified
Jesus blessed His crucifiers.

Let us then also imitate Him. Let us cast
out that spirit of murder and enmity. It is
not enough not to retaliate (for even in the
Old Dispensation this was exemplified) ; but
let us do all as we would for bosom-friends, as
we would for ourselves so for those who have
injured us. We are followers of Him, we are
His disciples, who after being crucified, sets
everything in action in behalf of his murder-
ers, and sends out His Apostles to this end.


1 To S€, ‘OAs eve ovdanovd Adyov av é€xor. He had before said.
that in the very description of ‘‘the Prophet like unto Moses,”
it is shown that He is more than like Moses: for instance,
‘““Every soul which will not hear,’’ etc. would not apply to
Moses. Having finished the description, he now adds, You
see that the ws eve nowhere holds as the whole account of the
matter: to be raised up (from the dead) and sent to bless, and
this by turning every one from his iniquities, is not to be sim-
ply such as Moses. The modern text adds, ‘‘ Unless it be
taken in regard of the manner of legislation:’’ i. e. Christ is
like unto Moses considered as Deliverer and Lawgiver, not in
any other respect.

2 E. and Edd. ‘‘that they shall hear all things which Christ
shall say: and this not in a general way, but with a fearful
menace? It is a powerful connection, for it shows that for
this reason also they ought to obey Him. What means it,
** Children of the Prophets,” etc.


And yet we have often suffered justly ; but
those acted not only unjustly, but impiously ;
for He was their Benefactor, He had done no
evil, and they crucified Him. And for what
reason? For the sake of their reputation.
But He Himself made them objects of rever-
ence. ‘The scribes and the pharisees sit in
Moses’ seat; all therefore whatsoever they
bid you observe, that do ye, but after their
works do'ye not.” (Matt. xxiii. 2.) And again
in another place, ‘‘Go thy way, show thyself
to the priest.”’ (ib, vill. 4.) Besides, when He
might have destroyed them, He saves them.
Let us then imitate Him, and let no one be
an enemy, no one a foe, except to the devil.
Not a little does the habit of not swearing
contribute to this end: I mean to the not
giving way to wrath:* and by not giving way
to wrath, we shall not have an enemy either.
Lop off the oaths of a man, and you have
clipt the wings of his anger, you have
smothered all his passion. Swearing, it is
said, is as the wind to wrath. Lower the
sails ; no need of sails, when there is no wind.
If then we do not clamor, and do not swear, we
have cut the sinews of passion. And if you
doubt this, just put it to experiment. Impose
it as a law upon the passionate man that he
shall never swear, and you will have no neces-
sity of preaching moderation to him. So the
whole business is finished. For* even though
you do not forswear yourselves [yet], by
swearing at all, do you not know in what
absurd consequences you involve yourselves
—binding yourselves to an absolute necessity
and as with a cord, and putting yourselves to
all manner of shifts, as men studying how to


3 A€éyw 5H TO MH OpyiGerPar, as the explanation of eis TovTO.
The other text confuses the meaning by substituting xai 7d wn
opy. ‘‘ Not to swear, and not to be angry, isa great help to
this.”” Which increases the “intricacy” of which Ben. com-
plains in the following passage, where oaths are first said to be
the wings of wrath, and then are compared to the wind filling
the sails. Here instead of, #orep yap mvedua THs Opyis Oo OpKos,
dnow, eort, (cited as an apothegm), the modern text gives,
@OTEP Yap TV. H Opyy Kai Oo OpKos cote. “For wrath and swear-
ing is as a wind.”’ The imagery is incongruous: oaths, the
wings of wrath: oaths the wind, and wrath (apparently) the
sails: but the alterations do not mend the sense.

4 Kav yap pH ETLOpKATE, OMVUYTES OAwWS OVK tate. The modern
text, Kal ovTe émopkyoeTe, ovUTE OMdTETHE GAws. OK ioTe.
Which does not suit the context. ‘‘ Make it a law with the
passionate man, never to swear.... The whole affair is
finished, and you will neither perjure yourselves, nor swear at
all.””. He seems to be speaking of oaths and imprecations, by
which a man in the heat of passion binds himself to do or
suffer some dreadful thing. ‘‘ Suppose you do not perjure
yourself, yet think of the misery you entail upon yourself: you
must either study all sorts of expedients to deliver your soul,
or, Since that cannot be without perjury, you must spend your
life in misery, etc. and curse your wrath.’’—Avaykyp Tui Kat
degx@, With comma preceding: so Sav. but A. B. C. avayxn
nom. preceded by a full stop: ‘“‘ For needs must you, binding
yourselves as with a cord,”’ etc: and so the modern text, with
other alterations (adopted by Sav.) which are meant to sim~

lify the construction, but do not affect the sense. Below,
Ere.éy yap nxoveate, Kai TO TA€oV VuiY KaTwWpOwrar. Ben makes
this a sentence by itself, Qua enim audistis, magna pars ret
a vobis perfecta est. Savile connects it with the following,
dhepe dn wk. tT. A. See p. 53, where he alludes to some who
laughed at him, perhaps even on the spot.


Homrty IX.|


Es AGES” OF THE “APOSTLES.


61


rescue their soul from an evil which there is
no escaping, or, failing of that, obliged [by
that self-imposed necessity] to spend your life
thenceforth in vexation, in quarrels, and to
curse your wrath? But all is in vain, and to
-nopurpose. Threaten, be peremptory (d:dpicav),
do all, whatever it be, without swearing ; [so]:
it is in your power to reverse (avaticaw) both
what you have said and what you have done,
if you have the mind. Thus on the present
day I must needs speak more gently to you.
For since ye have heard me, and the greater
part of the reformation is achieved by you,
now then let us see for what purpose the tak-
ing of oaths was introduced, and why allowed
to be. In relating to you their first origin,
and when they were conceived, and how, and
by whom we shall give you this account in
requital for your obedience. For it is fit that
he who has made his practice right, should be
taught the philosophy of the matter, but he
who is not yet doing the right, is not worthy
to be told the history.

They made many covenants in Abraham’s
time, and slew victims, and offered sacrifices,
and as yet oaths were not. Whence then did
they come in? When evil increased, when all
was confusion, upside down, when men had
turned aside to idolatry: then it was, then,
when men appeared no longer worthy to be
believed, that they called God as witness, as if
thereby giving an adequate surety for what
they said. Such in fact is the Oath: it is a
security where men’s principles cannot be
trusted.’ So that in the indictment of the
swearer the first charge is this,—that he is not
to be trusted without a surety, and a great
surety too: forsuch is the exceeding faithless-
ness, that they ask not man as surety, but will
needs have God! Secondly, the same charge
lies against him who receives the oath: that, in
a question of compact, he must drag in God for
warranty, and refuse to be satisfied unless he
get Him. O the excessive stupidity, the inso-
lence of such conduct! ‘Thou, a worm, earth
and dust, and ashes, and vapor, to drag in
thy Lord as thy surety, and to compel the
_ other to drag Him in likewise! Tell me, if
your servants were disputing with each other,
and exchanging” assurances with each other,
and the fellow-servant should declare that for
his part he would not be satisfied till he had
their common master given him for surety,
would he not have stripes given him without
number, and be made to know that the master
is for other purposes, and not to be put to any


1 Todto yap OpKos ETL, TPOTwHY amloTOUMEY wv eyyvn

2 mutToumevwr EauTovs, . C. N. as in the phrase meaTovabat
Tia (ooKw), “ to secure a person’s good faith by oath.”’ Edd.
amotovmevwy eavtots, * being obiects of distrust to each other.’


do this, say you.*


such use as this? Why do I speak of a
fellow-servant?® For should he choose any
respectable person, would not that person
consider it an affront? But I do not wish to
Well: then do not compel
the other to do so either: since where men
only are in question, this is done—if your
party says, “I give such an one as my surety,”
you do not allow him. ‘ What then,” say you,
‘‘am I to lose what I have given?” I am not
speaking of this; but that you allow him to
insult God. For which reason greater shall
be the inevitable punishment to him who
forces the oath upon another, than to him who
takes it: the same holds with regard to him
who gives an oath when no one asks him.
And what makes it worse, is, that every one is
ready to swear, for one farthing, for some
petty item, for his own injustice. All this
may be said, when there is no perjury ; but if
perjury follow in the train, both he that
imposes and he that takes the oath have
turned everything upside down. ‘“ But there
are some things,” you will say, ‘“ which are
unknown.” Well take these into account, and
do nothing negligently; but, if you do act
negligently, take the loss to yourself as your
punishment. It is better to be the loser thus,
than ina very different way. For tell me—you
force a man to take an oath, with what expec-
tation? That he will forswear himself?
But this is utter insanity; and the judgment
will fall upon your own head; better you
should lose your money, than he be lost.
Why act thus to your own detriment, and to
the insulting of God? This is the spirit of a
wild beast, and of an impious man. But you
do this in the expectation that he will not
forswear himself? Then trust him without
the oath. ‘‘ Nay, there are many,” you reply,
““who in the absence of an oath would pre-
sume to defraud; but, once the oath taken,
would refrain.” You deceive yourself, man.
A man having once learnt to steal, and to
wrong his neighbor, will presume full oft to
trample upon his oath; if on the contrary he
shrinks from swearing, he will much more
shrink from injustice. ‘“ But he is influenced
against his will.” Well then, he deserves
pardon.

But why am I speaking of this kind of oaths,
while I pass over those in the market-place ?
For as regards these last, you can urge none


3 op.ddovdov. So the Mss. but we should have expected
Searorny, ‘ the master. 2

4 "AAA eym ov BovAonat, dyot. ‘*I do not wish [so to insult
God].—Then do not oblige the Stee to do so: [nay, do not
suffer him:] just as, should he pretend to name as his surety
some person with whom he has no right to take such a liberty,
av ovK avexn you would not allow him.’’ That this is the
meaning, is shown by what follows: 6re roy Ocov UBpioar avexn-
‘he insults God, and you suffer him to do it.’


62


THE (WORKS OF ST. GHRYSUSIOR-


[HomiLy IX.


of these pleas. For ten farthings you there
have swearing and forswearing. In fact, be-
cause the thunderbolt does not actually fall
from heaven, because all things are not over-
thrown, you stand holding God in your bonds:
to get a few vegetables, a pair of shoes, for a
little matter of money, calling Him to witness.
What is the meaning of this? Do not let us
imagine, that because we are not punished,
therefore we do not sin; this comes of God’s
mercy; not of our merit. Let your oath be
an imprecation upon your own child, upon
your own self: say, “Else let the hangman
lash my ribs.” But you dare not. Is God
less valuable than thy ribs? is He less pre-
cious than thy pate? Say “Else let me be
struck blind.” But no. Christ so spares us,
that He will not let us swear even by our own
head ; and yet we so little spare the honor of
God, that on all occasions we must drag Him
in! Ye know not what God is, and with what
sort of lips he behooves to be invoked. Why,
when we speak of any man of eminent worth,
we say, “First wash your mouth, and then
make mention of him:”’ and yet, that precious
Name which is above every name, the Name
which is marvellous in all the earth, the Name
which devils hear and tremble, we haul about
as we list! Oh! the force of habit! thereby
has that Name become cheap. No doubt,
if you impose on any one the necessity of com-
ing into the sacred edifice to take his oath
there, you feel that you have made the oath
an awful one. And yet how is it that it seems
awful in this way, but because we have been
in the habit of using that at random, but not
this? For ought not a shudder of awe to be
felt when God is but named? But now,
whereas among the Jews His Name was held
to be so reverend, that it was written upon
plates, and none was allowed to wear the
characters except the high-priest alone: we
bandy about His Name like any ordinary
word. If simply toname God was not allowed
to all; to call Him to witness, what au-
dacity is it! nay, what madness! For if need
were (rather than this) to fling away all that
you have, ought you not readily to part with
all? Behold, I solemnly declare and testify ;
reform these oaths of the forum, these super-
fluous oaths,’ and bring to me all those who


1 Tots mepitrovs, kal mavtas éuor ayayete. E. and Edd. for
TovS TEpiTTOUs Kai have Tovs d€ uw wecBowevovs. The following
passage relates to a practice of swearing by touching the
Sacred Volume on the Holy Table. Against this custom he
inveighs in one of his Sermons ad Pop. Antioch. xv. §. 5. (t. ii.
158. E.) ‘‘ What art thou doing, O man? On the Holy Table,
and where Christ lies sacrificed, there sacrificest thou thy
brother? ... . sacrificest him in the midst of the Church, and
that, with the death to come, the death which dieth not?
Was the Church made for this, that we should come there to
take oaths? No, but that we should pray there. Does the
Table stand there, that we should make men swear thereby ?


wish to take them. Behold, in the presence
of this assembly, I charge those who are set
apart for the tending of the Houses of
Prayer, I exhort and issue this order to them,
that no person be allowed to take such oaths
at his own discretion: or rather, that none be
allowed to swear in any other way, but that
the person be brought to me, whosoever he be,
since even for these matters less will not serve
but they must needs come before us, just as if
one had to do with little children. May
there be no occasion! It is a shame in some
things still to need to be taught. Do you
dare to touch the Holy Table, being a person
unbaptized? No, but what is still worse, you
the baptized dare to lay your hand upon the
Holy Table, which not even all ordained per-
sons are allowed to touch, and so to take your
oath. .Now you would not go and lay your
hand upon the head of your child,? and yet
do you touch the Table, and not shudder, not
feel afraid? Bring these men to me; I will
judge, and send them away rejoicing, both the:
one and the other. Do what you choose; I
lay it down as a law that there be no swearing
at all. What hope of salvation, while we thus
make all to have been done in vain? Is this
the end of your bills, and your donds, that
you should sacrifice your own soul? What
gain do you get so great as the loss? Has he
forsworn himself? You have undone both
him and yourself. But has he not? even so
still you have undone (both), by forcing him
to transgress the commandment. Let us
cast out this disease from the soul: at any
rate let us drive it out of the forum, out of
our shops, out of our other work-places ; our
profits will but be the greater. Do not imag-
ine that the success of your worldly plans is
to be ensured by transgressions of the Divine
laws. ‘ But he refuses to trust me,” say you ;
and in fact I have sometimes heard this said


No, it stands there that we may lose sins, not that we may
bind thems But do thou, if nothing else, at least reverence
the very Volume which thou holdest forth to the other to
swear by: the very Gospel which thou, taking in thine hands,
biddest the other make oath thereby,—open it, read what
Christ there saith concerning oaths, and shudder, and desist.”’
—Here, he forbids the sacristans to admit persons for any such
purpose. ‘‘ Let such be brought to me, since I must needs be
the person to be troubled with these things, as if you were
rae children, needing to be taught such a simple matter as
this.”

2 i. e. to take an oath by the head of your child. So in the
Tract. de Virgin, t.i. 309 D. it is remarked, that *‘ men of rude
and dull minds, who do not scruple to swear by God in great
matters and small, and break their oath without remorse,
would not for a moment think of swearing by the head of their
children: although the perjury is more heinous, and the pen-
alty more dreadful, in the former than in the latter case, yet
they feel this oath more binding than that.”’

3" xal xaipovtas éxatépous amoreuww. i.e.“ both of them glad
(to be rid of the quarrel):’’ unless it is a threat, in the form of
an ironical antiphrasis. In alaw-suit one party comes off re-
joicing (xatpwv): here let both exult—if they can.

4 Matt. v. 34. ‘‘Swear not at all:’’ which St. Chrysostom
(as the surest remedy) would enforce literally, and without
any exception.


HomILy X.]


by some: “ Unless I swear oaths without num-
_ ber, the man will not trust me.” Yes, and for
_ this you may thank yourself, because you are
so off-hand with your oaths. For were it not
so, but on the contrary were it clear to all men
that you do not swear, take my word for it,
you would be more readily believed upon your
mere nod, than those are who swallow oaths
by thousands. For look now: which do you
more readily believe? me who do not swear,
or those that doswear? “ Yes,” say you, “ but
then you are ruler and bishop.” Then suppose
I prove to you that it is not only for that
reason? Answer me with truth, I beseech
you ; were I in the habit of perpetually swear-
ing, would my office stand me in that stead ?
Not a whit. Do you see that it is not for this
reason? And what do you gain at all?
Answer me that. Paul endured hunger; do
you then also choose to hunger rather than to
transgress one of the commandments of God.
Why are you so unbelieving? Here are you,
ready to do and suffer all things for the sake
of not swearing: and shall not He reward
you? Shall He, Who sustains day by day
both takers and breakers of oaths, give you
over to hunger, when you have obeyed Him?
Let all men see, that of those who assemble


teat Oly THE, APOSTLES:


63


in this Church not one is a swearer. By this
also let us become manifest, and not by our
creed alone; let us have this mark also to
distinguish us both from the Gentiles and
from all men. Let us receive it as a seal
from heaven, that we may everywhere be seen
to be the King’s own flock. By our mouth
and tongue let us be known, in the first place,
just as the barbarians are by theirs: even as
those who speak Greek are distinguished from
barbarians, so let us be known. Answer me:
the birds which are said to be parrots, how
are they known to be parrots? is it not by
speaking like men? Let us then be known
by speaking like the Apostles; by speaking
like the Angels. If any one bid you swear
tell him, ‘‘ Christ has spoken, and I do not
swear.” This is enough to make a way for all
virtue tocome in. It isa gate to religion, a
high road leading to the philosophy of piety ;1
a kind of training-schoo]. These things let
us observe, that we may obtain also the future
blessings, through the grace and mercy of our
Lord Jesus Christ, to Whom with the Father
and the Holy Ghost together be glory, power
and honor, now and ever, world without end.
Amen.


EO VEL! Oe:


ACTS


** And as they spake unto the people, there came unto
them the priests, and the captain of the temple. ”

ERE yet they had time to take breath after
théir first trials, straightway they enter into
others. And observe how the events are dis-
posed. First, they were all mocked together ;
this was no small trial: secondly, they enter
into dangers. And these two things do not
take place in immediate succession ; but when
first the Apostles have won admiration by
their two discourses, and after that have per-
formed a notable miracle, thereupon it is that,
after they are waxen bold, through God’s dis-
posal, they enter the lists. But I wish you
to consider, how those same persons, who in
the case of Christ must need look out for one |
to deliver Him up to them, now with their
own hands arrest the Apostles, having be-|
come more audacious and more impudent
since the Crucifixion. In truth, sin, while
it is yet struggling to the birth, is attended
with some sense of shame; but when once


fully born, it makes those more shameless


Weer:


who practise it. ‘‘ And the captain of the
temple,” it issaid. The object again was to
attach a public criminality to what was doing,
and not to prosecute it as the act of private
individuals : such in fact was constantly their
plan of proceeding.

‘“‘ Being grieved that they taught the peo-
ple.” (v. 2.) Not merely because they taught,
but because they declared, not alone that
Christ Himself was risen from the dead, but
moreover, that we through Him do tise again.
“Because they taught the people, and
preached through Jesus the resurrection of
the dead.” So mighty was His Resurrec-
tion, that to others also He is the cause of a
resurrection.* ‘And they laid hands on


1A. B. C. N. Sav. Ben. ‘Odds emi dtAogodiavy evAaBetas
eigayovga: (N. ayovoa’) madatotpa tis eater. E. F. D. omit
evAaBetas, and so Commel. Morel. It would be better trans-
ferred (as remarked by Ed. Par.) to the next clause: ‘a train-
ing-school for piety.”

* It is more likely that catayyéAeww év To "Inood Thy avagtacww
x. T. A. means “ to declare in (the case of) Jesus the resurrec-
tion,”’ i. e. that the reference is specifically to the resurrection
of Jesus instead of (as Chrys.) to the resurrection generally. —
G.


64 THE “WORKS: OF


them, and put them in hold unto the next day ;
for it was now eventide. (v. 3.) What im-
pudence! They? feared not the multitude ;
for this also the captain of the temple was
with them: they had their hands still reeking
with the blood of the former victim. ‘“ For it
was now eventide,” it is said. It was with
the wish to abate their spirit that those men
did this, and guarded them; but the delay
only served to make the Apostles more in-
trepid. And consider who these are who are
arrested. They are the chiefs of the Apos-
tles, who are now become a pattern to the
rest, that they should no longer crave each
other’s support, nor want to be together.
“ Howbeit, many having heard the word, be-
lieved ; and the number of the men was about
five thousand.” (v. 4.) How was this? Did they
see them in honor? Did they not behold
them put in bonds? How then did they
believe? Do you see the evident efficacy?
And yet even those that believed already
might well have become weaker. But no, it
is no longer so: for Peter’s sermon had
laid the seed deep into them, and had taken
a hold upon their understandings. Therefore
were [their enemies] incensed, that they did
not fear them, that they made no account of
their present troubles. For, say they, if He
that was crucified effects such great things,
and makes the lame to walk, we fear not
these men either.2~ This again is of God’s
ordering. For those who now believe were
more numerous than the former. Therefore
it was that in their presence they bound the
Apostles, to make them also more fearful.
But the reverse took place. And they exam-
ine them not before the people, but privately,
that the hearers may not profit by their bold-
ness.

‘“And it came to pass on the morrow, that
their rulers, and elders, and scribes, and
Annas the High Priest, and Caiaphas, and
John, and Alexander, and as many as were of
the kindred of the High Priest, were gathered
together at Jersualem.” (v. 5,6.) For now


1 So A. C. N. Cat. but B. omits ovx. Edd. ‘‘ They had their
hands still reeking with the blood of their former victim, and
they were not chilled (€vapxwv), but again laid them upon
others, to fill them with fresh blood. Or perhaps also they
feared them as having now become a multitude, and for this
reason the captain,’’ etc. But the statement, ov« eSecav 70
mwAnG0s is explained in the Recapitulation : they led Christ to
trial immediately, for fear of the multitude ; but not so here.

ea. Ei yap 6 gTavpwbeis, dyci To.avTa epyacerar, kat
Tov xwAdv averTyoer, ov poBovmeba ovdé TovTOUS. A. B.N. épya-
Setar, ovd€ TovTOUS PoBovpeBa- Tov xwAdov aveoTnge, and so Cat.
which however has éornoay. The meaning is obscure, espe-
cially the emphatic ové€ rovrovs: but perhaps it may be ex-
plained: *‘ He was crucified; they did their worst to Him, to
how little purpose ! therefore neither need we fear these men,
what they can do to us.”” But the report is otherwise so de-
fective and confused, that perhaps what Chrys. actually said
here was meant of the priests: ‘‘ We were able to crucify the
Master, therefore we do not fear these common men, His fol-
lowers, though, as they say, it is He that does these works,
that made the lame man walk.’


ST: CHRYSOSTOGRE


[HoMILy X.


along with the other evils (of the times 8), the
Law was no longer observed. And again
they set off the business with the form of a
tribunal, to constitute them guilty by their in-
iquitous sentence. ‘* And when they had set
them in the midst, they asked, By what
power, or by what name, have ye done this?”
(v. 7.) And yet they knew it well; for it was
because they were “grieved that they
preached through Jesus the resurrection’
that they arrested them. Then for what pur-
pose do they question them? ‘They expected
the numbers present would make them recant,
and thought by this means to have put all right
again. Observe then what they say: “And
by what name have ye done this? Then
Peter, filled with the Holy Ghost, said unto
them.” (v. 8.) And now, I pray you, call to
mind Christ’s saying; ‘‘When they deliver
you up unto the sytagogues, take ye no
thought how or what thing ye shall speak ; for
it is the Spirit of your Father which speaketh
in you.. (Luke xii. 11, 14.) So that it was a
mighty Power they enjoyed. What then says
Peter?’ ‘We rulers of ‘the’ people, and elders
of Israel.” Mark the Christian wisdom of the
man; how full of confidence it is: he utters
not a word of insult, but says with respect,
“Ye rulers of the people, and eldersio:
Israel, if we be this day called to account
of the good deed done to the impotent man.”
He takes them in hand right valiantly; by
the opening of his speech he exposes ‘ them,
and reminds them of the former things: that
it is for a work of beneficence they are call-
ing them to account. Asif he had said, “In
all fairness we ought to have been crowned
for this deed, and proclaimed benefactors ;
but since “‘ we are even put upon our trial for
a good deed done to an impotent man,” not a
rich man, not powerful, not noble—and yet
who would feel envy in a case like this?”
It is a most forcible (arayyera, al. éxayyedia)
way of putting the case; and he shows that
they are piercing their own selves :—‘‘ By
what means this man is made whole: be it
known unto you all, and to all the people
Israel ; that by the Name of Jesus Christ of
Nazareth:”—this is what would vex them
most. For this was that which Christ had


3 Something is wanting here: perhaps a remark on the men-
tion of Annas as the high-priest, whereas elsewhere Caiaphas
appears to have been high-priest shortly before.

* amo TOU Tpooiniov Stexwpwdyoer, i. e. ‘* You, the rulers of
the people, and elders of Israel,—to make it a crime,” etc. For
this, which is the reading of the other Mss. and the Catena, E.
alone has kat dcexwdavioe, waddAov dé adTovs Kal aveuvnoev k.T. A.
““And he rung them, nay, rather also reminded them,’’ etc.
Ataxwdwvigew is a word elsewhere used by St. Chrys., and
would suit the passage very well, either as ‘‘he put their un-
soundness to the proof (like false metal, or cracked earthen-
ware),”” or “‘he sounded an alarm in their ears:” but the
other is equally suitable, and better accredited here. Below,
*Erecdy S€ Kai kpivomeba x. T. A.—Cat. évet dé. Edd. viv de.


Homity X.] i Bi ACES
told the disciples, “‘ What ye hear in the ear,
that preach ye upon the housetops.—That in
the name of Jesus Christ,” he says, ‘‘ of Naza-
reth, Whom ye crucified, Whom God raised
from the dead, even by Him doth this man
stand here before you whole.” (v.10). (Matt.
x. 27.) Think not, he says that we conceal the
country, or the nature of the death. ‘ Whom
ye crucified, Whom God raised from the dead,
even by Him doth this man stand before you
whole.” Again the death, again the resurrec-
tion. “This is the stone,” he says, “ which
was set at nought of you builders, which is
Mecome the head: of the corner.” (vi 11.)

He reminds them also of a saying which was
enough to frighten them. For it had been
said, ‘Whosoever shall fall on this stone,
-shall be broken; but on whomsoever it shall
fall, it will grind him to powder. (Matt. xxi.
44.)—Neither is there salvationin any other,
(v. 12.) Peter says. What wounds, think you,
must these words inflict on them! “For there
is none other name,” he continues, “ under
heaven given among men, whereby we must
be saved.” Here he utters also lofty words,
For when ' the object is, not tocarry some
point successfully, but only to show boldness,
he does not spare; for he was not afraid of
striking too deep. Nor does he say simply,
“ By another ;” but, ‘ Neither is there salva-
tion in any other: that is, He is able to save
us. In this way he subdued their threaten-
ing.

‘““ Now when they saw the boldness of Peter
and John, and perceived that they were un-
learned and ignorant men, they marvelled
and they took knowledge of them, that they
had been with Jesus.” (v. 13.) The two un-
learned men beat down with their rhetoric
them and the chief priests. For it was not
they that spake, but the grace of the Spirit.
“And beholding the man which was healed
standing with them, they could say nothing
against it.” (v. 14.) Great was the boldness
of the man; that even in the judgment-hall he
has not left them. For had they said that the
fact was not so, there was he to refute them.
“But when they had commanded them to go
aside out of the council, they conferred among
themselves, saying, What are we to do to these
men?” (v. 15.) See the difficulty they are
in, and how the fear of men again does every-
thing. As in the case of Christ, they were
not able (as the saying is) to undo what is


1"Orav yap mi Te KaTOpAa@car. Quando enim non est aliquid
reclare _agendum. Ben. Non est corrigendum aliquid,
rasm. But see the comment in the recapitulation. ‘t Where
need was to teach, they allege prophecies; where to show
boldness, they affirm peremptorily.’’ xatop§®aa, ‘to carry
their point,’’ *‘to come off in the right;” viz. here, to con-
vince by argument.


5


OF) Ee


AL OS TEES: 65
done,’ nor to cast it into the shade, but for all
their hindering, the Faith did but gain ground
the more; so was it now. ‘What shall we
do?” O the folly! to suppose. that those
who had tasted of the conflict, would now take
fright at it: to expect, impotent as their efforts
had proved in the beginning, to effect some-
thing new, after such a specimen of oratory as
had been exhibited! The more they wished to
hinder, the more the business grew upon their
hands. But what say they? “For that
indeed a notable miracle hath been done by
them is manifest to all them that dwellin jeru-
salem ; and we cannot deny it. But that it
spread no further among the people, let us
straightly threaten them, that they speak hence-
forth to no man inthis name. And they called
them, and commanded them not to speak at all,
nor teach, inthe name of Jesus.” (v. 16-18.)
See what effrontery is shown by these, and what
greatness of mind by the Apostles. ‘“ But
Peter and John answered and said unto them,
Whether it be right in the sight of God to
hearken unto you more than unto God, judge ye.
For we cannot but speak the things which we
have seen and heard. So when they had fur-
ther threatened them, they let them go, finding
nothing how they might punish them, because
of the people.” (v. 19-21.) The miracles shut
their mouths: they would not so much as let
them finish their speech, but cut them short in
the middle, most insolently. ‘For all men
glorified God for that which was done. | For
the man was above forty years old, on whom
this miracle of healing was showed.” (v. 22.)
But let us look over what has been said from
the beginning.


“And as they spake unto the people, etc.
Being grieved that they taught the people,
and preached through Jesus the resurrec-
tion of the dead.” (Recapitulation, v. 1, 2.)
So* then at first they did all for the sake of
man’s opinion (or glory): but now another
motive was added: that they should not be
thought guilty of murder, as they said subse-
quently, “‘Do ye wish to bring this man’s
blood on us?” (ch. v. 28.) O the folly!
Persuaded that He was risen, and having re-
ceived this proof of it, they expected that He
Whom death could not hold, could be cast
into the shade by their machinations! What


2 avatpewar (pyoiv) TO yevouevoy ovx ev, A. B. C. Cat. A
proverbial expression. Bad. avatpewar TO yevouevoy ovK ioxu-
gay, ‘‘ Since then they had not power to undo,”’ etc.

3 We have supplied the text, instead of which C. inserts,
‘“What shall we do to these men?’’ adopted by E. and Edd.
Below, after the text 5. 23. E. inserts the latter part of v. 17.
‘*Let us straitly threaten them,”’ etc.

4 All our Mss. and Cat. meto@evros ore avéorn, Kai TovTo (A.
C. N. rovrov, Cat. 7d) texu. AaB., OTe EoTi @eds, except that B.
reads o7t av €atn Meds. Hence we read, ore aveorp. he repe-
tition of these words may have led to the alteration.


66


THE WORKS OF ST.‘ CHRYSOS/OM.


[| HomILy X.


can match the folly of this!’ Such is the
nature of wickedness: it has no eyes for any-
thing, but on all occasions it is thrown into
perturbation. Finding themselves overborne,
they felt like persons who have been out-
witted: as is the case with people who have
been forestalled and made a sport of in some
matter. And yet? they everywhere affirmed
that it was God that raised Him: but ?® it was
“in the Name of Jesus’ that they spake ;
showing that Jesus was risen. “Through
Jesus, the resurrection of the dead”: for
they themselves also held a resurrection: a
cold and puerile doctrine, indeed, but still
they held it. Why this alone, was it not suffh-
cient to induce them to do nothing to them—I
mean, that the disciples with such boldness
bore themselves in the way they did? Say,
wherefore, O Jew, dost thou disbelieve ?
Thou oughtest to have attended to the sign
done, and to the words, not to the evil dispo-
sition of the many. “ By their teaching the
people.”’* For already they were in ill repute
with them by reason of what they had done to
Christ; so that they were rather increasing
their own obloquy. “ And they laid hands
on them, and put them in hold until the
morrow; for it was now eventide.” (v. 3.)
In the case of Christ, however, they did not
so; but having taken Him at midnight, they
immediately led him away, and made no
delay, being exceedingly in fear of the multi-
tude: whereas in the case of the Apostles
here, they were bold. And they no more take
them to Pilate, being ashamed and blushing
at the thought of the former affair, lest they
should also be taken to task for that.

“And it came to pass on the morrow, that
their rulers, and elders, and scribes, were
gathered together at Jerusalem.” (v. 5.)
Again in Jerusalem: and there it is that
men’s blood is poured out; no reverence for
their city either; “And Annas, and Caiaphas,”
ete: (v. 6.) , “And Annas,” ‘it; says,, “cand
Caiaphas.” His maid-servant it was that
questioned Peter, and he could not bear it: in


1 The modern text adds, ‘‘ And marvel not that they again
attempt what had been vainly essayed before.”’

2 Kai wnv avw cai xatw éAeyov. E. F. D. for the sake of con-
nection insert dca tovro before eAeyov, adopted in Edd.

3 The same Mss. and Edd. ‘ And that in the Name of Jesus,
this man stands before you whole.’’ And below: “ And be-
sides, they themselves held, etc. ... : but now they disbe-
lieve and are troubled, taking counsel to do something to
them.’’ Again, after ‘‘ the wickedness of the many: ’—‘t And
pray why do they not deliver them up to the Romans?
ready they were,’’ etc. All these variations are due to the
innovator, who did not perceive that the recapitulation began
at the place marked above.

4 The modern text inserts Kat ti dymote ov mapadidcaciy
avTovs ‘Pwuators ; ‘* And why do they not deliver them over to
the Romans? Already they were,’ etc. And after wave
uadAov éavTovs exaxcCov, the same adds, Ureprideuevor THY avTaY
évdecE* and below, ‘‘ But concerning these, they neither were
bold, nor yet do they take them to Pilate.”


his house it was that Peter denied, when An-
other was in bonds there: but now, when he
has come into the midst of them all, see how
he speaks! “By what name have ye done
this?’’ Why dost thou not speak it, what it is,
but keepest that out of sight? ‘By what
name have ye done this?” (v. 7.) And yet
he affirmed, It was not we that did it. “Ye
rulers of the people,” etc. (v. 8.) Observe
his wisdom: he does not say outright, “ In the
Name of Jesus we did it,” buthow? “In His
Name this man’”—He does not say, “ was
made whole by us;” but—‘“ doth stand here
before you whole.” And again, “If we be
examined concerning the good deed done to
the impotent man.” (v.9.) He hits them
hard, that they are always making a crime of
such acts, finding fault with works of benefi-
cence done tomen: and he reminds them of
their former doings, that /Zey run to do murder,
and not only so, but make a crime of doing
good deeds. Doyou observe too (in point of
rhetoric) with what dignity they express them-
selves?? Even in the use of words they were
becoming expert by practice, and henceforth
they were not to be beaten down.* “ Be it
known unto you all,” etc. (v. 10.) Whereby
he shows them that they rather do, in spite of
themselves, preach Christ; themselves extol
the doctrine, by their examining and question-
ing. O exceeding boldness—‘‘ Whom ye cru-
cified! Whom God _ raised up”—this is
bolder still! Think not that we hide what
there is to be ashamed of. He says this all
but tauntingly: and not merely says it, but
dwells upon the matter. ‘ This,” says he, “is
the Stone which was set at naught by you
builders ;” and then he goes on to teach them,
saying in addition, ‘‘ Which is made the head
of the corner” (Va.iaa)5. that as ite (samg
that the Stone is indeed approved! Great
was the boldness they now had, in conse-
quence of the miracle. And when there was
need to teach, observe how they speak and
allege many prophecies ; but when the point
was to use boldness of speech, then they only
speak peremptorily. Thus ‘ Neither,” says
he, “is there any other name under heaven
given among men whereby we must be


5 mas Exel Kat TO Bap’ Ta pymata; Kal Ev TOUTOLS eyUpVacorTO.
i. e. ‘* how their words have the rhetorical quality of To Bapy—
grave and dignified impressiveness. Even in these, i. e. in
the use of words,” etc.

* Chrys. rightly remarks upon the great boldness and force
of Peter’s answer to the Sanhedrin (8-12). The € avaxpivo-
weOa, x. 7. A. (a) is ironical: ““If for doing a good deed a man
must make answer.” Then follow the bold declarations which
are almost of the nature of a challenge (10) ‘‘ Be it known to
you ali,” etc.,and the assertion that it was in the name which
they despised—the ‘* Nazarene’’—that the miracle had been
wrought and all this is pointed by the contrast: ‘* Ye cruci-
fied’’ but ‘‘God raised’’ and the charge of opposition to the
divine plan in that they had rejected the stone which God had
made the head of the corner.—G. B. S.


HomIiy X.]


THE ACTS) OF) THe APOSTLES.


67


saved.” (v.12.) Itis manifest to all, he says,
because not tous alone was that Name given ;
he cites even themselves as witnesses. For,
since they asked, “In what name did ye
pee? <i ne@hrist’s;” ‘says he +“ there is none
other name. How is it that ye ask? On all
hands this is palpable. ‘ For there exists not
another name under heaven, whereby we
must be saved.” ‘This is the language of a
soul which has renounced (kareyvwxuac) this
present life. His exceeding out-spokenness
proves here, that when he speaks in lowly
terms of Christ, he does it not of fear, but of
wise forbearance (cvyxatafaivov): but now that
it was the fitting time, he speaks not in lowly
terms: by this very thing intending to strike
dismay into them. Behold another miracle
not less than the former. “And _ beholding
the boldness of Peter and John,’ etc. ‘And
they took knowledge of them that they had
been with Jesus.” (v. 13.) Not without a
meaning has the Evangelist set down this pas-
sage; but in saying, “they recognized them
that they had been with Jesus,” he means, in
His Passion: for only these were [with Him]
at that time, and then indeed they had seen
them humble, dejected: and this it was that
most surprised them: the greatness of the
change. For in fact Annas and Caiaphas
with their company were there, and these men
also had stood by Him, and their boldness now
amazed them. ‘And beholding the bold-
ness.” For? not only their words : their very
bearing showed it; that they should stand
there so intrepidly to be tried in a cause like
this, and with uttermost peril impending over
them! Not only by their words, but by their
gesture also, and their look and voice, and,
in short, by everything about them, they
manifested the boldness with which they con-
fronted the people. From the things they
uttered, they marvelled, perhaps: ‘‘ that they
were unlearned and common men:” for one
may be unlearned, yet not a common or
private man, and a common man, yet not
unlearned. ‘Having perceived,” it says.
Whence? From” what they said? Peter


1 OU yap 7a pyuata movoy, Kal TA oXHMaTA édeikvuvto To adpov-
TiOTWS ETTAVAL TEP TOLOVTWY KpLYOMEVOoUs. A. C. but the former
has édetcvvov, N. édecxvyv. Our other Mss. have, ov yap rots
pymace povoy edeikvuvTo adpovtiatovvTes 7. T. Kptvomevot. which
is only an attempt to make the passage grammatical. The
comment is on the word @ewpovvtes: they beheld the boldness,
for not words only, their gestures also, declared it.—Below. thv
mappnoiav evehacvov ™Y Kata Tov Aaov. "EE & ov epOcyyovTo €bav-
magov tows. Edd. thy rapp. eveparvoy emi Tov Aaov ef dy epbey-
yovro. "Edavpagov 6€ tows.

2 ad’ dv éXeyov; Edd. and Erasm, take this affirmatively:
but this can hardly be the Author’s meaning; as he has just
said that ‘‘ from the things they uttered, they marvelled ” that
the speakers should be ‘illiterate and common men.
thing perhaps is wanting: e. g. ‘* Not from the matter, but
from the dialect, or from ‘the brev ity and abruptness of Peter’s
style, or, from the appearance of the men.—In the Mss. the
next sentence is, wate érréoxnwav av avrois, Extrema auctori-
tate mandassent zis, Erasm. Acrius in eos egissent, Ben.


Some- |
| speak at all:


| make nothing of you for
| adopted by Edd.


does not draw out long speeches, but then by
his very manner and method (ric arayyediac Kai
rij¢ ovvlljxyc) he declares his confidence. ‘And
they recognized them that they had been with
Jesus.” Which circumstance made them be-
lieve that it was from Him they had learned
these things, and that they did all in the
character of His disciples.* But not less
than the voice of these, the miracle uttered a
voice of its own: and that sign itself stopped
their mouths. ‘And beholding the man,”
etc.| So that they would have been per-
emptory (ézécxywav) with them, if the man had
not been with them. ‘We cannot deny it.”
So that they would have denied it, if the thing
had not been so: if the testimony had not
been that of the people in general. “ But
that it spread no further among the people.”

(v. 17.) And yet it was palpable to all men!


But such is the nature of wickedness: every-
where, It 3s\ shamed. <“Leti uste strate
threaten ‘them. ” What sayest thou?


‘Threaten ?
ing?


And expect ye to stop the preach-
And® yet all beginnings are hard and
trying. Ye slew the Master, and did not stop
it: and now, if ye threaten, do ye expect to
turn us back ? The imprisonment did not
prevail with us to speak submissively, and
shall ye prevail? “And they ee them,
and commanded them,” etc. (v. 18, 19.)
It* had been much better for them to let them
go. “And Peter and John answered and
said unto them, Whether it be right in the
sight of God to hearken unto you more than
unto God, judge ye.” When the terror was
abated (for that command was tantamount to
their being dismissed), then also the Apostles
speak more mildly: so far were they from


Here and in what follows we have endeavored to restore the
proper order. In the Mss. in consequence, as it seems, of a
confusion between the two clauses, ov dvvaueba apyyjcacba,
and ov duvaneda yap . . My Aadecv, the order of the comments
is deranged: viz. ‘‘So that they would—been with them.’
‘* And they recognized—stopped “their mouths:”’ ‘* * Whether
it be right—judge ye. W hen the terror—mere bravery.
‘Whether it be right,’ he says, and, * We cannot deny it.’
So that they would—better to let them go. ‘Whether it be
right—more than unto God.’ Here by God—His Resurrec-
tion.

* The author seems to give two different interpretations of
the statement: ‘‘ They recognized them that they had been
with Jesus.” (1) They “perceived that these were the men
whom they had before seen in company with Jesus. (2) They
saw that their words and acts betokened association with
Jesus. It is Beg that the former only is meant in this
place.—G. B.

3 Kaitou 2 aa ai apxat Sewai cai SvoxoAn. ‘If at the
beginning you failed. how can you expect to succeed now?
for the béginning being always the hardest part of any diffi-
cult undertaking, if you could not stop it then, much less after-
wards.’ The modern text unnecessarily alters it to oUmw 7. ai

xXaAerat Te Kai duox.
4 TIoAA@ paddov avrois BéeAtLov hv avrovs adetvar, N.has a
colon at avtois, which perhaps is better; then the first clause
may be the comment on 70 ca@oAov pH ‘bOeyyer Oar = DOE. .LS
much more to them. It had been better to dis-
miss them (at once).”” For this sentence E. alone has, Havu ye,
Tovs ovdey vuas nyOUEvous Kai ametAovvtas.: ‘* Aye, men who
all your threatening:’’ which is


a.


68 THE! WORKS, OF


ST.) CHRMSOST OM:


[HomILy X.


mere bravery: ‘“ Whether? it be right,” says
he: and “ We cannot [but speak]. Whether
it be right in the sight of God to obey you
rather than God.” (v. 20.) Here [by ‘‘God’’]
they mean Christ, for he it was that com-
manded them. And once more they confirm
the fact of His Resurrection. ‘“ For we
cannot but speak the things we have seen and
heard:” so that we are witnesses who have a
right to be believed. “So when they had
further threatened them.” (v. 21.) Again
they threatened in vain. ‘“ They let them go,
finding nothing how they might punish them,
because of the people: for all men glorified
God for that which was done.” So then the
people glorified God, but these endeavored
to destroy them: such fighters against God
were they! Whereby they made them more
conspicuous and _ illustrious. “For My
strength,” it is said, ‘‘is made perfect in weak-
ness,- ,(2 Cor.-xii. 9.)

Already these as martyrs have borne testi-
mony: set in the battle against all, they said,
“We cannot but speak the things we have
seen and heard.” If the things we speak be
false, reprehend them; if true, why hinderest
thou? Such is philosophy! Those, in per-
plexity, these in gladness: those covered with
exceeding shame, these doing all with bold-
ness: those in fear, these in confidence. For
who, I would ask, were the frightened? those
who said, “ That it spread no further among
people,” or these who said, “we cannot but
speak the things we have seen and heard ?”
And these had a delight, a freedom of speech,
a joy surpassing all; those a despondency, a
shame, a fear; for they feared the people.
But these were not afraid of those; on the
contrary, while these spake what they would,
those did not what they would. Which were
in chains and dangers? was it not these last ?

Let us then hold fast to virtue; let not
these words end only in delight, and in a cer-
tain elevation of the spirits. This is not the
theatre, for singers (xapdduv), and tragedians,
and musicians (x:Hapicrav), where the fruit con-
sists only in the enjoyment and where the
enjoyment itself passes with the passing day.
Nay, would that it were enjoyment alone, and
not mischief also with the enjoyment! Butso
itis: each man carries home with him much
of what he has witnessed there, sticking to
him like the infection of a plague: and one in-
deed, of the younger sort, having culled such
snatches of song here and there of those


1 E. and Edd. ‘‘ That a notable miracle is done, we cannot
deny:”’ and below ‘‘ Here they say, of God, for, ‘of Christ.’
Do you see how that is fulfilled which He said unto them,
‘Behold I send you as sheep in the midst of wolves; fear
them not.’ Then once more they confirm,’’ etc. For roo
®eov, A. B. have tov Xprorov.


satanic plays,? as he could fix in his memory,
goes singing them about the house: while an-
other, a senior, and forsooth too staid for such
levity, does not this indeed, but what is there
spoken, both the preachments and the very
words, he remembers it all; and another
again, some filthy and absurd ditty. From
this place you depart, taking nothing with
you.—We have laid down a law—nay, not we:
God forbid ! for it is said, “ Call no man your
master upon the earth” (Matt. xxiii. 8);
Christ has laid down a Jaw that none should
swear. Now, say, what has been done with
regard to this law? For I will not cease
speaking of it; “‘ lest,” as the Apostle saith, “if
I come again, I must not spare.” (2 Cor. xiii.
2.) I ask then, have you laid the matter to
heart? have you thought of it seriously? have
you been in earnest about it, or must we
again take up the same subject? Nay, rather,
whether you have or not, we will resume it,
that you may think seriously about it, or, if
you have laid it to heart, may again do this
the more surely, and exhort. others also.
With what then, I pray you, with what shall
we begin? Shall it be with the Old Testa-
ment? For indeed this also is to our shame,
that the precepts of the Law, which we ought
to surpass, we do not even thus observe!
For we ought not to be hearing such matters ©
as these: these are precepts adapted to
the poor Jewish level (ric Iovdaixie evresziac) : we
ought to be hearing those counsels of perfec-
tion; ‘Cast away thy property, stand courage-
ously, and give up thy life in behalf of the
Gospel, scorn all the goods of earth, have
nothing in common with this present life; if
any wrong thee, do him good; if any defraud
thee, bless him; if any revile thee, show him
honor; be above everything.” (S. Ambros.
de Off. i.2.) These and such as these are
what we ought to be hearing. But here are
we discoursing about swearing; and our case
is just the same as if, when a person ought to
be a philosopher, one should take him away
from the great masters, and set him to spell
syllables letter by letter! Just think now
what a disgrace it would be for a man having
a flowing beard, and with staff in hand, and
cope on shoulders, * to go to school with chil-


2? The various readings are aopatwy for Spayatwv, and pépyn
for edn. Below, tav E ExEloe AcyOMEVWY Kal KNPVY-ATwWY Kat
PnLaTwY wéenvynTar tavTwy. The mod. omits xaixyp. The mean-
ing is, ‘‘He cannot carry away in his memory the preach-
ing which he hears in Church: but the preachments (procla-
puations) which he hears in the theatre he remembers, every
word.

8 A description of the attire of a philosopher. Lucian men-
tions the long beard and the staff, but as the vestment, the
TpiBwriov or tritum pallium. The e&wmis elsewhere denotes
(in opposition to émwpts) a tunic without sleeves, forming part
of the dress of old men, and slaves, and also used in comedy.
Here it seems to mean a cope, perhaps (Doun. ap. Savil.), the
original of the academic hood, caputiumnz.


HomILy X.]


dren, and be set the same tasks with them:
would it not be above measure ridiculous ?
And yet the ridicule which belongs to us is
even greater. For not as the difference be-
tween philosophy and the spelling-lesson, so is
that between the Jewish polity and ours: no
indeed, but as the difference between angels
and men. Say now, if one could fetch down
an angel from heaven, and should bid him
stand here and listen to our preaching, as one
whose duty it is to conform himself thereto,
would it not be shameful and preposterous?
But if to be yet, like children, under teaching
about these things be ridiculous; what must it
be, not even to attend to these things: how
great the condemnation, how great the shame !
To be Christians still, and to have to learn
that it is not right to swear! However, let us
put up with that, lest we incur even worse
ridicule.

Well, then, let us speak to you to-day from
the Old Testament. What does it tell us?
** Accustom not thy mouth to swearing ; neither
use thyself to the naming of the Holy One.”
And why? “For as a servant that is con-
tinually beaten shall not be without a blue
mark, so he that sweareth.” (Ecclus. xxiii.
to.) See the discernment of this wise man.
He did not say, ‘‘ Accustom not to swearing ”’
thy mind, but “thy mouth”; because being
altogether an affair of the mouth, thus it is
easily remedied. For at last it becomes a
habit without intention ; as for instance, there
are many who entering the public baths, as
soon as they have passed the threshold, cross
(Hom. in 1 Cor. xi. 7) themselves (cgpayi-
Covra).t This the hand has got to do, with-
out any one’s bidding, by force of habit.
Again, at the lighting of a candle, often when
the mind is intent on something else, the
hand makes the sign. In the same way also
the mouth, without concurrence of the mind,
articulates the word, from mere habit, and the
whole affair is in the tongue. ‘“‘ Neither use
thyself,” he says, ‘‘to the naming of the Holy
One. For as a servant that is continually
beaten shall not be without a blue mark, so he
that sweareth.” He speaks not here of false
oaths, but he cuts down all oaths, and to them
also assigns their punishment. Why then,
swearing is asin. For such in truth is the
soul; full of all these ulcers, all these scars.
But you do not see them? Yes, this is the
mischief of it; and yet you might see if you
wished; for God has given you eyes. With
eyes of this kind did the Prophet see, when he


1 Tertull. de Corona militum. ‘‘ Ad omnem progressum
atque promotum, ad ontnen aditum et exitum, ad calceatum,
ad lavacra, ad mensas, ad lumina, ad cubilia, ad sedilia,
a Sal ik nos conversatio exercet, frontem crucis signaculo
erimus.


ite sels OF FHE APOSTLES:


69


said, ‘‘My wounds stink, and are corrupt,
because of my foolishness.” (Ps. xxxviil. 5.)
We have despised God, we have hated that good
Name, we have trodden Christ under foot, we
have lost all reverence, none names the Name
of God with honor. Yet if you love any one,
even at his name you start to your feet; but
God you thus continually invoke, and make
nothing of it. Call upon Him for the benefit
of your enemy; call upon Him for the salva-
tion of your own soul ; then he will be present,
then you will delight Him; whereas now you
provoke Him to anger. Call upon Him as
Stephen did; “ Lord,” he said, “‘ lay not this
sin to their charge.” (ch. vil. 59.) Call upon
Him as did the wife of Elkanah, with tears
and sobs, and prayers. (1 Sam.i. 10.) I pre-
vent you not, rather I earnestly exhort you to
it. Call upon him as Moses called upon Him,
yea, cried, interceding for those? who had
driven him into banishment. For you to
make mention at random of any person of
consideration, is taken as an insult: and do
you bandy God about in your talk, in season,
out of season? I do not want to hinder you
from keeping God always in your mind: nay,
this I even desire and pray for, only that you
should do this, so as to honor Him. Great
good would this have done us, if we had
called upon God only when we ought, and for
what we ought. And why, I would ask, were
such miracles wrought in the Apostles’ times,
and not in ours? And yet it is the same God,
the same Name. But no, the case is not the
same. For then they called upon Him only
for those objects which I have mentioned ;
whereas we call upon Him not for these, but
quite other purposes.—If a man refuse to be-
lieve you, and that is why you swear, say to
him, ‘ Believe me:” however, if you will
needs make oath, swear by yourself. I say
this, not to set up a law against Christ’s law ;
God forbid; for it is said, “ Let your yea be
yea, and your nay, nay (Matt. v. 37): but by
way of coming down to your present level, that
I may more easily lead you to the practice of
this commandment, and divert you from this
tyrannical habit. How many who have done
well in other respects, have been undone by
these practices! Shall I tell you why it was
permitted the ancients to take oaths ? (for to


2 Urép Tov duyadevocavtwy avrov. When the ‘intercession’’
of Moses is spoken of, it is natural to suppose that the refer-
ence is to Exod. xxxii. 11 ff. But Sav. and Ben. refer this to
Num. xii. 13, perhaps because of €Bda (LXX. €Bonce). But
the addition, ‘‘for those who had driven him into banish-
ment,’’ does not suit the latter and less memorable occasion:
for Miriam and Aaron did but pel ises against Moses,”’ not
attempt to banish or expel him. More fully expressed, the
meaning may be, *‘ Fora people who began by making hima
fugitive, Ex. ii. 15, Acts vil. 29, and now had put the finishing
stroke to their ingratitude.”’ Comp. Ex. xvii. 4; Num. xiv.
EOS 03) CLG.


70


take false oaths, was not permitted to them
either.) Because they swore by idols. But
are you not ashamed to rest in laws, by which
they in their infirmity were led on to some-
thing better? It is true, when I take a Gen-
tile in hand, I do not immediately lay this in-
junction upon him, but in the first place I ex-
hort him to know Christ; but if the believer,
who has both learnt Him and heard Him,
must needs crave the same forbearance with
the Gentile, what is the use, what the gain (of
his Christianity?)—But the habit is strong,
and you cannot detach yourself from it? Well
then, since the tyranny of habit is so great,
transfer it into another channel. And how is
this to be done? you will ask. What I have
said often, I say also now; let there be many
monitors (Aoycrai), let there be many examiners
and censors (éeraorai, doxuacrai). Say, if you
chance to put on your? mantle inside out, you
allow your servant to correct your mistake,
and are ashamed to learn of him, although


THE WORKS: OF 'ST) CHENSOSTOm:


[Homiry XI.


another? You suffer your menial to put your
dress in order, and to fasten your shoes, and
will you not endure him that would put your
soul in order? Let even your menial, your
child, your wife, your friend, your kinsman,
your neighbor, be your teachers on this point.
For as whena wild beast is hunted down from
all sides, it is impossible for it to escape; so he
that has so many to watch him, so many to re-
prove him, who is liable to be struck at from
all sides, cannot help being on his guard.
The first day he will find it hard to put up
with, and the second, and the third; but after
that it will come easier, and, the fourth passed,
there will not even be anything to do. Make
the experiment, if you doubt me; take it into
consideration, I beseech you. It is not a
trifling matter to be wrong in, nor yet to come
right in; on both sides it is great for evil and
for good. May the good be effected, through
'the grace and loving-mercy of our Lord Jesus
|Christ, to Whom with the Father and the


there is much to be ashamed of in this; and| Holy Ghost be glory, power, and honor, now
here when you are getting hurt to ‘your soul,} and ever, world without end. Amen.


are you ashamed to be taught better by


HOMEY: SP,


ACTS


“And being let go, they went to their own company,
and reported all that the chief priests and elders
had said unto them.”


Nor for their own glory did they tell the
tale—how should such be their motive ?—but
what they displayed was the proofs therein ex-
hibited of the grace of Christ. All that their
adversaries had said, this they told; their own
part, it is likely, they omitted: this made the
hearers all the more courageous. What then?
These again flee to the true Succor, to the
Alliance invincible, and again, “with one
accord. And when they heard that,” it is
said, “with one accord they lifted up their
voice to God, and said:” (v. 24) and with
great earnestness, for it is no prayer made at
random. Observe with what exquisite pro-
priety their prayers are framed: thus, when
they besought to be shown who was meet for
the Apostleship, they said, “Thou, Lord,
which knowest the heart of all men, show:”
(ch. i. 24) for it was a subject for Prescience
there: but here, where the thing needed was


1 ay mev Tov Bippov evaddak repiBadn. A. N. Bipov. B. C.
Biov (the word Bippos, d777hus having perhaps become obso-
lete). Mod. rnv éeodyra.


LIN BB


| that the mouths of their adversaries should be
stopped, they speak of lordship; wherefore
they begin thus : Lord, “ (Aéorora) the God that
madest heaven and earth, and the sea, and
all that in them is: Who,? by the Holy
Ghost through the mouth of Thy servant,
David our father, didst say, Why did the
heathen rage, and the people imagine vain
things? The kings of the earth stood up, and
the rulers were gathered together against the
Lord, and against His Christ.” (v. 24~26.)
It is to sue God, as one may say upon His
own covenants, that they thus produce this
prophecy: and at the same time to comfort
themselves with the thought, that in vain are
all the imaginations of their foes. This then
is what they say: Bring those words into
accomplishment, and show that they “imagine
vain things.—For of a truth,” they proceed,
“there were gathered together in this city,
against Thy holy Child Jesus, (Maida) Whom
Thou hast anointed, both Herod, and Pontius


_.? The various readings are: 6 Tod matpos nuav dia Mvevparos
Aytov otouatos A. mados cov, A. N. tov m. nuav, om. C.6 éx
oTOLATOS TOU 7. NuM@Y A. Kai matdds cov, B. 6 Sa oTou. A. Tov
ta.das gov, D. F. zov, om. E.


Homiry XI.]


Pilate, together with the Gentiles and the
people of Israel, for to do whatsoever Thy
hand and Thy counsel determined before to
be done. And now, Lord, behold their
threatenings.” (v. 27-29.) Observe their
largeness of mind (g:Aosogiav). ‘These are not
words of imprecation. In saying, “their
threatenings, they do not mean this or that
thing specifically threatened, but only in gen-
eral, the fact of their threatening, perhaps,
as being formidable. In fact, the writer is
concise in his narrative. And observe, they
do not say, “ Crush them, cast them down ;”
but what? “And grant unto Thy servants,
that with all boldness they may speak Thy
word.” Let us also learn thus to pray. And
yet how full of wrath one would be, when
fallen among men intent upon killing him,
and making threats to that effect ? how full of
animosity? But not so these saints. “ By
stretching forth Thine hand to heal, and that
signs and wonders may be done by the Name
of Thy holy Child Jesus.” (v. 30.) If in that
Name the mighty deeds are wrought, great
will be the boldness.

“And when they had prayed, the place was
shaken where they were assembled together.”
(v. 31.) This was the proof that they were
heard, and of His visitation. ‘And they
were all filled with the Holy Ghost.” What
means, “ They were filled?” ‘It means, They
were inflamed; and the Gift burned up within
them. “And they spake the word of God
with boldness. And the multitude of them
that believed were of one heart and of one
soul.” (v. 32.) Do you see that together
with the grace of God they also contributed
their part? For everywhere it ought to be
well observed, that together with the grace
of God they do their part likewise. Just as
Peter said above, “Silver and gold have I
none”; and again, that “they were all? to-
gether.” (ch. iii. 6.) But in this place, having
mentioned that they were heard, the sacred
writer proceeds to speak also of them, what
virtue they showed. Moreover, he is just about
to enter upon the narrative of Sapphira and
Ananias, and with a view to show the detest-
able conduct of that pair, he first discourses
of the noble behavior of the rest. Now say, did
their love beget their poverty, or the poverty
the love? In my opinion, the love begat the
poverty, and then the poverty drew tight the
cords of love. For observe what he says:
“They were all of one heart and of one soul.”


1 "Eni 7d adro,“At the same, as interpreted in a former Hom-
ily, vii. §. 2. For the next sentence, E. has Iadw eévravéa
SnA@v 7d avTd A€yet, OTL TOD TANBovs, K.T. A. “ Here again ex-
plaining the ‘7d avrd,’’’ etc.—It is in allusion to the same ex-
pression that he says a little further on, "Idov xapdia Kai Wuxn
To auto.


THEOACTS: OF: (THE “APOSTLES.


Fi


Behold,? heart: and soul are what make the
“together.”’ ‘Neither said any of them that
aught of the things which he possessed was
his own; but they had all things common.
And with great power the Apostles rendered
their testimony (azedidow) of the resurrection.”
(v. 33.) The phrase betokens them to be as
persons put in trust with a deposit: he speaks
of it as a debt or obligation: that is, their
testimony they with boldness did render, or
pay off, to all. “And great grace was upon
them all. Neither was there any among them
that lacked.” (v. 34.) Their feeling was just
as if they were under the paternal roof, all for
awhile *® sharing alike. It is not to be said,
that though indeed they maintained the rest,
yet they did it with the feeling that the means
whereof they maintained them were still their
own. No, the admirable circumstance is this,
that they first alienated their property, and so
maintained the rest, on purpose that the main-
tenance might not come as of their own private
means, but as of the common property. “ For
as many as were possessors of lands or houses
sold them, and brought the price of the things
that were sold, and laid them down at the
Apostles’ feet; and distribution was made
unto every man according as he had need.”
(v. 35.) A great mark of honor this, that
“they laid them at the Apostles’ feet. And
Joses, who by the Apostles was surnamed Bar-
nabas, (‘ which is, being interpreted, The son
of consolation.’)” (v. 36.) I do not think that
this is the same with the companion of Mat-
thias; for that person was also called Justus
and [Barsabas, but this, Joses and] “ Bar-
nabas ” [“‘son of consolation’’]. I suppose
he also received the name from his virtue, as
being qualified and suited for this duty. “A
Levite, and of the country of Cyprus by
birth.” Observe on all occasions how the
writer indicates the breaking up of the Law.
But how was he also a “ Cyprian by birth?”
Because they then even removed to other
countries,. and still were called Levites.
‘“‘ Having land, sold it, and brought the price,
and laid it at the Apostles’ feet.*”’

Let us now look over again what has been
said. [‘‘ And being let go, they went to their
own company, and reported all that the chief
priests and elders had said unto them.” |
(Recapitulation, v. 23.) See the unostentatious


2 i. e. the émi 7d avd is not local, but moral, the union of all
believers in one heart and soul: q. d. ‘* Do not object that itis
impossible for all believers to be together now.”

3 The Catena has preserved the true reading, téws, for which
A. C. N. have ate ws, B. F. D. are. E. substitutes viot.

4 A. B.C. N. trav 'ArootoAwy, dpa to atudov. “ldwuev Aowrov
avw0ev Ta cipnueva. Kat tav ‘ArooroAwy thy diAocodiav. The
clause 6pa 70 atvdor is to be restored to its place after the sec-
ond tev ’AmocToAwy, as in the modern text, opa tov "A, Td a. Kae
Ty o.


72D
/-


THE WORKS OF STs CHEYSOSTORE


[HomiLy XI.


conduct of the Apostles, and their largeness
of mind. They did not go about boasting,
and say, “How we served (arexypyodueba) the
priests!” nor were they ambitious of honor:
but, we read, “they came unto their own
company. Observe how they do not cast
themselves upon temptations, but when the
temptations present themselves, with courage
endure them. Had it been some other of the
disciples, perhaps, emboldened by the coun-
tenance of the multitude, he might have
insulted, might have vented ever so many
harsh expressions. But not so these true
philosophers; they do all with mildness and
with gentleness. “And when they heard
that, we read, with one accord they lifted up
their voice to God. (v. 24.) That shout pro-
ceeded from delight and great emotion. Such
indeed are the prayers which do their work,
prayers replete with true philosophy, prayers
offered up for such objects, by such persons,
on such occasions, in such a manner; whereas
all others are abominable and profane. ‘‘ Lord,
Thou the God that madest heaven and earth,
the sea, and all that in them is.” Observe
how they say nothing idle, no old wives’ talk
and fables, but speak of His power. Just as
Christ Himself said to the Jews, “ If I by the
Spirit of God do cast out devils: behold the
Father also speaks by the Spirit. For what
saith it? ‘‘ Lord, the God Who,’ by the Holy
Ghost, through the mouth of our father Thy
servant David didst say, Why did the nations
rage?” (v. 25.) Scripture is wont thus to speak
of one as of many. ‘For of a truth, Lord,
against Thy Holy Child Jesus, Whom Thou
didst anoint, 7? both Herod and Pontius Pilate,
etc. (v. 27.) Observe how, even in prayer,
they circumstantially, describe the Passion,
and refer all to God.—That is, Not they had
power to do this: but Thou didst it all, Thou?
that didst permit, that dost call to account,


1 Against the Arians, who from such texts as Matt. xii. 28,
inferred the inferiority of the Son, Chrys. says, ‘‘ Observe, the
Father Himself is here said to speak by the Holy Ghost.”
This is lost in the modern text, which substitutes Swryp for
Ilatyp. The text is given in our Mss. with these variations.
Comp. note a. A. C. Aé€arota 6 Geds (6 Cat.) tod matpos nuav (6
N.) dca Iv. ‘A otomatos A. B. Acorn: 0 ©. tov TaTpwY Nuav 6 da
IIv. ‘A dva grou, A. E. F. D. Acor. 0 ©. 6 Sta crow. A. omit-
ting dca Iv, “A,, but recognizing this clause in the comment.
“ Observe how they say nothing idle, but speak of His power
only: or rather, just as Christ said to the Jews. If I by the
Spirit of God do speak, so these also say, ‘By the Holy
Ghost.’ Behold, the Saviour also speaks by the Spirit. And
hear what it is that they say, ‘Lord, the God Who by the
mouth of David,’”’ etc.

2 In the Mss. this clause of v. 27, with the following com-
ment, opa mws, x. T. A. is set in the midst of the comment on v.
29: viz. before the sentence which (in the old text) also begins
With opa mws. It is certainly misplaced there. See note >.—
Atatpovat 70 maBos seems to refer to the mention of Herod and
Pontius Pilate. :

5 0 emiTpeWas, 0 kal €yKad@y Kai eis Tépas ayaywv. The mean-
ing seems to be, that though permitting, He calls to account,
and though holding men responsible, yet brought it to pass.
The modern text omits 0 cat éyxad@v, and adds eipyaow at the
end.


and yet didst bring to accomplishment, Thou
the All-skilful and Wise, that didst serve
Thee of Thine enemies for Thine own pleas-
ure. (v. 28.) ‘For to do whatever Thy hand,”
etc. Here they discourse of His exceeding
Skill and Wisdom and Power. So then, as
enemies they came together, and with murder-
ous purpose, and as opposing themselves, but
they did what things Thou wouldest: ‘ For to.
do,” as it is said, “‘ whatsoever Thy hand and
Thy purpose determined before to be done.”
What means, “‘ Thy hand?” Here he seems
to me to denote one and the same thing by
power and purpose, meaning that for Thee it
is enough but to will: for it is not by power
that one determines. ‘ Whatsoever Thy
hand,” etc. i. e. Whatsoever Thou didst
ordain: either this is the meaning, or, that
by His hand He did effect. “And now,
Lord, regard their threatenings.” (v. 29.) As
at that time, it is said, they “imagined vain
things,” so “now,” grant that their imagina-
tions may be in vain: i. e. let not their threaten-
ings come into accomplishment. And _ this
they said not because they would themselves
deprecate any hardship, but for the preaching’s
sake. For they do not say, “and deliver us
out of dangers;” but what? “And. grant
unto Thy servants, that with all boldness
they may speak Thy word.” ‘Thou Who didst
bring to pass the former designs, bring these
also to accomplishment. Observe,® how they
affirm God to be the Author of their confi-
dence ; and how they ask all for God’s sake,
nothing for their own glory or ambition.
They promise for their own part, that they
will not be dismayed; but they pray that
signs may be wrought “by stretching forth
Thy hand to heal, and that signs and wonders
may be done:” (v. 30) for without these,
however great the zeal they showed, they
would be striving to no purpose. God as-
sented to their prayer, and manifested this, by
shaking the place. For “when they had
prayed,” itis said, “‘the place was shaken.
(v. 31.) And wherefore this was done, hear
from the prophet, when he says, ‘ He looketh
on the earth, and maketh it to tremble. (Ps.


4 7d avrTd Aé€yew THy Svvauty Kat BovAnv. i. e. ‘hand’? means
‘* power,’ and ‘‘hand’’ (or, power) and ** purpose,”’ or, ‘“* will’’
here make one notion, “ Thy will which is also power,” for to
Thee to will is to prevail: not two notions, for we do not say
that power determines, but only the will.—The Edd. however,
adopt from E. thy xetpa for to av’to, which spoils the sense.
‘a the hand he means the power and the purpose.’’—Below,
B. C. have o7u 77 xerpi dueratrev (A. omits the clause), we retain
from E, F. D. évéemparrev.—CEcum. ‘‘ The hand and the coun-
sel mean the same thing: for where there is power, there is no
nerd of counsel. What Thou didst order from the beginning
is done.

5 Here the Mss. insert,*Ov €xpicas, dyoiv. “Opa mas, k. 7. A.
‘Observe how, even in prayer, they circumstantially describe
the Passion, and refer all to God,’’ etc. And then: ‘‘ Observe
how they ask all,’”’ etc. See note ?.—Here for the latter opa or
opas mws of the old text, E. has etSes mas. :


Homi.y X1.]


civ. 32.) For by this He made it manifest
that He is‘present to their prayers. And
again, another prophet saith, “ The earth was
shaken, and did tremble at the presence of
the Lord.” (Ps. xvili. 7; Ixviii, 8.). And God
did this, both to make it more awful, and to
lead them on to a courageous trust. ‘ And
they were all filled with the Holy Ghost, and
they spake the word of God with boldness.”
They’ gained increased boldness. As it was
the beginning (of their work), and they had
besought a sensible sign for their persuasion
(xpd¢ TO metic jvat avrouvc)—but after this we no-
where find the like happening—therefore great
was the encouragement they received. In
fact, they had no means of proving that He
was risen, save by miraculous signs. So that
it was not only their own assurance (dcdaZeiar)
that they sought: but that they might not
be put to shame, but that they might speak
with boldness. ‘ The place was shaken,” and
that made them all the more unshaken. For
this is sometimes a token of wrath, sometimes
of favor and providence, but on the present
occasion, of wrath. For’ in those times it
took place in an unusual manner. Thus, at
the Crucifixion, the earth was shaken: and
the Lord Himself says, “Then there shall be
famines, and pestilences, and earthquakes in
divers places. (Matt. xxiv. 7.) But then the
wrath of which it was a sign was against the
adversaries: as for the disciples, it filled them
with the Spirit. Observe, even the Apostles,
after the prayer, are “filled with the Holy
Ghost.” “And*® the multitudes of them
that believed,” etc. (v. 32.) Great, you per.
ceive, is the virtue of this thing, seeing their
was need of this (grace) even in that company.
For this is the foundation of all that is good,
this of which he now for the second time
makes mention, exhorting all men to the
contempt of riches: ‘‘ Neither* said any of


1 Edd. nat eis mappyotay mAciova adeidwv, as the conclusion of
the preceding sentence before the (omitted) text. ‘‘ And an-
ointing them (as wrestlers) unto greater boldness.’’ Then,
* For since it was the beginning (of their work), they besought
also a sensible sign in order that they might be believed (zpos
70 migTevOnvac avTovs, but after this, etc.). Great was the en-
couragement they thus received from their prayer. And with
good reason they crave the grace of signs, for they had no
other means,” etc.

2 Emet tore fevws yeyovev. Kai yap ore éotavpwOn, eoadevOn
nyn. Edd.’Emi dé 70d cwrnpiov mabous S€vws Kai mapa dvow
yeyove’ Kai yap TOTe maga egadevdn 7» yn. “* But at the Passion
of our Saviour it happened in an unusual manner and preter-
naturally: for then all the earth was shaken.’’ Instead of the
next sentence, ‘‘ And the Lord Himself,’ etc. E. has, ‘‘ to the
intent the power of Him that was crucified should everywhere
be known, and that the Sufferer was God, and not simply man.
But further: although it was a token of wrath, yet was it of
His wrath against the adversaries,” etc., but Edd. follow the
old text here.

3 A. B. C. omit the text: D. F. Edd. insert from v. 33, 34,
“And great grace was upon them all, neither was there any
among them that lacked:”’ E. ‘‘ And with great power, etc.
and great grace,’’ etc. Tov mpayuatos 7 dSvvauts, 1. e. of the
having all things common, as below, p. 163. C. has mvevuaros,
which Savile adopts.

4 The innovator. mistaking the meaning of 70 devrepov (viz


ewe OF tTEAE “ePOSTLES:


73


them that aught of the things he possessed
was his own,” ‘but they had all things
common.” For that this was in consequence
not merely of the miraculous signs, but of
their own purpose, is manifest by the case
of Sapphira and Ananias. “And with great
power gave the Apostles witness,” etc.
(v. 33.) Not in word, but with power the
Apostles exhibited their testimony of the
Resurrection: just as Paul saith, “And my
preaching was not with persuasive words
of human wisdom, but with. manifestation
of the Spirit and of power.” And it is not
merely, With power, but, “With great
power.” (1 Cor. ii. 4.). “ And great grace,”
it says, “(was upon them all; for neither
was there any among them that lacked.
(v. 34.) This is why the grace (was upon
them all,) for that “there was none that
lacked :” that is, from the exceeding ardor
of the givers, none was in want. For they
did not give in part, and in part reserve:
nor yet in giving all, give it as their own.
And they lived moreover in great abundance :


they removed all inequality from among
them, and made a goodly order. “For as
many as were possessors,” etc. And with


great respect they did this: for they did not
presume to give into their hands, nor did
they ostentatiously present, but brought to
the Apostles’ feet. To them they left it to
be the dispensers, made them the owners,
that thenceforth all should be defrayed as
from common, not from private, property.*


the reference to ch. il. 44), has, Saying above (v. 32), Neither
said any of them,” etc., and here (v. 34), ‘‘ Neither was there
any among them that lacked.’”’ So Edd.

* The strong expressions of Chrys. concerning the community
of goods at Jerusalem are quite different from the guarded and
limiting statements of most modern commentators who seem
bent upon showing that it was only a case of remarkable liber-
ality, e.g. Hackett 7 Zoco: ‘‘Common in the use of their prop-
erty, not necessarily in their possession of it.’’ Our author's
statements agree better with the New Test. notices on the
subject. The main facts are these. (1) There was a real and
general community of property. The statements in Acts on
this point are clear and strong : Kal elxov amavta Kowa (ii. 44) >
They were selling and distributing their real and personal
property—va xtyjpata kai ras Umapéecs (ii. 45). Nor did any one
say that anything of his possessions was his own, aAA jv avtois
anmavTa Kowva, (iv. 32); ‘‘ AS many as (oot) were possessors of
lands or houses,’’ sold them, brought the money and distribu-
tion was made to the needs of each (iv. 34, 35). This is more
than distinguished liberality or mere prevailing willingness to
give. (2) This peculiar phenomenon was connected with the
habit of living together as a group or family, on the part of
the Jerusalem Christians (i. 13 ; ii. 42-44). It was an evidence
that they were peculiarly one in heart and soul, that no mem-
ber of this closely-knit community was allowed to suffer
while others could supply him (iv. 32-34). (3) The arrange-
ment was purely voluntary. There was no law or demand in
the case. Ananias and Sapphira (v. 1-11) were not punished
for contributing to the common treasury only a part of the
price of the land but as verse 4 clearly shows, for falsely pre-
senting it as the whole. Yet the fact that they wished to have
it thought that they had brought all seems to show that to
bring all was customary and expected. (4) This community
of goods was both local and temporary. It seems to have
been confined to Jerusalem. There is no allusion to it in the
Epistles. It sprang out of the ardor of brotherly love in the
early years of. the Christian community at Jerusalem and
in view of the special needs of many of its members. The
special poverty of the church at Jerusalem which made
contributions from other churches necessary, may have
resulted in part, as Meyer suggests. from the working


74


This was also a help to them against vain-
glory. If this were done now, we should
live more pleasant lives, both rich and poor,
nor would it be more pleasant to the poor
than to the rich themselves. And if you
please, let us now for awhile depict it in
words, and derive at least this pleasure
from it, since you have no mind for it in
your actions. For at any rate this is evident,
even from the facts which took place then,
that by selling their possessions they did
not come to be in need, but made them
rich that were in need. However, let us
now depict this state of things in words,
and let all sell their possessions, and bring
them into the common stock—in words, I
mean: let none be excited, rich or poor. How
much gold think you would be collected?
For my part, I conjecture—for of course it
is not possible to speak exactly—that suppos-
ing all here, men and women, to empty out
their whole property, lands, possessions,
houses,—for I will not speak of slaves, since
at that time there was no such thing, but
doubtless such as were slaves they sat at
liberty,—perhaps ten hundred thousand
pounds weight of gold would be the amount
collected: nay, twice or thrice as much.
For consider; at what number of “‘7uga’’?
(yokes) is our city rated? How many (of
the population) shall we say are Christians?
shall we say an hundred thousand, and the
rest Greeks and Jews? Then what thousands


(of pounds) of gold would be collected!
And what is the number of poor? I do not
think more than fifty thousand. Then to
feed that number daily, what abundance


there would be! And yet if the food were
received in common, all taking their meals
together, it would require no such great
outlay after all. But, you will ask, what
should we do after the money was spent?
And do you think it ever could be spent?
Would not the grace of God be ten thousand
fold greater? Would not the grace of God
be indeed richly poured out? Nay, should


of thisplan. (5) The custom can hardly be explained apart
from the expectation of the nearness of the Parousza. In the
Thessalonian church all labor for self-support was upon the
ae of ceasing for the same reason. 1 Thess. iii. 10, sq.—G.


l eis mégov Lovywyv apiOuov ouvteiver; The word here used
erplexed the scribes of later times when it had become obso-
ete, and N. has iovAwy, B. iovyywv, C. dyywr (sic), only A. ex
corr. iovywv. The innovator substitutes wryadwy and ovvtedet.
The meaning is, At what number of 7zga is our city assessed
to the imperial tributes? Justinian MovelZ. xvii. c. 8. pre-
scribes that the imperial mpaxtopes, exactores, shall be com-
pelled to insert in their returns (amoxa() the exact quantity “ of
zygocephala or juga or jugalia or whatever else be the term
used in different localities:’? 1d mogov tay Gvyoxeharwy 7
to Vywv 7} LovyaAiwy, 7 Omws SymoTe av av’Ta KaTa X@pav Kadotev.
See Du Fresne Gloss. s. vv. It seems that each holding of
land was rated or assessed at so many juga or yokes of oxen;
moreover the term jwgu is equivalent to a measure of land,
as Varro remarks that land is measured in some places by
Juga, in others by jugera.


THE WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[HomILy XI.


we not make it a heaven upon earth? If,
where the numbers were three thousand
and five thousand, the doing of this thing
had such splendid success, and none of them
complained of poverty, how much more
glorious would this be in so vast a multitude ?
And even of those that are without, who would
not contribute ?—But, to show that it is the
living separately that is expensive and
causes poverty, let there be a house in which
are ten children: and the wife and the man,
let the one work at her wool, the other bring
his earnings from his outdoor occupation :
now tell me, in which way would these
spend most? by taking their meals together
and occupying one house, or by living sepa-
rately? Of course, by living separately.
For if the ten children must live apart, they
would need ten several rooms, ten tables,
ten attendants, and the income otherwise
in proportion. Is it not for this very reason,
that where there is a great number of
servants, they have all one table, that the
expense may not be so great? For so it
is, division always makes diminution, concord
and agreement make increase. The dwellers
in the monasteries jive just as the faithful
did then: now did ever any of these die of
hunger? was ever any of them not provided
for with plenty of everything? Now, it
seems, people are more afraid of this than
of falling into a boundless and bottomiess
deep. But if we had made actual trial of
this,” then indeed we should boldly venture
upon this plan (rov mpayyaroe). What grace
too, think you, would there not be! For
if at that time, when there was no believer
but only the three thousand and the five
thousand: when all, throughout the world,
were enemies, when they could nowhere look
for comfort, they yet boldly entered upon this
plan with such success; how much more
would this be the case now, when by the
grace of God there are believers everywhere
throughout the world? What Gentile would
be left? For my part, I think there would
not be one: we should so attract all, and
draw them to us? But yet if we do but
make® fair progress, I trust in God that
even this shall be realized. Only do as I
say, and let us successfully achieve things
in their regular order; if God grant life,
)


2 i.e. People now are more afraid of this (the cenobiticals
way of life, than they are of launching into the sea of this
world’s temptations: whereas if we had made trial of this, we
should boldly venture upon the practice so happily adopted by
the first Christians. (tod mpayuatos as above, p. 73, note 3.)

3’Eav 050 mpoBaivwuev. B. unnecessarily inserts tavrp,
which Ben, adopts. ‘‘ Si hac via progrediamur.” ‘Oda mpo-
Baivewy (or 68@ Badigevv) is a common phrase in St. Chrys. Ap-
plied to persons, it means ‘‘to be fairly started and getting
on:” to things, *‘ to be in train,’’ as in Hom. i. 086 wat Ta adda
mpovBacvev, ** the rest would follow in course.”’


Hemity XI.]


I trust that we shall soon bring you over
to this way of life.

In the first place, as regards that law about
swearing : accomplish that ; establish it firmly:
and let him that has kept it make known him
that has not, and call him to account withal,
and rebuke him sternly. For the swfra, Hom.
Vili.) appointed time (7 xpotecuia, is at hand,
and I am holding inquisition in the matter,
and him that is found guilty I will banish and
exclude. But God forbid that any such should
be found among us; rather may it appear,
f that all have strictly kept this spiritual watch-
- word. And as in war it is by the watchword
_ that friends and strangers are shown, so let it
_ be now; for indeed now also we are engaged
_ in a war; that we may know our brethren that
are properly such. For what a good thing it
is that we should have this to be our cogni-
zance both here and ina foreign land! What
a weapon this, against the very head of the
devil! A mouth that cannot swear will soon
both engage God in prayers, and smite the
devil a deadly blow. A mouth that cannot
swear will also be incapable of using insulting
language. Cast out this fire from your tongue,
as you would from a house: this fire, drag it
out. Give your tongue a little rest: make the
sore less virulent. Yea, I beseech you, do
this, that I may go on to set you another les-
son : for as long as this is not rightly done, I
dare not pass on to any other. Let this les-
son be got perfectly, and you shall have a
consciousness of the achievement, and then I
will introduce you to other laws, or rather not
I, but Christ. Implant in your soul this good
thing, and by little and little ye shall be a par-
adise of God, far better than that paradise of
old. No serpent among you, no deadly tree,
nor any such thing. Fix this habit deep. If
this be done, not ye only that are present shall
be benefitted, but all that are in all the world;
and not they alone, but those that are to suc-
ceed hereafter. For a good habit having
once entered, and being kept by all, will be
handed on to long ages, and no circumstances
shall be able to erase it. If he that gathered
sticks on the sabbath was stoned,—the man
that is doing a far more heinous work than
that gathering, the man that is amassing a
load of sins, for such is the multitude of oaths,
what shall he undergo? what shall he not have
to endure? You will receive great assistance
from God, if this be well achieved by you. If
I were to say, Be not abusive, immediately


I say, Be not envious, you will urge some
other excuse.
ing of the kind to say. On which account I
began with the easy precepts, which indeed is
also the unifarm practice in all arts.


rie Ae tS Or PE APOSDLES:


you will plead to me your indignation ; should |


But in this case you have noth- |


And |


75


thus one comes-to the higher duties, by learn-
ing first those which are easier far. How
easy it is you will see, when by the grace of
God having succeeded in this, you shall re
ceive another precept.

Put it in my power to speak out boldly, in
the presence both of Gentiles and of Jews,
and, above all, of God. Yea, I entreat you
by the love, by the pangs wherewith I have
travailed for your birth, *‘ my little children.”
I will not add what follows, “of whom I
travail in birth again;” nor will I say, ‘“ until
Christ be formed in you.” (Gal. iv. 19).
For I am persuaded, that Christ has been
formed in you. Other language I will use
towards you; ‘‘ My brethren, dearly beloved
and longed for, my joy and my crown.”
(Phil. iv. 1.) ‘Believe me that I shall use no
other language. If at this moment there were
placed upon my head ten thousand richly-
jewelled royal crowns, they could not give me
the joy which I feel at your growth in holi-
ness; or rather, I do not think the monarch
himself has such a joy, as that wherewith I
joy over you. Let him have come home, vic-
torious over all the nations at war with him,
let him have won many other crowns besides
the crown of his right; and receive other dia-
dems as tokens of his victory: I do not think
he would joy over his trophies, as I joy over
your soul’s progress. For I exult, as if I
had a thousand crowns on my head; and
well may I rejoice. For if by the grace
of God you achieve this good habit, you
will have gained a thousand battles far more
difficult than his; by wrestling and fighting
with malicious demons, and fiendish spirits,
with the tongue, not with sword, but by
the will. For consider how much is gained, if
so be that you do succeed! You have eradi-
cated, first, a heinous habit; secondly, an evil
conceit, the source of all evil, namely, the
opinion that the thing is indifferent and can
do no hurt; thirdly, wrath; fourthly, covet-
ousness; for all these are the offspring of
swearing. Nay, hence you will acquire a sure
footing in the way to all other virtues. For as
when children learn their letters, they learn
not them alone, but by means of them are
gradually taught to read; so shall it be with
you. That evil conceit will no longer deceive
you, you will not say, This is indifferent ;
you will no longer speak by mere habit, but
will manfully stand against all, so that having
perfected in all parts that virtue which is after
God, you may reap eternal blessings, through
the grace and loving-kindness of His Only-
Begotten Son, to Whom with the Father and
the Holy Ghost be glory, power and honor,
now and ever, world without end. Amen.


THE WORKS ‘OF ‘ST’ "CHER YSOSTeaE


[HomiLy XII


PrOMiEY VT:


ACTS eV. 36537


And Joses, who by the Apostles was surnamed Barna-
bas (which is, being interpreted, The son of con-
solation), a Levite, and of the country of Cyprus,
having land, sold it, and brought the money, and
laid it at the Apostles’ feet.”’


THE writer is now about to relate the affair
of Ananias and Sapphira, and in order to show
that the man’s sin was of the worst description,
he first mentions him who performed the virtu-
ous deed ; that, there being so great a multi-
tude all doing the same, so great grace, so
great miracles, he, taught by none of these,
but blinded by covetousness, brought destruc-
tion upon his own head. ‘“ Having land,—
meaning that this was all he possessed,—sold
it, and brought the money, and laid it at the
Apostles’ feet. But a certain man named
Ananias, with Sapphira his wife, sold a pos-
session, and kept back part of the price, his
wife also being privy to it, and brought a
certain part, and laid it at the Apostles’ feet.”
(ch. v. 1, 2.) The aggravating circumstance |
was, that the sin was concerted, and none
other saw what was done. How came it into
the mind of this hapless wretch to commit this
crime? “But Peter said, Ananias, why hath
Satan filled thine heart to lie to the Holy
Ghost, and to keep back part of the price
of the land?” (v. 3.) Observe even in this,
a great miracle performed, greater far than the
former. ‘‘ Whiles it remained,” say she, “‘ was
it not thine own? and after it was sold, was it
not in thine own power?” (v. 4.) That is,
“Was there any obligation and force? do we


Ghost ?


and found her dead, and, carrying her forth,


/wrought more miracles; both Peter and the


_accord in Solomon’s porch. And of the rest


constrain you against your will?” ‘ Why |
hast thou conceived this thing in thine heart?
thou hast not lied unto men, but unto God.
And Ananias hearing these words fell down,
and gave up the ghost.” (v. 5.) This miracle
is greater than that of the lame man, in respect
of the death inflicted, and the knowing what |
was in the thought of the heart, even what |
wdas- done’ “in “secret.* ““sAnd. vsrear, ‘fear
came on all them that heard these things.


'7. A. falls into its natural place as the comment on Ilezpov nav
| n oKLa,


* Chrys. evidently regards the death of Ananias and Sap-
phira as a miracle wrought by Peter (so Meyer). All that the
narrative states is that Peter disclosed the sin of Ananias and |
foretold the fate of his wife (Lechler). The middle position
seems preferable: Peter acted as the instrument of God, the
agent of the divine retribution. His will acted in conscious
harmony with the divine purpose of which it was the organ
(so Gloag).—G. B. S.


the streets their impotent folk, and laid them
‘upon couches and beds, that at the least the


| The modern text, after “the people magnified them,


And the young men arose, and wound him up,
and carried him out, and buried him. And
it was about the space of three hours after,
when his wife, not knowing what was done,
came in. And Peter answered unto her, Tell
me whether ye sold the land for so much?”
(v. 6-8.) The woman he would fain save,
for the man had been the author of the
sin: therefore he gives her time to clear
herself, and opportunity for repentance, say-
ing, “Tell me whether ye sold the land for
so much? And she said, Yea, for so much.
Then Peter said unto her, How is it that
ye have agreed together to tempt the Holy
Behold, the feet of them which
have buried thy husband are at the door,
and shall carry thee out. Then she fell
down straightway at his feet, and yielded up
the ghost; and the young men came in,


buried her by her husband. And great fear
came upon all the Church, and upon as
many as heard these things.” (v. g-11.)

After this fear had come upon them, he


rest; “‘And by the hands of the Apostles
were many signs and wonders wrought among
the people; and they were all with one


durst no man join himself to them,” i. e. to the
Apostles ; ‘“ but the people magnified them,”
i.e. the Jewish people. If* “no man durst
join himself unto them,” the Apostles, “ there
were,” however, ‘the more added unto the
Lord, believers, multitudes both of men and of
women, insomuch that they brought out into


shadow of Peter passing by might overshadow —
some of them.” (v. 12-15.) For Peter was the


1 Ei ovdeis ér6Aua KodAAaaGat avtois tT. amoot. For et, which
is the reading of A., and seems to be the true reading, B.C. N. }
have 7. The passage is corrupt, but the sense may be restored
by inserting the words of the sacred text as above: i. e. To —
them, the Apostles, none durst join himself, but believers ©
were the more added to the Lord, etc. Then 6 yap Iletpos x. ©


But with the other reading, 7, the sense may be com- |
pleted as below, p. 78, viz. ‘‘ or, no man durst,”’ ete., [so that
they were allowed to remain undisturbed in Solomon’s porch

sub-
stitutes: Elxdtws: kat yap o Il. x. 7. A. ‘* With reason. For
indeed Peter was henceforth terrible, inflicting punishment,
exposing even the thoughts of the mind: to whom also they
gave more heed by reason of the miracle,” etc.


Hominy XII.) THE ACTS OF


PELE


APOSTLES: 77


wonderful one, and he to whom they more gave
heed both because of his public harangue, the
first and the second and the third, and because
of the miracle; for he it was that wrought the
miracle, the first, the second, the third: for
the present miracle was twofold: first, the con-
-victing the thoughts of the heart, and next
the inflicting of death at his word of com-
mand. “ That at the least the shadow of Peter
passing by,” etc. This had not occurred
in the history of Christ; but see here what
He had told them actually coming to pass,
that “they which believe on Me, the works
that I do shall they do also ; and greater works
_ than these shall they do.” (John xiv. 12.)
_* There came also a multitude out of the cities
round about unto Jerusalem, bringing sick
_ folks, and them that were vexed with unclean
spirits; and they were healed every one.”
(v. 16.)


And now I would have you observe the way.


in which their whole life is interwoven. First,
there was despondency on account of Christ
taken from them, and then came joy because
of the Spirit descending upon them; again,
dejection because of the scoffers, and then joy
in the result of their own apology. And here
again we find both dejection and gladness.
In that they were become conspicuous, and
that God made revelations to them, there was
gladness: in that they had cut off some of
their own company, there was sadness. Once
more: again there is gladness upon their
success, and again sadness by reason of the
High Priest. And so it will be seen to be the
case throughout. And the same will be found
to hold in the case of the ancient saints like-
wise.—But let us look over again what has
been said.


sihey-sold them,” it. is written, “and
brought the prices, and laid them down at the
Apostles’ feet.” (Recapitulation. iv, 34-37.)
See, my beloved brethren, how instead of leav-
ing the Apostles to sell, they themselves sold,
and presented the prices to them. “But!
a certain man named Ananias,” etc. (v. 1.)
This history touches Bishops too, and very
forcibly. And the wife of Ananias was privy
to the thing done : therefore he examines her.
But perhaps some one will say that he dealt
very harshly with her. What do you mean?
What harshness? If for gathering sticks a
man is to be stoned, much rather ought he
for sacrilege; for this money was become
Sacred. He that has chosen to sell his goods


1 The modern text inserts here: ‘‘ But not so Ananias: he
secretes a part of the price of the field which he sold : where-
fore also he is punished as one who did not manage his
business rightly, and who was convicted of stealing what was
his own.”


and distribute. them, and then withdraws
them, is guilty of sacrilege. But if he is
sacrilegious, who resumes from his own, much
more he who takes from what is not his own.
And do not think that because the conse-
quence is not now the same, the crime will
go unpunished. Do you see that this is the
charge brought against Ananias, that having
made the money sacred, he afterwards secreted
it? Couldest thou not, said Peter, after selling
thy land, use the proceeds as thine own?
Wast thou forbidden ? Wherefore after thou
hadst promised it? See how at the very
beginning, the devil made his attack ; in the
very midst of such signs and wonders, how
this man was hardened! Something of the
same kind had happened upon a time in the
Old Testament. The son of Charmi coveted
the devoted thing : for observe there also what
vengeance ensues upon the sin. Sacrilege,
beloved, is a most grievous crime, insulting,
and full of contempt. We neither obliged thee
to sell, the Apostle says, nor to give thy money
when thou hadst sold; of thine own’free choice
thou didst it; why hast thou then stolen from
the sacred treasury? ‘“ Why,” he says, “ hath
Satan filled thine heart?” (v. 3.) Well, if
Satan did the thing, why is the man made
guilty of it? For admitting the influence of
the devil, and being filled with it. You will
say, they ought to have corrected him. But
he would not have received correction ; for he
that has seen such things as he had seen, and
is none the better, would certainly be none the
better for anything else that could be done;
the matter was not one to be simply passed
over: like a gangrene, it must be cut out,
that it might not infect the rest of the body.
As it is, both the man himself is benefitted in
regard that he is not left to advance further
in wickedness, and the rest, in that they are
made more earnest; otherwise the contrary
would have ensued. In the next place, Peter
proves him guilty, and shows that the deed
was not hidden from him, and then pronounces
the sentence. But wherefore, upon what pur-
pose hast thou done this? Didst thou wish
to keep it? Thou oughtest to have kept it all
along, and never to have professed to give it.
The sacrilege, beloved, is a grievous one.
For another, it may be, coveted what was not
his own: but it was at thy discretion to keep
what was thine own. Why then didst thou
first make it sacred, and then take it? Out
of excessive contempt hast thou done this.
The deed does not admit of pardon, it is past
pleading for.—Therefore let it be no stumbling-
block to any, if at present also there are
sacrilegious persons. If there were such per-
sons then, much more now, when evils are


78


many. but let us “rebuke them before all,
that others also may fear.” (1 Tim. v. 20.)
Judas was sacrilegious, but it was no stum-
bling-block to the disciples. Do you see
how many evils spring from love of money ?
“And great fear, it is said, came on all them
that heard these things.” (v.5.) That man
was punished, and others profited thereby.
Not without cause. And yet, signs had been
wrought before: true, but there was not such
a sense of fear. So true is that saying,
“The Lord is known by executing judgments.”
(Ps. ix. 16.) The same thing had occurred
in the case of the Ark: Uzzah was punished
and fear came upon the rest. (2 Sam. vi. 7.)
But in that instance the king through fear
removed from him the Ark; but here the
disciples became more earnestly heedful.
(‘‘ And it was about the space of three hours
after, when his wife, not knowing what was
done, came in,” etc.] (v.7.) But observe how
Peter, instead of sending for her, waited till
she entered; and how none of the others
durst carry out the intelligence. Such the
teacher’s awfulness, such the disciples’ rever-
ence, such the obedience! ‘ An interval of
three hours,’—and yet the woman did not
hear of it, and none of those present reported
it, although there was time enough for it to
be noised abroad; but they were afraid. This
circumstance the Evangelist relates with
wonder even, when he says, “ Not knowing
what was done, came in.” “ And Peter
answered unto her,” etc. (v. 8.) And yet she
might have perceived even from this that
Peter knew the secret. For why, . having
questioned none other, does he question you?
Was it not clear that he asked because he
knew? But so great was her hardness, it
would not let her attempt to evade the guilt;
and with great confidence she replied; for
she thought she was speaking only to a man,
The aggravation of the sin was, that they com-
‘mitted it as with one soul, just as upon a
settled compact between them. ‘ How is it
that ye have agreed together,’ he said, “to
tempt the Spirit of the Lord? behold, the feet
of them which have buried thy husband are at
the door.” (v. 9g.) First he makes her learn
the sin, and then shows that she will justly
suffer the same punishment with her husband,
since she has committed the same wickedness :
‘“‘ And they shall carry thee out. And she fell
down straightway at his feet,’ for she was
standing near him, and yielded up the ghost.”
(v. 10.) So entirely by their own act had they
invited upon themselves the vengeance! Who
after that would not be struck with awe? who
would not fear the Apostle? who would not mar-
vel ? who not be afraid? ‘“ And they were with


THE, WORKS OF ST. GCHRYSOSa oar


{Homity XII.


one accord, all of them in Solomon’s porch,” (v.
12) no longer in a house, but having occupied
the very Temple, they there passed their
time! No longer they guarded themselves
against touching the unclean; nay, without
scruple they handled the dead. And observe
how, while to their own people they are severe,
against the aliens they do not exercise their
power. ‘But’ the people,” he says, “magni-
fied them.” (v. 13.) And as he had men-
tioned their being “in Solomon’s porch,” that
you may not wonder how the multitude allowed
this, he tells us that they did not dare even to
approach them : for “ no man,” he says, ‘“durst
join himself unto them.” ‘But believers
were the more added unto the Lord, multitudes
both of men and women : insomuch that they
brought forth the sick into the streets, and
laid them on beds and couches, that at the
least the shadow of Peter passing by might
overshadow some of them.” (v. 14, 15.)
Great faith, surpassing what had been shown
in the case of Christ. How comes this? Be-
cause Christ declared: ‘‘ And greater works
than these shall he do, because I go unto My
Father.” (John xiv. 12.) And these things
the people do, while the Apostles remain there,
and are not moving about from place to place :
also from other places they were all bringing
[their sick] on beds and couches: and from
all quarters accrued to them fresh tribute of
wonder; from them that believed, from them
that were healed, from him that was punished;
from their boldness of speech towards those
(their adversaries), from the virtuous behav- |
ior of the believers: for certainly the effect
produced was not owing to the miracles only.
For though the Apostles themselves modestly
ascribe it all to this cause, declaring that they
did these things in the name of Christ, yet
at the same time the life and noble conduct
of the men helped to produce this effect.
“And believers were more added unto the
Lord, multitudes both of men and women,”
Observe, how he now no longer tells the
number of them that believe; at such a rate
was the faith making way even to an immense
multitude, and so widely was the Resurrection
proclaimed. So then “the people magnified
them:” but they were now no longer lightly ~
to be despised as once they were: for in a
little moment, at a single turn of the scale, ©
such have been the effects produced by the —
fisherman and by the publican! Earth was


become a heaven, for manner of life, for ®
boldness of speech, for wonders, for all be- —


sides ; like Angels were they looked upon with ~


1 Edd. from E., omitting this and the following sentence,
insert v. 14, 15, and below, John xiv. 12, both of which are
wanting in the old text.


Homizy X11}


DrneUNe ter Ory THE, AROSTLES:


79


wonder: all unconcerued for ridicule, for
threats, for perils : compassionate’ were they,
and beneficent ; some of them they succoured
with money, and some with words, and some
with healing of their bodies and of their
souls; no kind of healing (zap eldog iatpeiac) but
they accomplished.

Peter all but pleads for himself, when at
the point to inflict the punishment, and at
the same time gives a lesson to the rest.
For because the act would seem exceeding
stern, therefore it is that he does so much?
in the case.* In respect of the woman also
the process of judgment was terrible. But®
see how many evils grow out of the sacrilege:
covetousness, contempt of God, impiety; and
upon these too he pleaded for himself before
the assembly, in that he did not immediately
proceed to punishment, but first exposed the
sin. None groaned, none lamented, all were
terrified. For as their faith increased, the
signs also were multiplied, and great was the
fear among their own company : for the things
which are from without do not so militate
(xoAeuei) against our peace, as do the acts of
our own people. If we be firmly joined to-
gether, no* warfare will be hard: but the
mischief would be the being divided and
broken up. Now they went about in the
public place: with boldness they attacked
even the market, and in the midst of enemies
they prevailed, and that saying was fulfilled,
“Be Thou Ruler in the midst among Thine
enemies.” (Ps. cx. 2.) This was a greater
miracle, that they, arrested, cast into prison,
should do such acts as these !

If those for lying suffered such things,


1 Edd. from E. ‘‘ But not only for this reason, but because,
being exceedingly humane and beneficent, they succored
some with money, some with healing of their bodies. Why
hath Satan filled thine heart? Peter,”’ etc.

2 KE. Edd. ‘‘ therefore both in the case of the man himself,
and in that of the wife, he makes the judgment terrible.”’

* Our author touches upon the difficulty which has so often
been found in this narrative on account of the apparent dis-
proportion of the penalty to the offence. But it is to be re-
membered that: (1) The narrative presents the sin as the most
heinous—lying to God—trying to deceive the Holy Spirit
whose organs the Apostles were. It was a deliberate conspir-
acy for this purpose. (2) These persons were members of the
church who professed to possess and should have possessed
the Holy Spirit. Instead they had been overcome by a Sa-
tanic principle which here makes its manifestation in pride
and hypocrisy. The selfishness of the deed is the more griev-—
ous because of the great piety and sacrifice of the act which
was counterfeited. Pride is the greater evil, the higher the
virtue which it simulates. (3) Sucha retributive miracle, be-
sides being just in itself, may have been specially necessary in
this early stage of the church’s life to warn against deception
and fraud and to emphasize the principles of honor in the
early church. ‘‘So terrible was this judgment in order to

uard the first operations of the Hely Spirit’ (Neander).—G.


ASE

3 Edd. from E. ‘‘ Now if, their sin being inexcusable, he
had not inflicted such punishment on them both, what con-
tempt of God would thence have arisen! And that this was
the reason, is evident from the fact, that he did not immedi-
ately,’’ etc.

4 FE. Edd. ‘There will be none to War upon us: just as,
if we be put asunder one from another, on the contrary all
will set upon us. Hence it was that they henceforth were of
good courage, and with boldness attacked,” etc.


what shall not the perjured suffer? Because
she simply affirmed, ‘“‘ Yea, for so much,” ye
see what she suffered. Bethink you then; they
that swear and forswear themselves, of what
should they be worthy? It® comes in oppor-
tunely to-day even from the Old Testament to
show you the heinousness of perjury. “There
was,” it says, “a flying sickle, ten cubits in
breadth.” (Zech. v. 2.) The “ flying ” betokens
the swift advent of the vengeance which pur-
sues oaths; that it is many cubits in length and
breadth, signifies the force and magnitude of
the woes ; that it comes flying “ from heaven,”
is to show that the vengeance comes from
the judgment-seat on high: that it is in the
form of a “sickle,” denotes the inevitableness
of the doom: for just as the sickle, where it
comes and has hooked the neck, is not drawn
back with nothing but itself, but with the
head reaped off, even so the vengeance
which comes upon thé swearers is severe, and
will not desist until it have completed its
work. But if we swear and escape, let us
not be confident; this is but to our woe. For
what think ye? How many, since Ananias
and Sapphira, have dared the same with
them? How is it then, say you, that they
have not met with the same fate? Not
because it was allowed in them, but because
they are reserved. for a greater punishment.
For those who often sin and are not punished,
have greater reason to fear and dread than
if they were punished, For the vengeance is
increased for them by their present impunity
and the long-suffering of God. ‘Then let us
not look to this, that we are not punished ;
but let us consider whether we have not
sinned: if sinning we are not punished, we
have the more reason to tremble. Say, if you
have a slave, and you only threaten him, and
do not beat him; when is he most in fear,
when most inclined to run away? Is is not
when you only threaten him? And hence we
advise each other not to be continually using


5 Evcatpov kat amo THs Madatas deiéar To xaAeTov THs ETLOPKLas
thuepov. Meaning perhaps that this had occurred in one of
the Scripture Lessons for the day. Below, Ka@amep yap dpe-
mavov OmouTep av eumecy ovK av Kad’ cavTd aveAKvabetn povor,
GAAG Kal aroTenvonerns THS Kehadjs. So A. B. N. Savil. and C.,
which last however has amo for amoteuvonerns. Hales ap. Sav.
suggests, that amoreny. THs Keb. Ought to be rejected: it is better
however to supply eis tpaxnAov before €uméop as in the trans-
lation. The meaning is explained in Serm. ad. Pop. Antioch.
xv. t. ii. 158. D. “A flying sword, one might manage to
escape from, éperavny 5é eis TOV TpayNnAoV éumecovgav Kal aVTL
oxouviov yevouerny, ovdeis av Scadvyor, but from a sickle darted
round the neck and catching it as a halter would, there can be
no escape.’’ Hence it appears that the innovator has quite
mistaken the Author’s meaning. He reads, Ka@amep yap Spera-
vov eis TpaxnAov euTeov ovK av Kab’ EavTO aveAKvabem, MEVEL ée
Tos €TL Kat amoTemvouevns THS Kehadys. i.e. “having cut off
one head, it still remains, that it may cut off more:” which
is irrelevant to the matter in hand. viz. how 70 dperavoedes
denotes To aduxtov ths Tyswpias. Of the Edd. Savile alone
retains the old and genuine reading. Montf. strangely
remarks, ‘‘ Savz/ianam lectionem esse Morelliana quam segui-


| mur obscuriorem.”


80 THE “WORKS: OF


ST. “CHEYSOSTORE


|Homity XILf.


threats, thereby choosing rather to agitate
the mind by the terror, and lacerating it
worse than with blows. For in the one
instance the punishment is momentary, but
in the other it is perpetual. If then no one
feels the stroke of the sickle, do not look to
this, but rather let each consider whether he
commits such sins. Many like things are
done now as were done before the Flood, yet
no flood has been sent: because there is a
hell threatened, and vengeance. Many sin
as the people did in Sodom, yet no rain of
fire has been poured down: because a river
of fire is prepared. Many go the lengths of
Pharaoh; yet they have not fared like
Pharaoh, they have not been drowned in a
Red Sea: for the sea that awaits them, is the
sea of the bottomless pit, where the punish-
ment is not accompanied with insensibility,
where there is no suffocation to end all, but
in ever lengthened torture, in burning, in
strangling, they are consumed there. Many
have offended like the Israelites, but no
serpents have devoured them: there awaits
them the worm that never dieth. Many have
been like Gehazi, yet they have not been
struck with leprosy: for instead of leprosy, it
remains for them to be cut asunder, and num-
bered among the hypocrites. Many have
both sworn and forsworn; but if they have
indeed escaped, let us not be confident : the


gnashing of teeth awaits them. Yea, here
too they will suffer many grievous woes,


though, it may be, not immediately, but after
further transgressions, that the vengeance
may be the greater; for even we often set
out at first with small sins, and then through
great offences lose all. Therefore when you
see anything happening to you, call to mind
that particular sin of yours.
Jacob are an example of this. Remember


Joseph’s brothers; they had sold _ their
brother, they had even attempted to slay
him; nay, they had slain him, as far as
inclination went; they had deceived and
grieved the old man; they suffered nothing.
After many years they are brought into
extreme peril, and now they are put in remem-
brance of this their sin. Exceeding wisely
is this circumstance brought in. Hear what
they say: “We are verily guilty concerning
our brother.” (Gen. xlii. 21.) In this man-
ner then do thou also, when anything hap-
pens, say, We are verily guilty, because we
have not obeyed Christ; because we have
sworn; my much _ swearing, and my false
swearing, has fallen upon my own head.
Confess thou; since they also confessed, and
were saved. For what though the punish-
ment follow not immediately? Since Ahab
also did not immediately after his sin in the
matter of Naboth suffer that vengeance which
he yet at last suffered. (1 Kings xxi. 19.)
And what is the reason of this? God sets
thee a time, in which to wash thyself clean ;
but if thou persist, at last He will send down
the vengeance. You have seen the fate of
liars. Consider what is the fate of false
swearers , consider, and desist. It is impossi-
ble a swearer should not forswear himself,
whether he will or not; and no perjurer can
be saved. One false oath sufficeth to finish
all, to draw down upon us the whole measure
of vengeance. Let us then take heed to
ourselves, that we may escape the punishment
due to this offence, and be deemed worthy
of the loving kindness of God, through the
grace and mercies of His only-begotten Son,
with Whom to the Father and the Holy Ghost
be glory, power, and honor, now and ever,


The sons of} and world without end. Amen,


iol OP MOME NEO CREE.


ACTS V. 17, 18.


“Then having risen up, the high-priest and they that
were with him (which is the sect of the Sadducees)
were filled with indignation, and laid their hands
on the Apostles, and put them in the common
prison.”


“ HAVING risen up,” that is, being1 roused,
being excited at the things taking place, ‘‘ the


* (Ecumenius has in part preserved the true reading, T. €.
SteyepOeis, Kivneis, Et ToLs yrvomevors [text omitted] apodporepov
avrots emtiderar. A. B.C. Cat. r. €., SemyepOn, KuvnOets emt Tots
yev. “Kai €0. avtovs ev 7. 6.’’ Nov oodp, avrots éemitibevrar.
And again after mpaovs évec@at,—Kai ododp. éemcridevtar (Cat.
emtiBerar)* EBevTo avTous, ., ev T. §. "AyyedAos dé x. T. A.—E. D.


high-priest and they which were with him
(which is the sect of the Sadducees) were


F. Edd. ‘Nothing more reckless than wickedness, nothing
more audacious. Having learned by experience the courage
of these men, from the attempts they had made before, they
nevertheless attempt, and again come to the attack. What
means it, ‘ And having risen up, the high-priest and they that
were with him?’ He was roused, it says, being excited at
what had taken place. ‘ And laid their hands on the Apostles,
and put them in the common prison.’ Now they assault them
more vigorously: but did not forthwith, etc. And whence is
it manifest that they assaulted them more vigorously? From
their putting them in the common prison. Again they are in-
volved in danger, and again they experience succor from God.
And in what manner, hear from what follows.”’


HomiLy XIII.)


filled with indignation, and laid their hands
on the Apostles:” they now assault them
more vigorously: “and put them in the com-
mon prison;” but did not forthwith bring
them to trial, because they expected them
again to be softened down. “But the Angel
of the Lord opened the prison doors, and
brought them forth, and said, Go, stand and
speak in the temple to the people all the words
of this life.” “And when they heard that, they
entered into the temple early in the morning,
and taught.”’ (v. 19-21.) This was done both
for the encouragement of the disciples, and for
the benefit and instruction of the others. And
observe how the proceeding in the present
instance is just the same as in what Christ Him-
self did. Namely, in His miracles though He
does not let men see them in the act of being
wrought, He furnishes the means whereby
they may be apprised of the things wrought :
thus, in His Resurrection, He did not let them
see how He rose: in the water made wine,
the guests do not see it done, for they have
been drinking much, and the discernment He
leaves to others. Just so in the present case,
they do not see them in the act of being
brought forth, but the proofs from which they
might gather what had been done, they do
see. And it was by night that the Angel put
them forth. Why was this? Because! in
this way they were more believed than they
would have been in the other: so, people


1’Ore ovTw wadAov 7 Exeivws ErioTEVOnoav: oVTw Kal OUK av
€mi TO Epwtioat HAGov, ovK av ETépws emiatevoay. If it be meant
that the Apostles were more believed because the miracle
itself was not seen, than they would have been if the Angel
had brought them out in open day, this may be understood in
a sense which St. Chrys. expresses elsewhere, viz. with refer-
ence to the nature of faith: ‘“‘in the latter case there could
have been no room for doubt; people would have been forced
to acknowledge the claims of the Apostles.”> Thus Hom. vi.
in Cor. ‘‘ Put the case that Christ should come this moment
with all the Angels, reveal Himself as God, and all be subject
unto Him: would not the heathen believe? But will this be
counted unto the heathen for faith? No: this were no faith ;
for a compulsory power from without—the visible appearance
—would have effected this. There is no free choice in the
matter: ovx é€ote TO Tpayna Tpoatperews. But then the next
sentence ought to be, ‘Exetvws yap ov’ av emi TO Ep. HAPov: et dé
OVX OUTS, OUK av ETEpws E7., or to that effect.—Perhaps, how-
ever, the meaning is rather: ‘‘ It was so plain to common sense
that a miracle must have been wrought, that hed the Angel
brought them out in the sight of all men (ovTw), they could not
have been more believed than they had a right to be as the
case was (€xetvws). Had the miracle been performed openly
(ovTw), people would have had no occasion even to ask, How is
this? And they who, as it was, were not brought to ask such
a question, would certainly not have believed under any other
circumstances. So in the Old Testament, Nebuchadnezzar,
when he sees the Holy Men praising God in the furnace, is
brought to ask in amazement, Did we not cast three men, etc.
but these priests are so hardened, that instead of asking as
they ought to have done, How came ye out? they only ask, as
if nothing had happened, Did we not straitly charge you, etc.
And observe, they have no excuse for their wilful apathy: for
they have had a full report of the circumstances from the offi-
cers: the prison shut, the guards at their posts.”” If this be
the meaning, we must replace ovx av or ovd av in the sentence
OTt oUTw waddAov x. 7. A. But the text is too corrupt to be re-
stored by any simple emendation.—Edd. *‘ Because in this
way, etc. especially as they would hot have been brought to
ask the question, nor yet in another case would they them-
selves have believed ; GAAws Te Kal OTL OVK av, and ovTe mHy
ETEPWS av Kal avTo. émioTevoav.


6


ine ACTS OF -THE APOSTLES!


SI


would not even have had occasion to put the
question: they would not in some other way
have believed. So it was in the old times, in
the case of Nebuchadnezzar: he saw them
praising God in the furnace, and then indeed
he was put in amazement. (Dan. iii. 24.)
Whereas then these priests ought as their first
question to have asked, How came ye out? in-
stead of this, as if nothing had happened, they
ask, ‘‘ Did we not straitly charge you not to
speak?” (v. 28.) And observe, by report
of others they are apprised of all the circum-
stances: they see the prison remaining closed
with safety, and the guards standing before
the doors.” A twofold security this; as was
the case at the sepulchre, where was both
the seal, and the men to watch. See how
they fought against God! Say, was this of
man’s doing, that happened to them? Who
led them forth, when the doors were shut?
How came they out, with the keepers standing
before the door? Verily they must be mad or
drunken to talk so. Here are men, whom
neither prison, nor bonds, nor closed doors,
had been able to keep in; and yet they expect
to overpower them: such is their childish
folly! Their officers come and confess what
has taken place, as if on purpose to debar
them from all show of reason. Do you mark
how there is miracle upon miracle, differing
in kind, some wrought by them, others on
them, and these more illustrious than the
others? “And when they heard that, they
entered into the temple early in the morning
and taught. But the high-priest came, and
they that were with him, and called the coun-
cil together, and all the senate of the children
of Israel, and sent to the prison to have them
brought. But when the officers came, and
found them not in the prison, they returned,
and told, saying, The prison truly found we
shut with all safety, and the keepers standing
without before the doors: but when we had
opened, we found no man within. Now when
the high-priest and the captain of the temple
and the chief priests heard these things, they
doubted of them whereunto this would grow.”’
(v. 21-25.) It*® is well ordered that the infor-
mation was not brought to them at once, but
they are first utterly at a loss what to think,
that when they have considered it well and
seen that there is a Divine Power in the case,
then they may learn the whole state of the
case. ‘Then came one, and told them, say-


2 Here the Mss. insert v. 21-23, inconveniently; for it inter-
rupts the connection. Chrys. here deviates from his usual
method, not following the narrative point by point, but re-
flecting first upon the conduct of the priests. &f course it is
to be understood, that the whole text, at least to v. 28, had
been first read out.

3 In the Mss. this comment is placed before v. 24.


82 THE WORKS: OF:


oT. CHRYSOSTEGN, |[Homity XIIL.


ing, Behold, the men whom ye put in prison
are standing in the temple, and teaching the
people. Then went the captain with the
other officers, and brought them without
violence : for they feared the multitude, lest
they should have been stoned.” (v. 25, 26.)
O the folly of the men! “ They feared,” saith
he, “the multitude.’ ‘Why, how had the
multitude helped the Apostles? When they
ought to have feared that God Who was
continually delivering them like winged crea-
tures out of their power, instead of that, “ they
feared the multitude! ‘And the high-priest,”
shameless, reckless, senseless, “‘asked them,
saying, Did not we straitly command you that
ye should not teach in this name ? and, behold,
ye have filled Jerusalem with your doctrine,
and intend to bring this man’s blood upon us.”
(v. 27, 28.) What then (say the Apostles)?
Again with mildness they address them; and
yet they might have said, ‘“‘ Who are ye, that
ye countermand God?” But what do they
say? Again in the way of exhortation and
advice, and with much mildness, they make
answer. ‘‘ Then Peter and the other Apostles
answered and said, We ought to obey God
rather than men.” (v. 29.) High magna-
nimity! He shows them too that they are
fighting against God.1 For, he says, Whom
ye killed, Him hath God raised up. ‘“ The
God of our fathers raised up Jesus, Whom ye
slew and hanged on a tree. Him hath God
exalted with His right hand to be a Prince:
and a Saviour, for to give repentance to Israel,
and forgiveness of sins.” (v.30, 31.) And
again they refer the whole to the Father, that
He should not seem to be alien to the Father.
“And hath exalted,” saith He, “ with his right
hand.” He affirms not merely the Resurrec-
tion, but the Exaltation also. ‘For to give
repentance to Israel.” Observe here as
before the gain (to them): observe the
perfection of doctrine conveyed in the form of
apology. ‘‘And we are witnesses of these
things.” (v. 32.) Great boldness of speech !
And the ground of their credibility : “ And so
is also the Holy Ghost, Whom God hath given
to them that obey Him.” Do you observe
that they allege not only the Spirits testi-
mony? And they said not, “Whom He hath
given” to us, but, “to them that obey Him:
therein alike showing their own unassuming
temper, and intimating the greatness of the
gift, and showing the hearers that it was possi-
ble for them also to receive the Spirit. See,
how these people were instructed both by
deeds and by words, and yet they paid no


1 Here A. B.C. N. insert v. 29 omitted above by the two
first. The following sentence, omitted here by D. E. F. and
inserted after v. 31, is there repeated by A. B. C.


heed, that their condemnation might be just.
For to this end did God suffer the Apostles to
be brought to trial, that both their adversaries
might be instructed, and all might learn, and
that the Apostles might be invigorated to
boldness of speech. ‘ And they hearing that,
were cut to the-heart.”' (v. 33.) “The others
(on a former occasion) “when they heard
these things were pricked;”’ here they were
cut (as with a saw) (dexpiovro) “‘and desired to
slay them.” (ch, ii. 37.)

But it is necessary now to look over again
what we have read. ‘But the angel of the
Lord by night opened the prison doors, and
brought them forth, and said, Go, stand and
speak in the temple to the people all the
words of this life. Brought * them forth.”
(Recapitulation, v. 19, 20.) He did not bring
them away to benefit themselves thereby, but,
“Stand,” he says, “and speak in the temple
to the people.” But if the guards had put
them out, as those thought, they would have
fled, that is, supposing they had been induced
to come out: and if those had put them forth,
they would not have stood in the temple, but
would have absconded. No one is so void of
sense, as not at once tosee this. ‘‘ Did we
not straitly charge you?” (v. 28.) Well, if
they undertook to obey you, ye do well to call
them to account: but if even at the very time
they told you they would not obey, what
account have you to call them to, what de-
fence is there for. them. to) make gs eam
behold ye have filled Jerusalem with your
doctrine, and intend to bring this man’s blood
upon us.” * Mark the inconsistency of the


2 E. Edd. “ Observe the excess of their wickedness. When
they ought to have been struck with alarm at what they heard,
here they are cut (to the heart), and take counsel in their
temerity (BovAevovTat eixky) to slay (them).’’ The innovator
did not perceive the reference to ii. 37 in ot @dAot ‘* ravTa axovc-
avTes KaTEvUynoay.””

3 E. and Edd. ‘“ ‘ Having brought them forth.’ He does not
himself bring them away, but lets them go: that in this way
also their intrepidity might be known; which also they
showed, in that by night they entered into the temple and
taught.’’ In the following sentence perhaps the purport of
what St. Chrys. said was, that ‘Sif, as the priests supposed,
the guards had let them out, the guards themselves would
have absconded, and the Apostles would not have stood in the
temple, but would have escaped.” El ye mevo@evtes may have
been said of the guards, ‘tif they had been bribed or other-
wise induced to let them out ;”’ but all the Mss. have et ye 7.
éé7A Gov, in the sense, ‘‘ supposing, which is not likely, that the
Apostles had been induced to come forth at the request of the
guards.’ Savile gives this clause to the latter part, beginning
as E. and Edd. with ma@adov éé ei e&eB. for kat et e€eB. ** Sup-
posing they had been induced to come out, or rather if those
had put them out:’’ Ben. refers it to what precedes ; ‘* they
would have fled, if they had come out at their request: nay,
if those had put them out,” etc.

* The meaning of the council’s statement : ‘‘ Ye intend to
bring this man’s blood upon us”’ (28) probably is: You would
cause an insurrection against us and thus be avenged for the
crucifixion of Jesus (Meyer): others take it to mean: You
would carry the idea that we had murdered an innocent man
in crucifying Jesus (Hackett). The strong language of Peterin
reply (29) which seems to imply: We cannot help conse-
quences ; we must obey God in our preaching and healing,
favors the former view. The confusion of the text of Chrys.
here aaa zn loco) makes his view on this point uncertain.


HomiLy XIIL|


accusations, and the exceeding folly. They
want to make it appear now, that the disposi-
tions of the Jews’ are sanguinary, as if they
were doing these things not for the truth’s
sake, but in the wish to be revenged. And
for this reason too the Apostles do not
answer them with defiance (@pacéwe): for they
were teachers. And yet where is the man,
who, with a whole city to back him, and
endowed with so great grace, would not have
spoken and uttered something big? But not
so did these: for they were not angered; no,
they pitied these men, and wept over them,
and marked in what way they might free them
from their error and wrath. And they no
longer say to them, “ Judge ye:” (ch. iv. 19)
but. they simply affirm, saying, “Whom God
raised up, Him do we preach: it is by the
will of God that these things are done.” They
said not, Did not we tell you even then, that
“we cannot but speak the things which we
have seen and heard ?”’ (ib. 20.) for they are
not contentious for glory; but they repeat
again the same story,—the Cross, the Resur-
rection. And they tell not, wherefore He was
crucified—that it was for our sakes: but they
hint at this indeed, but not openly as yet,
wishing to terrify them awhile. And yet what
sort of rhetoric is here? None at all,? but
everywhere it is still the Passion, and the
Resurrection and the Ascension, and the end
wherefore: ‘‘The God of our fathers raised
mp jesus; ete.” (v.30, 31.) And! yet what
improbable assertions are these! Very im-
probable, no doubt; but for all that, not
rulers, not people, had a word to say against
them: but those had their mouths stopped,
and these received the teaching. ‘And we,”
saith he, “are witnesses of these things.”
iv-32.) Of what things? Of His having
promised forgiveness and repentance: for the
Resurrection indeed was acknowledged, now.
But that He giveth forgiveness, both we are
witnesses, and “so is the Holy Ghost,” Who
would not have come down, unless sins had
been first remitted: so that this is an indis-
putable proof. ‘ When they heard that, they
were cut” (to the heart), “and took counsel
to slay them.” (v. 33.) Hearest thou of the


1 dovixas Aourov BovAovrar dei~ar Tas Tpoatpeces Tov ‘Tovdatwy.
As the latter part of the sentence, ws ov 6’ aAnBevav tavTa 7oL-
ovvTwy add’ aunvvac@ar BovAowerwyv, seems inapplicable to the
Jews, and to be meant for the Apostles, it may be conjectured
that the true reading is tov “AnooroAwv. ‘*that the Apostles
were bent upon having blood.’’ But all the Mss. have ray
*Iovédaiwv, and the sense so far is satisfactory: viz. They
want to make it appear now indeed what bloody-minded men
the Jews are: now, not when Christ was crucified.

2bne modern. text? "So artlessly did they preach the
Gospel of life. But when he says, ‘He hath exalted,’ he
states for what purpose, namely, ‘to sive repentance’ he
adds, ‘to Israel, and remission of sins.’ But, it will be said,
these things seemed incredible. How say you? And why
not rather credible. seeing that neither rulers,”’ etc.


mre wos OF THE APOSTLES:


83.


forgiveness of sins, O wretched man, and that
God doth not demand punishment, and dost
thou wish to slay them? What wickedness
was this! And yet, either they ought to have
convicted them of lying, or if they could not
do that, to have believed: but if they did not
choose to believe, yet they ought not to slay
them. For what was there deserving of
death? Such was their intoxication, they did
not even see what had taken place. Observe,
how everywhere the Apostles, when they have
made mention of the crime, add the mention
of forgiveness ; showing, that while what had
been done was worthy of death, that which
was given was proffered to them as to bene-
factors! In what other way could any one
have persuaded them ?


“Then stood up the high-priest,” etc. As®
men in high repute, these (the Apostles) were
about to take their place near to the Prophets.
The Sadducees were they that were most sore
on the subject of the Resurrection. But
perchance some one will say: Why, what
man, endowed with such gifts as the Apostles
were, would not have been great? But
consider,* I pray you, how, before that they
were endowed with the grace, “they were
continuing steadfastly with one accord in
prayer” (ch. i. 14), and depending on the
aid from above. And dost thou, my beloved,
hope for the kingdom of heaven, yet endurest
naught? And hast thou received the Spirit,
yet sufferest not such things, nor encounterest
perils? But they, before they had breathing-
time from their former dangers, were again
led into others. And even this too, that there
is no arrogance, no conceit, how great a good


3 Here begins a second recapitulation or rather gleaning,
partly of matter not touched upon before, partly of further
remarks on what has been said.—'Qs evdoximoovres € eyyus Tov
mpobyt@y eéueAAov totac@ar: ‘This relates to v. 13- 16, as the
reason why they were “filled with indignation.” The inno-
vator (E. F. D. Edd.) not perceiving this, alters ws evdoximo-
bytes tO H ws Eevdoxiovvtas, Which he joins to the former sen-
tence, ‘‘ How else could any one have persuaded them than
(by treating them) as persons in high repute?”’ and adds,
‘And mark their malignity: they set on them the Sadducees
who were most sore on the subject of the Resurrection: but
they got nothing by their wickedness. But perchance,” etc.

Ss Chrysostom” frequently contends against the common
excuse, ‘‘ We cannot attain to the holiness of the first Chris-
tians, because there are no miracles now.’’ Thus, he urges,
Hom. in Matt. x\vi., that it was not their miracles that made
the saints, both of the Old and of the New Testament, great
and admirable, but their virtues: without which, no miracles
would have availed for themselves or others: that if they
wrought miracles, it was after they, by their noble qualities
and admirable lives had attraeted the Divine grace: for
miracles proceed from a holy life, and this is also their goal:
only he that lives a holy life receives this grace; and he that
receives it, receives it only that he may amend the life of
others. . . Let no man therefore wait for miracles. It afflicts
the evil spirit when he is expelled from the body, much more
when he sees the soul set free from sin: for in this lies Satan’s
great power, and to destroy this, Christ died. In expelling
this from thyself, thou hast performed a miracle greater than
all miracles. This is not my doctrine; ,it is the doctrine of
the Apostle Paul. 1 Cor. xii. 31, the “more excellent way ”’
is not miracles, but Charity, the root of all good. If we

ractise this we need no miracles; and if we practise not
Foi miracles we shall get no good.


84 THE WORKS ‘OF ST. ‘CHEYSOsitGaye [Homiry XIII.
itis! To converse with mildness, what a| Let us imitate these, my beloved: let us be
gain itis! For not all that they did was the} undaunted in all our dangers. There is noth-


immediate work of grace, but there are many
marks of their own zeal as well. That the
gifts of grace shine forth in them, this was
from their own diligence. See, for instance,
from the very beginning, how careful Peter i iS ;
how sober and vigilant: how they that be-
lieved cast away their riches, had no private
property, continued in prayer, showed that
they were of one mind, passed their time in
fastings. What grace, T ask (alone), did all
this? Therefore it is that He brings the
evidence home to them through their own
officers. Just as in the case of Christ, it was
their officers who said, ‘‘ Never man spake as
this Man speaketh.” (John vii. 46.) These?
(proofs) are more apt to be believed than the
Resurrection.—Observe also the moderation
shown by (the rulers) themselves, and how
they give way. “The high-priest asked
them, saying,” etc. (v. 27): here he reasons
with them, forsooth, in a moderate tone; for
he was frightened : indeed to hinder was
what he desired rather than to kill, since that
he cannot do: and with the view to rouse
them all, and show them the extreme danger
they are in, “And intend,” says he (to the
Apostles), “ to bring this man’s blood upon us.”
Dost thou still take Him to be but man? He
wants to make it appear that the injunction
was necessary for their own safety. But
mark what (Peter) says: “Him hath God
exalted with His right hand to be a Prince
and a Saviour, for to give repentance to
Israel, and forgiveness of sins.” (v. 31.)
Here he forbears to mention the Gentiles, not
to give them a handle against him. “ And
they desired,” it says, “to slay them.” (v.
33.) See again these in perplexity, these in
pain: but those in quiet and cheerfulness and
delight. It is not merely, They were grieved,
but “They were cut” (to the heart). Truly
this makes good that proverb, “ Evil do, evil
fare:”’ as we may see in this case. Here
were these men in bonds, set at the bar of
judgment, and the men that sit in judgment
upon them were in distress and helpless per-
plexity. For as he who strikes a blow upon
the adamant, gets the shock of the blow him-
self, so it was with these men. But they saw
that not only was their boldness of speech
not stopped, but rather their preaching in-
creased the more, and that they discoursed
without a thought of fear, and afforded them
no handles against them.


1 ravTa THs avactagews muoTOTeEpa. E. omits this, and inserts
annyyelAav Uroatpewavtes amep eldov. ‘* They reported on their
return just what they had seen:”’’ so Edd. except Savile, who


retains the reading of E. and adds to it as above (from N.)


ing dreadful to him that fears God; but all
that is dreadful is for others. For when a
man is delivered from his passions, and re-
gards all present things as a shadow, say,
from whom shall he suffer anything dreadful?
whom shall he have to fear? whom shall he
need plead to? Let us flee to this Rock
which cannot be shaken. If any one were to
build for us a city, and throw up a wall
around it, and remove us to a land uninhab-
ited, where there were none to disturb us, and
there supply us with abundance of everything,
and not suffer us to have aught to trouble us
with anybody, he would not set us in such
perfect safety, as Christ hath done now. Be
it a city made of brass, if you will, surrounded
on all sides with a wall, lofty and impregna-
ble, let there be no enemy near it; let it have
land plentiful and rich, let there be added
abundance of other things, let the citizens too
be mild and gentle, and no evil-doer there,
neither robber, nor thief, no informer, no
court of justice, but merely agreements
(cuvaAAdiuara) ; and let us dwell in this city : not
even thus would it be possible to live in
security. Wherefore? Because there could
not but be differences with servants, with
wives, with children, to be a groundwork
of much discomfort. But here was nothing
of the kind; for here was nothing at all to
pain them or cause any discomfort. Nay,
what is more wonderful to say, the very things
which are thought to cause discomfort, be-
came matter of all joy and gladness. For teil
me, what was there for them to be annoyed
at? what to take amiss? Shall we cite a
particular case for comparison with them?
Well, let there be one of consular dignity,
let him be possessed of much wealth, let
him dwell in the imperial city, let him
have no troublesome business with anybody,
but only live in delight, and have nothing else
but this to do, seated at the very summit of
wealth and honor and power: and let us set
against him a Peter, in bonds if you will, in
evils without number: and we shall find that
he is the man that lives the most delightfully.
For when there is such excess of joy, as to be
delighted when in bonds, think what must be
the greatness of that joy! For like as those
who are high in office, whatsoever evils may
happen, are not sensible of them, but continue
in enjoyment: so did these the more rejoice
on account of these very evils. For it is im-
possible, impossible in words to express how
great pleasure falls to their lot, who suffer for
Christ’s sake: for they rejoice in their suffer-
ings, rather than in their good things. _Whoso


Homity XIII.]


loves Christ, knows what I say.—But what as
regards safety? And who, I ask, if he were
ever so rich, could have escaped so many
perils, going about among so many different
nations, for the sole purpose! of bringing
about a reformation in their manner of life?
For it was just as if by royal mandate that
they carried all before them, nay, far more
easily, for never mandate could have been so
effectual, as their words were. For the royal
edict compels by necessity, but these drew
men willingly and spontaneously, yea, and
with hearts above measure thankful. What
royal edict, I ask, would ever have persuaded
men to part with all their property and their
lives ; to despise home, country, kindred, yea,
even self-preservation? Yet the voices of
fishermen and tent-makers availed for this.
So that they were both happy, and more pow-
erful and strong than all others. “ Yes,” say
you, “those of course were, for they wrought
miracles.” (supra, p. 83, note 4.) But I ask,
what miracles did those who believed work,
the three thousand, and the five thousand ;
and yet these, we read, passed their time in
gladness? And well they might: for that
which is the groundwork of all discomforts,
the possession of riches, was done away with.
For that, that, I say, was ever the cause both
of wars and fighting, and grief, and discom-
fort, and all evils: the thing which makes life
full of labor and troubles, it is that. And
indeed it would be found that many more rich
than poor have reason to be sad._ If any
think this is not true, their motion is derived
not from the nature of the things, but
from their own fancy. And if the rich do
enjoy some sort of pleasure, this is not to
be wondered at: for even those who are
covered all over with the itch, have a good
deal of pleasure. For that the rich are for all
the world like these, and their mind affected in
the same sort, is plain from this circumstance.
Their cares annoy them, and they choose to
be engrossed with them for the sake of the
momentary pleasure: while those who are
free from these affections, are in health and
without discomfort. Whether is more
pleasant, I ask, whether of the two more safe?
To have to take thought only for a single loaf
of bread and suit of clothes, or for an im-
mense family, both slaves and freemen, not
having care about himself (only)? For as
this man has his fears for himself, so have you
for those who depend on your own person.


Why, 21 pray you, does poverty seem a thing


1 €O@vegt TOTOUTOLS OMLA@Y UTE WETATTATEWS TOALTELas OVS.

2 Edd. ‘**And why,”’ you will ask, ‘‘is poverty thought a
thing to be fled from!’? Why, because other good things are,
in the judgment of many, things to be fled from, not because
they are to be deprecated, but because hard of attainment.


THE TAGs OF- THE APOSTLES:


85


to be shunned? Just in the same way as
other good things are, in the judgment of
many, things to be deprecated. ‘‘ Yes,” say
you, “but it is not that those good things
are subjects for deprecation, but that they are
hard of attainment.”’ Well, so is poverty, not
a thing to be deprecated, but hard of attain-
ment: so that if one could bear it, there
would be no reason to deprecate it. For how
is it that the Apostles did not deprecate it?
how is it that many even choose it, and so far
from deprecating, even run to it? For that
which is really a thing to be deprecated,
cannot be an object of choice save to mad-
men. But if it be the men of philosophic and
elevated minds that betake themselves to this,
as to a safe and salubrious retreat, no wonder
if to the rest it wears a different appearance.
For, in truth, the rich man seems to me to be
just like a city, unwalled, situated in a plain,
inviting assailants from all sides: but poverty,
a secure fortress, strong as brass can make it,
and the way up to it difficult. ‘And yet,” say
you, “the fact is just the reverse: for these
are they, who are often dragged into courts of
law, these are they who are overborne and
ill-treated.” No: not the poor, as poor, but
those who being poor want to be rich. But I
am not speaking of them, but of such as make
it their study to live in poverty. For say,
how comes it that nobody ever drags the
brethren of the hills into courts of law? and
yet if to be poor is to be a mark for op-
pression, those ought most of all to be dragged
thither, since they are poorer than all others.
How comes it that nobody drags the common
mendicants into the law-courts? Because
they are come to the extreme of poverty.
How is it that none does violence to them,
none lays vexatious informations against
them? Because they abide in a stronghold
too safe for that. How many think it a con-
dition hard to struggle against, poverty, I
mean, and begging! What then, I ask, is it a
good thing to beg? “It is good, if there be
comfort,” say you; “if there be one to give: it
is a life so free from trouble and reverses, as
every one knows.” But I do not mean to
commend this; God forbid! what I advise is
the not aiming at riches.

For say, whom would you rather call
blessed ? those who find themselves at home
with virtue, (éxitdeiouc m™poe apetiy) or those who
stand aloof? Of course, those who are near.
Say then, which of the two is the man to learn
anything that is profitable, and to shine in the
true wisdom? the former, or the latter? The
first, all must see. If you doubt it, satisfy
yourself in this way. Fetch hither from the


|market-place any of the poor wretches there ;


86


THE WORKS OF ST: CHRY¥SOSTOM:


[Homity XIII.


let him be a cripple, lame, maimed: and then | ior his ways all branching off from this one


produce some other person, comely of aspect,
strong in body, full of life and vigor in every
part, overflowing with riches: let him be of
illustrious birth, and possessed of great power.
Then let us bring both these into the school
of philosophy: which of them, I ask, is more
likely to receive the things taught? The first
precept, at the outset, ‘ Be lowly and moder-
ate” (for this is Christ's command): which
will be most able to fulfil it, this one or the
other? ‘Blessed are they that mourn”
.(Matt. v. 4): which will most receive this say-
ing? “Blessed are the lowly:” which will
most listen to this? ‘Blessed are the pure
in heart. Blessed are they which do hunger
and thirst after righteousness. Blessed are
they which are persecuted for righteousness’
sake” (ib. 8, 6, 10). Which will with ease
receive these sayings? And, if you will, let
_us apply to all of them these rules, and see
how they will fit. Is not the one inflamed
and swollen all over, while the other is ever
lowly minded and subdued in his whole bear-
ing? Itis quite plain. Yes, and there is a
saying to that effect among those that are
without: “(I was) a slave,1 Epictetus by
name, a cripple in body, for poverty a very
Irus, and a friend of the Immortals.” For
how, I would ask, can it be otherwise, but
that the soul of the rich must teem with evils ;
folly, vainglory, numberless lusts, anger and
passion, covetousness, iniquity, and what not ?
So that even for philosophy, the former is
more congenially (ézr7deia) disposed than the
latter. By all means seek to ascertain which
is the more pleasant: for this I see is the
point everywhere discussed, whether such an
one has the more enjoyable way of life. And
yet even as regards this, we need not be in
doubt; for to be near to health, is also to
have much enjoyment. But whether of the
two, I would ask, is best disposed (érvr7becoc)
to the matter now in hand, that which we will
needs carry into accomplishment—our law,
I mean—the poor man or the rich? Whether
of them will be apt to swear? The man who
has children to be provoked with, the man
who has his covenants with innumerable par-
ties, or the man who is concerned to apply for
just a loaf of bread or a garment? This man
has not even need of oaths, should he wish,
but always lives free from cares of business ;
nay, more, it is often seen that he who is dis-
ciplined to swear not at all, will also despise
riches ; and one shall see in his whole behav-


1 The Epigram is preserved in the Palatine Anthology,
7. 676.
AovdAos "Emixtytos yevouny, kal owpartt mpods,
kat meviay"Ipos, kat bidos abavarors.


But our Mss. except E., for"Ipos have iepas, ** sacred.”


good habit, and leading to meekness, to con-
tempt of riches, to piety, to subduedness of
soul, to compunction of heart. Then let us
not be indolent, my beloved, but let us again
show great earnestness: they who have suc-
ceeded, that they may keep the success
achieved, that they be not easily caught by
the receding wave, nor the refluent tide carry
them back again [they” too who are yet
behindhand, that they may be raised up
again, and strive to make up that which is
wanting. And meanwhile let those who have
succeeded, help those who have not been able
to do the same]: and by reaching out their
hands, as they would to men struggling in the
deep water, receive them into the haven of
no-swearing (daveuociac), For it is indeed a
haven of safety, to swear not at all: whatever
storms burst upon us, to be in no danger of
sinking there: be it anger, be it insult, be it
passion, be it what it may, the soul is stayed
securely ; yea, though one have vented some
chance word or other that ought not, and had
been better not, to be spoken, yet be has laid
himself under no necessity, no law. (Szpra,


FHom.:dx..'§ ad. Pop. Ant. viii. § 3.) See
what Herod did for his oath’s sake: he cut
off the head of the Fore-runner. ‘“ But be-


cause of his oaths,” it says, “and because of -
them which sat at meat with him” (Mark vi.
26), he cut off the head .of the, Proplee
Think what the tribes had to suffer for their
oath in the matter of the tribe of Benjamin
(Judges xxi. 5-10): what Saul had to suffer
for his oath (1 Sam. xiv. 24, etc.). For Saul
indeed perjured himself, but Herod did what
was even worse than perjury, he committed
murder. Joshua again—you know how it
fared with him, for his oath in the matter of
the Gibeonites. (Joshua, ch. ix.) For it is in-
deed a snare of Satan, this swearing. Let us
burst ® the cords; let us bring ourselves into
a condition in which it will be easy (not to


2 Something is wanting in the old text to complete the
sense: the matter in the brackets is supplied from E. D. F.
Below, the same have: ‘‘to swear not at all: a haven, that one
be not drowned by the storm bursting. For though wrath,
though (sense of) insult, though passion boil over, yea though
anything, be what it may, the soul is in security, so that it
will not even utter aught that should not be spoken: for one
has laid himself,” etc.

3 Acappytwper Ta oxoLvia* év evKoAta KaTaoTHOwLEV é€avTovs*
TAGS aToplas amaAAaywpev Kal THS TaTaviKys Tayloos. i.e. ‘* The
cords of this snare are, the ties of worldly business in the pos-
session or pursuit of wealth: there is a condition, as was said
above, in which it is full easy not toswear; let us bring ourselves
into that condition: all that makes us say, “We cannot help
swearing,’ (raans amopias), let us have done with it, and break
loose from the snare of the devil.””. The exhortation connects
both parts of the ‘‘ Morale’’—the commendation of voluntary
poverty, and the invective against swearing. In the modern
text (E. F. D. Edd.) this is lost sight of: it reads: Scapp. Ta
OX. Kai ev evK. KaTagTHGOVeY (al. -cwuev) Tagns PvdaKhs* amadrda-
youev THs cat. may. ‘Let us burst the cords, and we shall
bring ourselves into a facility of all watchfulness: let us break
loose,”’ etc.


HomiLy XIV.]


swear); let us break loose from every entan-
glement, and from this snare of Satan. Let
us fear the command of the Lord: let us
settle ourselves in the best of habits: that,
making progress, and having achieved this
and the rest of the commandments, we may


THE CACTS OFTHE APOSTLES:


87


obtain those good things which are promised
to them that love Him, through the grace and
loving-kindness of our Lord Jesus Christ, with
Whom to the Father and the Holy Ghost to-
gether be glory, power, and honor, now and
ever, and world without end. Amen.


POMELY: KV’.


ACTS


*“*Then stood there up one inthe council, a Pharisee,
named Gamaliel, a doctor of the law, had in
reputation among all the people, and commanded
the men to be put forth a little space.”


Tuis Gamaliel was Paul’s teacher. And
one may well wonder, how, being so right-
minded in his judgment, and withal learned
in the law, he did not yet believe. But it
cannot be that he should have continued in
unbelief to the end." Indeed it appears
plainly from the words he here speaks. He
““commanded,” it says, “to put the men forth
a little space [and said unto them.]”
Observe how judiciously he frames his speech,
and how he immediately at the very outset
puts them in fear. And that he may not be
suspected of taking their part, he addresses
them as if he and they were of the same
opinion, and does not use much vehemence,
but as speaking to men intoxicated through
passion, he thus expresses himself: “ Ye men
of Israel, take heed to yourselves what ye
intend to do as touching these men.” (Vv. 35.)
Do not, he would say, go to work rashly and
ina hurry. ‘ For before these days rose up
Theudas, boasting himself to be somebody :
to whom a number of men, about four hun-
dred, joined themselves: who was slain; and
all, as many as obeyed him, were scattered,
and brought to naught.” (v. 36.) By exam-
ples he teaches them prudence; and, by way


of encouragement, mentions last the man who.


seduced the greatest number. Now before
he gives the examples, he says, “Take heed
to yourselves ;”” but when he has cited them,
then he declares his opinion, and _ says,
“Refrain from these men.” ‘For, ‘says he,


1 In the Clementine Recognz. i. 65, Gamaliel is spoken of
as Bowing been early a Christian in secret. Lucian the Pres-
byter A.D. 415, writes an account of the discovery in conse-
quence of a vision in which Gamaliel himself appeared to him,
of the reliques of St. Stephen, together with those of Nico-
demus and Gamaliel. See note on St. Augustin Comm. on
St. John, p. 1048. Photius, Cod. 171, p. x99 read in a work of
Eustratius how Gamaliel was baptized by St. Peter and St.
John. (According to the Jewish tradition, Wolf. Bi4/. Hedr.
ii. 882. he died President of the Sanhedrim, eighteen years
after the fall of Jerusalem.)


Nese:


“there rose up Judas of Galilee in the days


of the taxing, and drew away much people
after him: he also perished; and all, even
as many as obeyed him, were dispersed. And
now I say unto you, Refrain from these men,
and let them alone: for if this council or
this work be of men, it will come to naught.
But if it be of God, ye cannot overthrow
them.” - (al. /72): (Gv. 39-39.) * Dhen = tweet
is there, he would say, to hinder you to be
overthrown? For, says he (take heed), “lest
haply ye be found even to fight against God.”
He would dissuade them both by the consid-
eration that the thing is impossible, and
because it is not for their good. And he
does not say by whom these people were de-
stroyed, but that there they “were scattered,”
and their confederacy fell away to nothing.
For if, says he, it be of man, what needs any
ado on your part? but if it be of God, for all
your ado you will not be able to overcome it.
The argument is unanswerable. ‘ And they
were persuaded by him.” (v. 40.) How
were they persuaded? So as not to slay
them, but merely to scourge, For, it says,
‘““And when they had called the Apostles,
and beaten them, they commanded that they
should not speak in the name of Jesus, and
let them go.” See after what great works
they are scourged! And again their teaching
became more extended: for they taught at
home and in the temple, “ And they departed
from the presence of the council, rejoicing
that they were counted worthy to suffer shame
for His name. And daily in the temple, and
in every house, they ceased not to teach and
preach Jesus Christ. (v. 41, 42.) And in
those days, when the number of the disciples
was multiplied, there arose a murmuring of
the Hellenists against the Hebrews, because
their widows were neglected in the daily


2 The modern text: ‘‘ As if he had said, Forbear; and if
these men came together of themselves, nothing will hinder
them also to be overthrown.”’ C. reads nuas, ‘* What to hinder


‘us?’ Catena, as above.


88


THE). WORKS “OF tST. CHE¥SOST ONE


[Homity XIV.


ministration.” (ch. vi. 1.) Not absolutely in
those immediate days; for it is the custom of
Scripture to speak of things next about to
happen, as taking place in immediate succes-
sion. But by ‘“ Hellenists’’ I suppose he
means those who spoke Greek [against the
Hebrews” ]: for’ they did not use the Greek
language. Behold another trial ! observe how
from within and from without there are
warrings, from the very first! “‘ Then,” it says,
“the twelve called the multitude of the disci-
ples unto them, and said, It is not reason that
we should leave the word of God, and serve
tables.” (v. 2.) Well said: for the needful
must give precedence to the more needful.
But see, how straightway they both take
thought for these (inferior matters), and yet
do not neglect the preaching. ‘Because
their widows were overlooked:” for those
(the Hebrews) were treated as the persons of
greater consequence (aideoyudrepo). ‘* Where-
fore, brethren, look ye out among you seven
men of honest report, full of the Holy Ghost
and wisdom, whom we may appoint over this
business. But we will give ourselves contin-
ually to prayer, and to the ministry of the
word. And the saying pleased the whole
multitude: and they chose Stephen, a man
full of faith and of the Holy Ghost (v. 3-5.)
so were the others also full of faith;? not to
have the same things happening as in the
case of Judas, as in the case of Ananias
and Sapphira—‘ and Philip, and Prochoras,
and Nicanor, and Timon, and Parmenas, and
Nicolas a proselyte of Antioch: whom they
set before the Apostles: and when they had
prayed, they laid their hands on them. And
the word of God increased; and the number
of the disciples multiplied in Jerusalem
greatly; and a great company of the priests
were obedient to the faith. (v. 5-7.)

But * let us look over again what has been
spoken. .“ Ye men of Israel take heed to
yourselves.” (Recapitulation, v. 35.) See
here, [ pray you, how mildly Gamaliel rea-
sons, and how he says but a few words to
them, and does not recount ancient histories,
although he might have done so, but more
recent instances, which are most powerful to


1 ovte yap €AAnuott dveAéyovto. So A. B. C. N. but Cat.
otro, and E. D. F. add ‘Efpaioe évres. *‘ For these used the
Greek language, being Hebrews.’’ There is no need to adopt
this reading: the comment seems to belong to the words,
against the Hebrews: viz. ‘‘they murmured against them,
seeing they were overlooked, etc., for neither could these
Hebrews converse with them in the Greek language.”

2 apa (Cat. Opa) kai éxetvor Anpets TiaTews Hoav (E. D. F. add
ovs Kai efeAcEavTo). va wy TA aUTA K. 7. A. The meaning seems
to be: ‘If Stephen was a man full of faith, so were the others:
(they were careful to choose only such,): in order that,” etc.

3 Omitted in the old text: supplied by E.—Below, E. omits,
“for, saith the Scripture, in the mouth of two witnesses: ’’ and
amplifies the rest, adding, ‘“‘even a third, superabundantly:
both showing how well he himself speaks, and leading them
away from their sanguinary purpose.”


produce belief. With this view he throws out
a hint himself, saying, “For before these
days” (v. 36): meaning, not many days be-
fore. Now had he at once said, “ Let these
men go,” both himself would have fallen into
suspicion, and his speech would not have
been so effective: but after the examples, it
acquired its own proper force. And he men-
tions not one instance, but a second also:
“for,” saith the Scripture, “in the mouth of
two witnesses” (Matt. xviii. 16): and yet he
had it in his power to mention even three.
“‘ Refrain from these? mena 48.) ese
how mild his manner is, and his speech not
long, but concise, and his mention even of
those (impostors) how free from passions
“And all, as many as obeyed him, were scat-
tered.” And?# for all this he does not blas-
pheme Christ. They heard him, all these
unbelievers, heard him, these Jews. [“ For if
this council or this work be of men, it will
come to naught.’’] Well then, since it did
not come to nought, it is not of men. [‘ But
if it be of God, ye cannot overthrow it.’”}
(v. 39.) Once more he checks them by
the impossibility and the inexpediency of
the thing, saying, “Lest haply ye be found
even to fight against God.”* And he does
not say, If Christ be God; but the work -
(itself) declares (this). He does not pro-
nounce upon it, either that, it is “ of men,” or
that it is “of God;” but he leaves the proof
to. the future. ‘‘ They were persuaded [by
him].”” (v. 40.) Then why, it may be asked,
do ye scourge them? Such was the incontro-
vertible justness of his speech, they could not
look it in the face; nevertheless, they sated
their own animosity; and again they expected
to terrify them in this way. By the fact also
of his saying these things not in the presence
of the Apostles, he gained a hearing more
than he would otherwise have done; and then
the suavity of his discourse and the justness
of what was said, helped to persuade them.
In fact, this man all but preached the Gospel.


* Edd. from E. ‘‘ Saying this, he speaks nothing blasphe-
mous against Christ, but what he most wishes, he effects. ‘ If,”
says he, ‘it be of men, it will come to naught.’ Here he
seems to me to put it to them by way of syllogism, and to say:
Consequently, since it has not come to naught, it is not of
man. ‘Lest haply ye be found even to fight against God.’
This he said to check them,”’ etc.—Below, aAAa 70 épyov tovTo
dyAot, might be rendered, *‘but he is declaring this work”’
(viz. *‘if this work be of men,” etc.); the modern text, 70 yap
Epyov ToUTO edyAov.

* Meyer finds in the expression of Gamaliel (38, 39): ‘“‘if it
de of men—éav 7 e& avOpwmwy”’ and “if it zs of God—é S& é«
Geov €otiv”’ an indication that he leaned to the latter opinion.
While this distinction is grammatically valid it can scarcely be
justified as intentional. Gamaliel, although tolerant toward
Christianity, as the Pharisaic party in general were at this
time, was not a Christian in secret, but an orthodox Jew. His
advice was politic even from a Jewish point of view. He saw,
as the more bitter party did not, that this sort of opposition
would only serve to rouse all the energy and perseverance of
the Christian disciples and thus indirectly tend to the increase
and spread of their doctrines among the people.—G. B. S.


Homity XIV;]


ieee hs) OP. THE “APOSTLES:


89


“I Ye were persuaded,” one may say, “that ye


had not strength to overthrow it. Wherefore
did ye not believe?” Such is the witness
borne even by enemies. There it is four


hundred, there, four thousand: and here the
first movers were twelve. Let not the number
which added itself affright you. (ch. il. 41;
iv. 4.) He might also have mentioned another
instance, that of the Egyptian, but what he has
spoken is fully sufficient. And he closes his
speech with an alarming topic: “ Lest haply,”
etc. And he does not pronounce upon it,
lest he should seem to be pleading their
cause; but he reasons by way of syllogism
from the issue of the matter. And he does
not venture to pronounce that it is not of
men, nor yet that it is of God; for had he
said that it was of God, they would have
gainsaid him: but had he said that it was of
men, they would again have taken prompt
measures. Therefore he bids them wait for
the end, saying, “‘ Refrain,’ But they once
more threaten knowing indeed that they avail
nothing, but doing after their manner. Such
is the nature of wickedness: it attempts even
impossibilities.—“ And after this man rose up
Judas,” etc. These things Josephus relates
madetail. 9 \C47txx. 85 ib. v.23 xvilt, 1.8.7.
ii. 8. 1.) But what a great thing it was that
he ventured to affirm: that it was of God,
when in the sequel it received its proof from
the events! Great boldness of speech, great
freedom from all respect of persons! 7? And
he does not say, “‘ But if ye do not overthrow
it, itis. of God;” but, “ If it be of God, it will
not be overthrown.” ‘And to him they
agreed.” (v. 40.) They reverenced the high
character of the man. “ And they departed
from the presence of the council, rejoicing
that they were counted worthy to suffer shame
for the name of Christ.” (v. 41.) What
miracles so wonderful as this? Nowhere is
the like of this recorded of the old saints: for
Jeremiah indeed was scourged for the word of
God, and they threatened Elijah, and the rest :
but in this case, even by this very thing, and
not only by their miracles, these showed forth
the power of God. He does not say, that
they were not pained, but that though pained
they rejoiced. How does this appear?


1 E. F. D. and Edd. (except Savile) add, waAdov S€ povovovyxi
TotavTa dixucodoyovmevos mpos avTovs amoretverar, ‘* Or rather
he all but with just remonstrance thus expostulates with them:
“Ye were persuaded,’”’ etc. Below, "Exet retpaxdatot, exec
TéeTpakigxiAcor- Kal wde x. 7T.A. But the mention of the four
thousand, here referred to the second instance (Judas of Gal-
ilee), is in fact derived from the case of the Egyptian, ch. xxi.
38, being the third instance which ‘the might have cited.”’
Accordingly the modern text substitutes, *‘ There four hun-
dred stood up, and after this a great multitude.”

2 E. and Edd. omit the following sentence, substituting the
first two clauses of v. 40 and after ‘“‘ the character of the man,”
add, ‘‘ wherefore also they desist from their purpose of killing
the Apostles. and having only scourged they dismiss them.”


!


From their boldness afterwards: they were
so instant still, even after their beatings, in
preaching the word. ‘But in the temple,”
it says, “and in every house, they ceased
not to teach and preach Jesus Christ.”
(v. 42.) “And in those days ”—when these
things were done, when there were scourg-
ings, when there were threatenings, when the
disciples were multiplying—also, it says,
“there arose a murmuring.” (ch. vi. 1.)
And this comes of the multitude: for it is im-
possible to have strict order in a multitude,
“There arose a murmuring,” etc. to,—“And3
a great company of the priests were obedient
to the faith. There arose murmuring against
the Hebrews ”*—for that description of
people seemed to be more honorable—“ be-
cause their widows were neglected in the daily
ministration.” * (v. 1-7.) So then there was
a daily ministration for the widows. And
observe how he calls it a “ministration ” (dia
xovia), and not directly alms: extolling by this
at once the doers, and those to whom it was
done. . ‘Were neglected.” This did not
arise from malice, but perhaps from the care-
lessness of the multitude. And therefore he
brought it forward openly, for this was no
small evil. Observe, how even in the begin-
ning the evils came not only from without, but
also from within. For you must not look to
this only, that it was set to rights, but observe
that it was a great evil that it existed.
4 Then) the) jiwelve?.etc.:,\(v.r2)is}Do~you
observe * how outward concerns succeed to
inward? They do not act at their own discre-


3 Standing here by itself, this last clause of v, 7 is quite out
of its place. It is best explained as marking the conclusion of
the text v. 1-7 here again read out. In the old text it is
followed by the comment, ’Exetvo yap 70 yevos edoxer Tiiwrepor
eivac- as if ‘‘this description of people’’ meant the priests:
and then, ‘‘ And there arose,” it says, ‘‘a murmuring,” v. 1,
We have restored the comment to its proper place.—The inno-
vator adds as comment on v. 7: Tovro aivittomevov eoti Kai
decxvivtos ote ad’ wy oO Kata Xpiotov Bavatos éaxevacdOy, ToAAOL
amo TOUTwY mLaTEVovolY. ~* This is by way of hint, to show that
of those very persons, by whose machinations the sentence of
death against Christ was procured, of those same many be-
lieve. ‘* There arose,’’ it says, ‘‘a murmuring,’ etc. And so
Edd.

* The murmuring arose from the ‘‘ Hellenists’’ who are not
mentioned by Chrys. (probably because of a defect of the text)
These Hellenists are distinguished from the ‘‘ Hebrews” and
were probably Greek-speaking Jews resident in Jerusalem
who had become Christians and who are here distinguished by
their language from the great mass of the Jewish Christians
who spoke the vernacular.—G. B. S.

+ The neglect here referred to was doubtless, as Chrys. says,
unintentional (vs. Meyer) and arose from the increasing diffi-
culties of administering the affairs of so large a society as the
Christian community at Jerusalem had now become, on the
plan of acommon treasury. The narrative gives the impres-
sion that the complaint was not unfounded. It is not unlikely
that the natural jealousy between the Greek and Palestinian
Jews may have sharpened the sense of neglect. This is the
first record of dissension in the Christian Church. We may
note thus early the conditions which tended to develop a Jew-
ish and a Gentile party in the church ; the germs of dissenting
sects of Ebionites and Gnostics which developed into so many
dangerous and harmful forms in the apostolic, and especially
in the post-apostolic age.—G. B. S.

4 ‘@pas Ta efw Siadexoueva ta €ow; E. omits this and so Edd,
The antithesis here seems to be, not, as before, of evils from
without and from within the Church; but of the concerns of
the body and of the soul.


gO


tion, but plead for themselves to the congre-
gation. So ought it to be done now. “It is
not reason,” says he, “‘ that we should leave
the word of God, and serve tables.” First he


puts to them the unreasonableness of the
thing ; that it is not possible for both things


to be done with the same attention: just as
when they were about to ordain Matthias, they
first show the necessity of the thing, that one
was deficient, and there must needs be twelve.
And so here they showed the necessity ; and
they did it not sooner, but waited till the
murmuring arose; nor, on the other hand,
did they suffer this to spread far. And, lo!
they leave the decision to them: those who
pleased all, those who of all were honestly
reputed, them they present: *not now
twelve, but “seven, full of the Spirit and of
wisdom : well reported of ” for their conversa-
tion. (v.3.) Now when Matthias was to be
presented, it was said, “ Therefore must one
of these men which have companied with us
ail the stime’*’ (ch, 1. 21): but not so! here
for the case was not alike. And they do not
now put it to the lot; they might indeed
themselves have made the election, as moved
by the Spirit: but nevertheless, they desire
the testimony of the people. The fixing
the number, and the ordaining them, and for
this kind of business, rested with them: but
the choice of the men they make over to the
people, that they might not seem to act from
favor: just as God also leaves it to Moses to
choose as elders those whom he knew.
(Num. xi. 16.) “And of wisdom.” For
indeed there needs much wisdom in such
ministrations. For think not, because he
hath not the word committed unto him, that
such an one has no need of wisdom: he does
need it, and much too, ‘“ But we,” saith he,
** will give ourselves continually to prayer, and
to the ministry of the word.” (v. 4.) Again
they plead for themselves, beginning and end-
ing with this. ‘‘ Will give ourselves contin-
ually,” he saith, For so it behooved, not just
to do the mere acts, or in any chance way,
but to be continually doing them. ‘“ And the
saying,” we are told, “ pleased the whole mul-
titude.” (v. 5. 6.) This too was worthy of
their wisdom. Allapproved of what was said,
so sensible was it. “ And they chose,” it
says (again it is the people (airoi) that choose, )
“Stephen, a man full of faith and of the Holy


Ghost, and Philip, and Prochorus, and
Nicanor, and Timon, and Parmenas, and


Nicolas a proselyte of Antioch: whom they
set before the Apostles: and when they had


1 E. D. F. Morel. Ben. omit this sentence, and go on with,
**Now when Matthias,” etc. Savile: And a very good deci-
sion this is. And they present seven, not now twelve, full,’
etc:


THE WORKS; OF (ST. CHRYSOS#ORE


[HomILy XIV.


prayed, they laid their hands on them.” They
separated them from the multitude, and it is
the people (airo:) that draw them, not the
Apostles that lead them. Observe how he
avoids all that is superfluous: he does not tell
in what way it was done, but that they were
ordained (éyexpotovytjoav) with prayer: for this
is the meaning of yeiporovia, (i. e. “ putting
forth the hand,”) or ordination: the hand of
the man is laid upon (the person,) but the
whole work is of God, and it is His hand
which toucheth the head of the one ordained,
if he be duly ordained. “And the word of
God,” it says, “increased : and the number of
the disciples multiplied.” (v.7.) Itis not for
nothing that he says this: it shows how great
is the virtue of alms and good order. And as
he is about in the sequel to enlarge (aise)
upon the affair of Stephen, he puts first the
causes which led to it. ‘ And many,” he says,
“of the priests were obedient to the faith.”
For” since they perceived such to be the mind
of their ruler and teacher, they put the matter
to the test of facts.—It is also a subject for
wonder, how it was that the multitude was not
divided in its choice of the men, and how it
was that the Apostles were not rejected by
them. But what sort of rank these bore,
and what sort of office they received, this is —
what we need to learn. Was it that of Dea- ©
cons? .And yet this is not the case in them
Churches. But* is it to the Presbyters that —


2°Eme.dn yap eldov tov apxovta Kai duddoKadov ToLavtTa amopn-
VamLevov, aT0 Tav Epywy AoiTov THY TE:pay EAauBavov. Meaning,


perhaps, that these priests, acting upon the counsel of Gama- %
liel, put the question to the test of facts and experience, and


learned that it was of God.—In the next sentence, a covert
censure seems to be implied: gq. d.‘* Would it be so now? ~
Would there not be parties and factions in the choosing of the
men? Would not the Bishop’s overture be rejected, were he
to propose a plan for ridding himself of the like distracting
demands upon his time ?

3 adda tev mpecBuTépwr EoTiv H Oikovouta; interrogatively (so |
in Cone. Quine Can. xvi., see below), but in the Edd. this
is put affirmatively; Ben. Sed preshyterorum erat w@conomia.
Atgui nullus adhuc erat episcopus. Erasm. Sed preshyter-~
orunt est hac dispensatio, tametsi nullus adhuc esset episco-
pus.’ But to say that the otxovouia, i. e. stewardship and
management of Church funds (in Chrysostom’s time). was
vested in the presbyters, would be contrary to facts. There-
fore we take it interrogatively: the answer not expressed,
being, ‘‘ No: it belongs to the Bishops.’’ Perhaps, however,


the passage may be restored thus; “AAAa tov mpecBuTépwr ; a
Katto: ©


*AAAG Ta@Y emicxoTwy (or OVS Tay mpeEcB.)
k.7. A. ‘* Well, was it that of presbyters? Nay, this steward-
ship belongs to Bishops. (Or, No, neither does it belong to
presbyters.) And yet,”’ etc.—The following sentence, “’OOev —
oure Staxovwy ove mpeaBuTépwy oiat(Cat. om.)Td bvoua elvar SHAoV
kat havepov, as the text stands, might seem to mean, ‘* Whence


€oTiv H OK.


I think that neither of deacons nor of presbyters is the name |


clearly and manifestly expressed: ’’ i. e. “* there is no express —
and clear mention in this narrative either of deacons or of
presbyters; and I account for this circumstance by the fact,
that there were no Bishops.’ Ben. Unde puto nec diacono-
runt nec presbyterorum tunc futsse nomen admissumt nec
manifestum. But transposing oiwat and eivac, or indeed even
as the words stand, we get the sense expressed in the transla- —
tion, which is more suitable. So Erasmus: Unde neque —
diaconorum neque presbyterorum monten esse opinor quod
clarnm ac manifestum.
and office is neither deacons nor presbyters: they were
ordained upon a special emergency.’’—It seems to have been
commonly held in earlier times, that Acts vi. 1-6 is the history —
of the first institution of the Diaconate. Thus the Council of
Nicoczesarea ordains (a.p. 314) that in each city, however


large, the number of deacons according to the Canon ought to |


St. Chrys. says, ‘‘Their appellation |


Homity XIV.] ERE CAC ES: OF


the management belongs? And yet at present
there was no Bishop, but the Apostles only.
Whence I think it clearly and manifestily fol-
lows, that neither Deacons nor Presbyters is
their designation : but it was for this particular
purpose that they were ordained.* And this
_ business was not simply handed over to them
without further ceremony, but the Apostles
_ prayed over them, that power might be given
to them. But observe, I pray you, if there
_ were need of seven men for this, great in pro-
portion must have been the sums of money
that flowed in, great in proportion also the
number of widows. So then the prayers were
not made in an off-hand way, but with much
deliberate attention: and this office,1 as well
as preaching, was thus brought to good effect ;


be seven,and for proof appeals to this history, reca@jon dé
amo THs BiBAov tay mpagewv. In the third century, Corneiius
£p. ad Fab. ap. Eus. H. £. vi. 43 states, that the clergy of
Rome consisted of one Bishop, forty-six presbyters, seven
deacons, etc. (Accordingly St. Jerome, Z%. 146 @/. 101 ad
Evang. remarks: Diéaconos paucitas honorabiles factt.
Comp. Sozomen. vii. 19.) But the rule which assigned to each
Bishop seven deacons, neither more nor less, was not always
followed in large cities,as appears even from the Canon above
cited: how greatly that number was exceeded in later times,
may be seen in the Noved/e of Justinian, when it is enacted
(iii. c. 1.) that the number of deacons in the metropolitan
Church at Constantinople should be a hundred. The Council
or Councils commonly called the fifth and sixth General (Conc.
Quinisextum, or Trullanum,) held under the same Emperor,
A.D. 692, sanctioned this departure from the earlier rule, in the
following Canon (xvi). ‘‘ Whereas the Book of Acts relates
that seven deacons were appointed by the Apostles, and the
Council of Neoczsarea in its Canons determines that ‘‘ The
number of deacons in each city,” etc. (as above): we, having
applied the sense of the Fathers to the Apostolic text, find that
the said history relates not to the deacons who minister in the
mysteries, but to the service of tables, etc.: the history in the
Acts being as follows, ‘“* And in_ those days,”’ etc. (Acts vi. 1-
6.) The doctor of the Church, John Chrysostom, expounding
the same, thus speaks: ‘“‘ It is a subject for wonder
neither deacons nor presbyters is their designation,’’ (as
above.) Hereupon therefcre do we also publish, that the
aforesaid seven deacons be not taken to mean those which
Minister in the mysteries, as in the doctrine above rehearsed:
but that these are they which were charged with the service of
the common need of the people then gathered together; albeit
herein these be unto us a pattern of humane and diligent
attendance on them that be in necessity.

* There is no sufficient ground to doubt that this narrative
describes the formation of the diaconate which we find exist-
ing later in the apostolic age (Phil. i. 1 ; 1 Tim. iii. 8-12). Al-
though the word étaxovos does not here occur, we have the cor-
responding verb é:axovery and abstract noun érakovia (1, 2).
The chief grounds of this opinion are: (1) the substantial
identity of the duties here described and those of the later
diaconate ; (2) the almost universal testimony of patristic tra-
dition to their identity : (3) the continuance for centuries of the
number seven in the diaconate of churches (like that at Rome)
where more than seven avould naturally be required, out of
deference to the apostolic mode. See Lightfoot, Cow. on
Philippians, pp. 187-9.—G. B. S.

1 kai ToUTO, Womep TO KYPVyHAa, OVTWS HYvETO'—TOVTO, the
“serving of tables” itself: ovrws, by this arrangement. Ta
yap wAciw tTavTats jvvov: the more time the Apostles had for
prayer, the better for the Church: so much depended on their
prayers. Therefore the plan was every way beneficial : ovTw
Ta mvevpaTixa emeA€yovTo, (Erasm. adnumerabantur, Ben.
preferebuntur, but the meaning is, ‘‘ they chose to them-
Selvyes,”) ovTw xai amodyutas eateAAovTo, oTws evexetpiadnoay
oro. Tov Adyov. ‘* by this arrangement, the Apostles were free
to give their undivided attention to spiritual matters; to leave
Jerusalem, if need were, on journeys to distant places: by this
arrangement, in short, the Word was their proper charge—
not secular matters, such as Bishops are now burdened with, in
addition to their proper duties,’ Comp. note!, p.90._ Headds:
The writer, indeed, does not say all this, nor extol the
devotion with which the Apostles gave themselves up to their
work, and how beneficial the arrangement proved: but it is
said, *‘It is not reason,’’ etc. Moses had set the example in
this regard: and in token of their concern for the poor, ob-
serve the charge which they afterwards gave to Paul and
Barnabas, to ‘‘ remember the poor.”’


TRE APOs PLES:


gI


=


for what they did, they effected mostly by the
means of these (their prayers.) Thus they
were enabled to give their attention to things
Spiritual ; thus were these also free to under-
take long journeys ; thus were these put in trust
with the word. But the writer does not say
this, nor extol them, but that it was “ not rea-
son” that they should leave the work given to
them. ‘Thus they had been taught by Moses’s
example not to undertake the management of
everything by themselves. (Num. xi. 14.)
“Only,” it is said, “ that we should remember
the poor.” (Gal. ii. 10.) And? how did they
bring these forward? They fasted. ‘ Look
you out seven men,” ete, (wv. 3.) dt Is, not
simply, spiritual men, but, “full of the Spirit
and of wisdom, “ for it needed very great supe-
riority of mind (¢:Aoco¢iac) to bear the complain-
ings of widows. For what profits it, that the
dispenser of alms steal not, if nevertheless he
waste all, or be harsh and easily provoked?
‘““And they chose Stephen, a man full of faith
and of the Holy Ghost.” (v. 5.) And in
this regard Philip also was admirable: for it
is of him that the writer says: “And we
entered into the house of Philip the Evangelist,
which was one of the seven; and abode with
him.”—(ch. xxi. 8.) Dost thou mark how
matters are ordered quite otherwise than after
the matter of men? “And the number of
disciples was multiplied in Jerusalem.” (v.
.) In Jerusalem the multitude increased.
Wonderful, where Christ was slain, there the
preaching increased! And not only was it
not the case that some were offended then in
the manner of Ananias, but the awe became
even greater: while these are scourged, those
threatening, those tempting the Spirit, those
murmuring. ButI would have thee remark
under what circumstances the multitude in-
creased: after these trials, then it was that the
multitude increased, and not before. Mark
also how great the mercy of God. Of those
chief-priests, of the very men who had indig-
nation and sore displeasure and so cried out
and said, “He saved others, Himself He
cannot save ;” of these same, ‘‘ Many,” it says,
‘“‘were obedient unto the faith.”” (Matt. xxvii.
42.)


2 Tlas 5€ mponyov tovtous; ‘Evnorevor, Edd. from E.,
**But how they also brought these forward, learn thou. They
fasted, they continued in prayer. This ought also to be done
now.’’—As there is no mention of fasting in Acts vi. 1-6

erhaps this refers to the history xiii. 2, 3 of the mission of
-aul and Barnabas, to which he has just alluded.—Below,
kai Tavtn 6€ Savuacros iva, The clause to which this refers
is misplaced in the old text, viz. before the sentence, ** In Jer-
usalem,’’ etc. where E. and Edd. restore the proper clause of
V. 7 Kai erAnOuveto, x. t. A. The connection is: ‘* The Apostles
desired seven men full of the Holy Ghost and of wisdom:”'
and such was Stephen, ‘‘a man full of faith and of the Holy
Ghost: ”’ such doubtless were the others likewise ; (supra, p.
88) certainly Philip was eminent in this regard, for [besides
the history of his preaching at Samaria, ch. viii.] he is after-
wards conspicuous in the history as Philip the Evangelist.


THE WORKS. OF SF. ‘CHRYSOSTOR,


[HomiLy XIV.


Him therefore let us also imitate. He re-
ceived them, and did not cast them out. So
let us requite those our enemies, who have
wrought us even numberless ills. Whatever
good thing we may have, let us impart to
them: let us not pass them by, in our acts of
beneficence. For if we ought, by suffering ill,
to sate their rage, much more, by doing them
good: for this is a less thing than the other.
For it is not all alike, to do good to an
enemy, and to be willing to suffer greater
wrongs than he wishes (to inflict) :* from the
one we shall come on to the other. This is
the dignity of Christ’s disciples. Those cru-
cified Him, when He had come for the very
purpose of doing them good; His disciples
they scourged; and after all this, He admits
them to the same honor with His disciples,
making them equally partakers of His gifts.
I beseech you, let us be imitators of Christ :
in this regard it is possible to imitate Him:
this makes a man like unto God: this is
more than human. Let us_ hold fast to
Mercy: she is the schoolmistress and teacher
of that higher Wisdom. He that has learnt
to show mercy to the distressed, will learn
also not to resent injuries ; he that has learnt
this, will be able to do good even to his
enemies. Let us learn to feel for the ills our
neighbors suffer, and we shall learn to endure
the ills they inflict. Let us ask the person
himself who ill-treats us, whether he does not
condemn himself? would he not be glad
to show a nobler spirit (¢Aocodeiv) ? must he not
own that his behavior is nothing but passion,
that it is little-minded, pitiful? would he not


like to be of those who are wronged and are.


silent, and not of those who do wrong, and
are beside themselves with passion? can he
go away not admiring the patient sufferer?
Do not imagine that this makes men despic-
able. Nothing makes men so despicable, as
insolent and injurious’ behavior: nothing
makes men so respectable, as endurance under
insolence and injury. For the one is a
ruffian, the other a philosopher; the one is
less than man, the other is equal to angels.
For though he be inferior to the wrong-doer,
yet, for all that, he has the power, if he had
the mind, to be revenged. And besides, the
one is pitied by all, the other hated. What
then? The former will be much the better of
the two: for everybody will treat the one as a
madman, the other as a man of sense.


1 Kat melGova teAjoar avery 7 BovAecdar: so all our Mss.
Erasm. “Et majora voluisse pati, vel velle.’ Ben. Et majora
velle patz.’’ But the meaning is, ‘‘To be ready to suffer
greater wrongs than an enemy chooses to inflict:’’ alluding to
Matt. v. 30-41 Comp. Hom. xviii. 7x Matt. p. 238. D. 70 Kat
TapacyXely éavTov els TO TAbELY KaK@s* . . . TO Kai TACOV TapacxeELV
H €xetvos BovAetat o moinoas. If for BovAeodac we read BovAerta,
the sense is clearer: 7 BovAeo dar, ‘* than that he should wish it,”
is somewhat abrupt


He?” cannot speak of him in evilsort: yea, thou
fearest, says one, lest perchance he be not
such (as thou wouldest represent). Best that
thou speak not evil in thy thought even; next,
that thou speak it not to another. Pray not
thou to God against this man: if thou hear
him evil-spoken of, take his part: say, It was
passion that spoke such words, not the man ;
say, It was anger, not my friend: his mad-
ness, not his heart. Thus let us account of
each offence. Wait net for’ the fireto se
kindled, but check it before it comes to that :
do not exasperate the savage beast, rather do
not suffer it to become exasperated: for thou
wilt no longer be able to check it, if once the
flame be kindled. For what has the man
called thee? ‘Thou fool and simpleton.”
And which then is liable to the name? the
called, or the caller? For the one, be he ever
so wise, gets the character of being a fool:
but the other, even if he be a simpleton, gets
credit for being wise, and of philosophic
temper. Say, which is the simpleton? he who
alleges against another what is untrue, or he
who even under such treatment is unmoved?
For if it be the mark of true philosophy to be
unmoved however moved; to fall into a passion
when none moves to anger—what folly is it!
I say not yet, how sore a manner of punish-
ment is in store for those who utter such
reproaches and revilings against their neigh- |
bor. But how? has he called thee “a low®
fellow and low-born, a sorry creature and of —
sorry extraction?” Again he has turned the ~
taunt against himself. For the other will —
appear worthy and respectable, but he a sorry
creature indeed: for to cast up such things,
that is to say, meanness of birth, as a disgrace, —
is little-minded indeed: while the other will —
be thought a great and admirable character,
because he thinks nothing of such a taunt, and —
is no more affected by it than if he were
told * that he had about him any other ordinary ©


2 Ov bu > - > Cin - . . 55 , 5 A s t
v Svvatat eimety avToOY Kak@s* Kat dédotkas pyTws OVK HY,
dyotv, ToLovUTOs.


éfwOev eipnuéva, as he says below. But in this sentence the ~
text appears to be corrupt, and the Mss. lend no real assist- —
ance for the reading adopted by Edd. from E. F. D. is only —
meant for restoration: viz. ‘‘ Therefore, when any would com-

pel thee to speak evil of some person (xaxnyopyoat Tuva, Sav.
Marg. amexdws mpos tiva Exe) Say to him, ‘I cannot speak


evil of him: for I fear lest perchance he were not (jv, Sav. ein) |


such.’ ’’—A. as usual in cases of difficulty, omits the passage
as unintelligible.
interlocution, and whether #v is the first or the third person, ~
must be left doubtful; but the words might be rendered, ** Lest
per chanee I, says he, (i. e. the person attacked), be not such.”? —

elow, wh évtixys Kata TovTOUV To ew is strangely rendered by
Erasm. Ne zx hoc cum Deo pugnes: ‘“‘Lest herein thou fight
against God.” :

3 OTe Exo. TL T@V GAAwWY ToV adtapopwv. E. D. F. Edd. dad-
épov ‘‘something about him, better than other men.”’ Below,
for évvojaavta yap ** for-when one has considered,’ Edd. have
évvojgavtas 6€ «kat, ‘* but when you consider also:”’ i. e. ‘* but
if the case be not so,” etc. In fact something is wanting:
for the case here supposed is that the charge is true: the per-
son has been guilty of some immorality, which the other pub-
licly exposes.


. Here and in the following sentences we seem —
to have a string of apothegms from heathen moralists: ta ~


Whether ¢yoiv denotes a citation or an ~


HomILy XIV.]


Po eee) Ol -THE APOSTLES:


93


and quite indifferent circumstance. But does
he call thee “adulterer,” and such like? At
this thou mayest even laugh: for, when the
conscience is not smitten, there can be no
occasion for wrath. * * For when one has
considered what bad and disgraceful dis-
closures he makes, still for all that, there
is no need to grieve. He has but laid bare
now, what everybody must be apprised of
by and bye: meanwhile, as regards himself,
he has shown all men that he is not to be
trusted, for that he knows not how to screen
his neighbor’s faults: he has disgraced him-
self more than he has the other; has stopped
up against himself every harbor: has made
terrible to himself the bar at which he must
hereafter be tried. For not the person (whose
secrets are betrayed) will be the object of
everybody’s aversion, but he, who where he
ought not to have raised the veil, has stripped
off the clothes. But speak thou nothing of
the secrets thou knowest: hold thou thy peace
if thou wouldest bear off the good fame. For
not only wilt thou overthrow what has been
spoken, and hide it: but thou wilt also bring
about another capital result: thou wilt stop
sentence being given against thyself. Does
somebody speak evil of thee? Say thou:
“Had he known all, he would not have
spoken only thus much.”—So you admire
what has been said, and are delighted with it ?
Aye, but you must follow it. For when we
tell you all! these maxims of the heathen
moralists, it is not because Scripture does not
contain hundreds of such sayings, but because
these are of more force to put you to the
blush. As in fact Scripture itself is wont to
use this appeal to our sense of shame; for
instance, when it says, ‘“‘Do ye even as the
Heathen.’’* .(Jer, | xxxv. 3.). And the prophet
Jeremiah brought forward into public view the
children of Rechab, how they would not con-
sent to violate the command of their father.—
Miriam and her company spake evil of Moses,
and he immediately begged them off from
their punishment; nay, would not so much as
let it be known that his cause was avenged.
(Num. ch. xii.) But not so we: on the con-
trary, this is what we most desire; to have all
men know that they have not passed unpun-
isued. How long shall we breathe of the
earth ?—One party cannot make a fight.
Pluck the madmen from both sides, you will
exasperate them the more: but pluck from
right or from left, and you have quenched the
passion. The striker, if he has to do with one


lta Aeyoueva auvayouev, B. C. N. omitting e€wOev, which
Say. supplies. A. E. D, F. Ben. ra éfwOev cipnucva Acyouev.—
Below, for xaOws ta €Ovn (dynotv) roineate, which is not found in
Scripture, E. Edd. have, Ovxi xat of €Ovixoi 7d adTd ToLovcw;
Matt. v. 47.


who will not put up with blows, is the more
set on: but if with one who yields, he is the
sooner unnerved, and his blow is spent upon
himself. For no practised pugilist so un-
nerves the strength of his antagonist, as does
a man who being injuriously treated makes no
return. For the other only goes off ashamed,
and condemned, first by his own conscience,
and secondly by all the lookers on. And
there is a proverb too, which says, that “to
honor another, is to honor one’s self ”’: there-
fore also to abuse another is to abuse one’s self.
None, I repeat, will be able to harm us, unless
we harm ourselves; nor will any make me
poor, unless I make myself such. For come,
let us look at it in this way. Suppose that I
have a beggarly soul, and let alJ lavish all
their substance upon me, what of that? So
long as the soul is not changed, it is all in
vain. Suppose I have a noble soul, and let
all men take from me my substance : what of
that? So long as you do not make the soul
beggarly, no harm is done. Suppose my life
be impure, and let all men say just the con-
trary of me: what of that? For though they
say it, yet they do not judge thusof me in
their heart. Again, suppose my life be pure,
and let all say of me just the reverse: and
what of that? For in their own conscience
they will condemn themselves: since they are
not persuaded of what they say. Just as we
ought not to admit the praise, so neither the
criminations. And why say I these things?
None will ever be able to plot against us, nor
lay us under any evil charge, if we choose
(that they shall not). For how now, I ask
you? Let him drag me intoa court of justice,
let him lay vexatious informations, let him, if
you will, have the very soul out of me: and
what of that? for a little while, undeservedly
to suffer these things, what does it signify?
“Well,? but this,” say you, “is of itself an
evil.” Well, but of itself this is a good, to
suffer undeservedly. What? would you have
the suffering to be deserved ? Let me men-
tion again a piece of philosophy, from one of
the sages. A certain person, says the story,
had been put todeath. And one of the sage’s
disciples said to him, “ Woe is me, that he
should have suffered unjustly!” The other


2 Tovro bev ody avTo Kaxov, dyatv. ATO mév obv TOUTO KaAdy Td
By Kat’ agiay madecy. Morel. from E. kaxov for ckaAov - which
supposes it to be put interrogatively: ‘‘this thing itself an
evil, say you?’’—The philosopher, whose apothegm is here
referred to, is Socrates: of whom Diog. Laert. 7” l’7t. relates:
“His wife having said, Thou art unjustly put to death: ov ée,
Edy, Suxaiws eBovdov; wouldst thou rather it were justly ?”’
But Xenophon, in Aol. relates a similar answer made to
Apollodorus, ‘‘a SE ae but affectionate disciple of
Socrates. This, said he, O Socrates, is what hurts me most,
that I see thee unjustly put to death. And he, stroking the
head of his disciple, replied: And wouldest thou, my friend,
rather see me justly than unjustly put to death?” Down. ap.
Sav.


Oe


turned upon him, ‘“ Why, how now?” said he,
“would you have had him justly suffer?”’ (Soc-
rates ap. Diog. Laert. and Xen. AZem. Socr.)
John also, was not he unjustly put to death?
Which then do you rather pity: them that
justly suffer death, or [him?* Do you not
count them miserable, while] him you even
admire? Then what is a man injured, when
from death itself he has got great gain, not
merely no hurt? If indeed the man had been
immortal, and this made him mortal, no doubt
it would be a hurt: but if he be mortal, and
in the course of nature must expect death a
little later, and his enemy has but expedited


THE) WORKS OF STS ‘CHRYSOST GRE


[HomMILy XV.


his death, and glory with it, what is the harm ?
Let us but have our soul in good order, and
there will be no harm from without. But
thou art not in a condition of glory? And
what of that? That which is true of wealth,
the same holds for glory: if I be magnani-
mous (ueyaronperte), I shall need none; if vain-
glorious, the more I get, the more I shall
want. In this way shall I most become illus-
trious, and obtain greater glory; namely, if I
despise glory. Knowing these things, let us
be thankful to Him Who hath freely given us
such a life, and let us ensue it unto His glory ;
for to Him belongs the glory, forever. Amen.


EO MLE Yai 2 Vin


AGHS


“And Stephen, full of faith and power, did great
wonders and miracles among the people.”


SEE how even among the seven one was
preéminent, and won the first prize. For
though the ordination was common to him and
them, yet he drew upon himself greater grace.
And observe, how he wrought no (signs and
wonders) before this time, but only when he
became publicly known; to show that grace
alone is not sufficient, but there must be ordi-
nation also; so that there was a further access
of the Spirit. For if they were full of the
Spirit, it was of that which is from the Laver
of Baptism. ‘‘ Then there arose certain of
them of the synagogue.” (v. 9.) Again he
uses the phrase of “rising up” (dvdoraow,
Hom. xiii. p. 81), to denote their exaspera-
tion and wrath. Here we have a great multi-
tude. And observe the difference in the form
of accusation : for since Gamaliel had stopped
them from finding fault on the former plea,
they bring in another charge. “And there
rose up, it says, certain of them of the syna-
gogue of those who are called (ray Aeyouévor. Edd.
77¢ Aeyouévyc) Libertines, and of the Cyrenians
and Alexandrians, and of them of Cilicia and
Asia, disputing with Stephen. And they were
not able to resist the wisdom and the spirit by
which he spake. Then they suborned men,
which said, We have heard him speak blasphe-
mous words against Moses, and against God.”
(v. 9-12.) That they may establish the charge,
the phrase is, “he speaks against God, and
against Moses.” And with this object too


1 We supply this from the modern text, which, however, has
Tov ovX oUTws ; But execvoy is better, as this will account for the
omission. Our Mss. have: tots dtxkaiws amodavovtas, 7 éxetvov
kai daupwacers


WARS:


they disputed, that they might force him to
say somewhat. But he now discoursed more
openly, and perhaps spoke of the cessation of
the Divine Law: or, spoke it not, but hinted
as much: since had he spoken plainly, there
had been no need of suborned men, nor yet of
false witnesses.* The synagogues were di-
verse :; [to wit, “‘Of the Libertines 7] +c) ottie
Cyrenians, i. e. those in the parts beyond
Alexandria [“of the Alexandrians,” etc.].
There also they seem to have had synagogues
according to their different nations ; for many
stayed behind there, that they might not be


obliged to be continually travelling. The
Libertines perhaps were freedmen of the
Romans. As there were many foreigners


dwelling there, so they had their synagogues,
where the Law was to be read. ‘“ Disputing
with Stephen.” Observe him, not taking
upon him to teach, but forced to do so. The
miracles once more brought him into ill-will;
but when he overcame in argument, it was
false-witness! For they did not wish to kill


* The accusations against Stephen were probably true in
part and false in part. He had doubtless spoken against Jew-
ish legalism and narrowness and had perhaps shown the bear-
ing of O. T. prophecy and of Jesus’ doctrine of fulfilment
upon the fate of the Jewish system. The charge that he had
spoken ‘‘against Moses” had, then, a certain verbal truth
which made its moral falseness all the more subtle. The per-
version of his words was due in part to their utter incapacity
to apprehend Christianity as the fulfilment of their own reli-
gion which necessarily involved the passing away of the latter,
and partly from their bitter jealousy and hatred of the Chris-
tian ‘‘sect’’ and the determination to find some excuse to
bring against it all the legal and social forces of the whole
Jewish people. In his preaching Stephen had doubtless
sought to set forth the distinctive character of Christianity as
a religion historically founded in Judaism, but not to be lim-
ited and bound by its forms. He but developed germs of truth
found in the teaching of Jesus concerning the Sabbath, cere-
monial purifications, etc. He was the forerunner of Paul, who
brought upon himself the same accusations (Acts xviil. 135
Xx1. 21).—G. B.S.


HomiLy XV.]


MtEVACES OF THE, APOSTLES:


95


intolerable to them. ‘They could not resist,
etc.: then they suborned men.” Everywhere
out of hand, but by means of a sentence, that
they might hurt their reputation also: and
leaving those (the Apostles), they attack these
(the disciples), thinking in this way to terrify
those also. They say not, “he speaketh,”
but, “he ceaseth not to speak. And _ they
stirred up the people, and the elders, and the
scribes, and came upon him, and caught him,
and brought him to the council, and set up
false witnesses, which said, This man ceaseth
not to speak blasphemous words against this
_ holy place, and the Jaw.” (v. 12, 13.) “ Ceaseth
' not,” say they, as if he made this his business.
“For we have heard him say that this Jesus

of Nazareth shall destroy this place, and shall
change the customs which Moses delivered
Bus.” (v.14.) “Jesus,” they say, “‘ the Naza-
rene,” as a term of reproach, “ shall destroy this
place, and shall change the customs.” This is
also what they said about Christ. ‘“ Thou that
‘destroyest this Temple.” (Matt. xxvii. qo.)
_ For great was their veneration for the Temple
(as indeed they had chosen to leave their own
country (werok:iv) in order to be near it) and
for the name of Moses. The charge is twofold.
If* He “shall change the customs,” He will
also introduce others instead: observe how
the charge is a bitter one, and fraught with
perils. ‘“ And all that sat in the council, look-
ing steadfastly on him, saw his face as it had
been the face of an angel.” (v. 15.) So
possible is it even for one in a lower degree
to shine. For what, I ask, had this man less
than the Apostles? He lacked not miracles,
and great was the boldness he exhibited. "—
“They saw his face,” it is said, “as it had been
the face of an angel.” (Ex. xxxiv. 30.) For
this was his grace, this was the glory of Moses.
God made him thus gracious (éziyapw) of visage,
now that he was about to say somewhat, thus
at once by his very look to awe them. For
there are, yes, there are faces full-fraught with
Spiritual grace, lovely to them that love, awful
to haters and enemies. It mentions also the
reason, why they suffered his oration.—“ Then,”
it proceeds, ‘‘said the high-priest, Are these
things so?” (ch. vii. 1.) Observe, the ques-
tion is put with mildness, that he may effect
some great mischief. For this reason Stephen
too begins his speech in a tone of gentleness,
and says, “Men, brethren, and fathers,


ee Ce Oe i aed


sea FQ


C


fa 1 E. * And observe how the charge is twofold. ‘Shall
0 destroy,’ say they, ‘the place,’ and, ‘shall change the
se customs. And not only twofold, but bitter,’ etc. So Edd.


but Savil. adds, ‘“‘ and shall introduce others instead.”’

2A. B. C. N. Ovxi onpeiwy eden6n, cat (A. B. od) modAAnv
emedeifato thy mappyoiav. Cat. has woAdA@v for onmetwv, and
reads it affirmatively. Edd. ovxi onueta ecpyacato; ov (D. F.
kai) ToAAnv x. 7. A. Perhaps the passage may be restored thus:
* Did he not work miracles—though he needed not many—and
show great boldness?”’


hearken ; The God of glory appeared unto our
father Abraham, when he was in Mesopota-
mia, before he dwelt in Charran.” (v. 2.)
Immediately at the outset he overthrows their
conceit, and makes it appear by what he says,
that the temple is nothing, that the customs
are nothing either, without their suspecting
his drift : also that they shall not overcome the
preaching ; and that from powerless (ay;ydver)
things God evermore contrives Him powerful
(eiujyava) instruments. Mark then how these
threads make the texture of the whole speech :
and moreover that having evermore enjoyed ex-
ceeding goodness, they still requited their Ben-
efactor with the opposite conduct, and that they
are now attempting impossibilities. ‘The God
of glory appeared unto our father Abraham,
when he was in Mesopotamia, before he came
into Charran.” Both the temple was not, and
sacrifice was not, and yet a vision of God was
vouchsafed to Abraham, and yet had he Per-
sians* for his ancestors, and was in a strange
land. And he does well at the beginning of
his speech to call Him, “ the God of glory:”
seeing that He hath made them that are with-
out honor to be glorious. ‘“ Because”’ (says he)
“it was He that made them glorious, He will
make us also.’ Observe how he leads them
away from things of the body, from the place,
in the first instance, as the place was in ques-
tion. “The God of glory,” says he: implying
again, that He needs not the glory which comes
from us, which comes by the Temple: for
Himself is the Fountain thereof. Think not,
he would say, in this way to glorify Him.
“ And from thy kindred.” How? then saith
the Scripture, that Abraham’s father was will-
ing to goout? Hence we learn, that it was in
consequence of Abraham’s vision, that his father
was moved to join inthe migration. (Gen. xi.
31.) ‘And said unto him, Get thee out of
thy country, and from thy kindred, and come
into a land which I shall show thee.” (v. 3.)
It shows how far these men are from being
children of Abraham, how obedient he was.
“ And® from thy kindred.” Uncomfortable
(ooptixa) reflections, both, that he endured the
labors, while ye reap the fruits, and that all
your ancestors were in evil case. “ Then
came he out of the land of the Chaldzans,
and dwelt in Charran : and from thence, when


3 Chrys. commonly denotes the oriental nations, generally,
by the name, “ Persians.’’ Ben. /

4 Edd. from E. ‘‘ And how, it may be asked, doth the Script
ure say this concerning Abraham's father? Because it does
not trouble itself about matters that are not very essential.
What was useful for us to learn, this only it has taught us,
that in consequence of his son’s vision, he went out with him ;
the rest it leaves untold, by reason that he died soon after
settling in Charran. ‘Get thee out of thy kindred.’ Here he
shows that these men,”’ etc.

5 E. Edd. ‘ but these disobedient: or rather, we learn from
what he does, as he was bidden, that he endured,” etc.


96


THEC WORKS. OFEST:


CHRYSOST@OM. [Homity XVI.


his father was dead, He removed him into this
land, wherein ye now dwell. And He gave
him none inheritance in it, no, not so much as
to set his foot on.” (v. 4, 5.) See how he raises
their thoughts away from (their possession of)
the land. }For if He said (that, He will give:
clearly [all came from him], and nothing from
themselves. For he came, having left both
kindred and country, Wherefore then did
He not give it to him? Truly it was a figure
of another land. ‘And He promised to give
it to him.”” Do you perceive, that he does not
merely resume the thread of his discourse?
“ He gave him not,” says he; ‘‘ and He prom-
ised ; and to his seed after him, when as yet he
had no child.” Again, what God can do:
that out of impossibilities, He doeth all;
For here is a man in Persia, so far away, and
this man God saith He will make lord of
Palestine. But let us look back to what
was said before.

Whence, I pray you, did that grace bloom
upon the countenance of Stephen? (Recapi-
tulation.) The writer gives him this report
above, that he was “full of faith.” (ch. vi. 8).
For it is possible to have a grace that does
not consist in works of healing: “‘ For to one
is given the grace of the Spirit (1 Cor. xi. 8,
g) in such and such wise (roasde). But here,
it seems to me, it says that he was also gra-
cious to look at: “They saw his face as it
had been the face of an angel.” “ Full of
faith and of power”: (v. 15) which is also
the character given of Barnabas “he was a
good man, full of faith and of the Holy
Ghost.” (ch. xi. 24.) Whence we learn that
the sincere and innocent are, above all others,
the? men to be saved, and that these same
are also more gracious. “Then they sub-
orned men, which said, We have heard him
speak blasphemous words.” (v. 11.) In the
case of the Apostles they were annoyed that
they preached the Resurrection, and _ that
much people flowed unto them: but in this
case, that they were getting their diseases
healed. (ch. iv. 2.) The things for which
they ought to give thanks, they made matter
of blame: O the madness! The men who


1 A.C.N. Ei yap eirev, décer, SjAov O71, kal ovdey Tap avTav
Cat. OU yap x.7. A. B. Ov yap eimev, dWaet, add’, OvK Edwxe,
SjAov OTL TA Tap exeivov, kal ovdev map avtwv. So E. D. F. Edd.
except that for éyAov 67e ta these have dyA@v OTe mavTa. The
meaning seems to be: ** They boasted of their possession of
the land, as the token of God’s favor to themselves. See how
Stephen will not allow them to rest in this conceit. Abraham
was ‘the friend of God,’ yet to him ‘He gave none inheri-
tance,’ etc. True ‘He promised to give it’: but if God said
(that) He will give it (spoke of giving it at some future
time) ; this very circumstance shows that the Jews had it from
Abraham, in consequence of God’s favor to him; not as
deserved by themselves.”’

2 tovs owouevovs. Edd. from E. tovs Savpaopnevous,
‘““they that are admired.’’—Below, all our Mss. and the Catena
have “Ent pév tov amogroAwy édeyov, ‘‘In the case of the
Apostles, they said.’’ We read, conjecturally, 7Ayouv.


overcame them by works, they expected to
overcome by words! It is just what they did
in the case of Christ, and always they forced
them to words. For they were ashamed to
seize them without more ado, having nothing
to charge them with. And observe, not the
persons themselves who bring them to judg-
ment bear witness against them; for they
would have been refuted : but they simply hire
others, that it may not seem to be an act of
mere violence. It is all of a piece with their
proceeding in the case of Christ. And ob-
serve the power of the preaching, that, though
they are not only scourged but stoned, it still
prevails : not ® only, private individuals as they
are, dragged to the bar, but assailed from all
quarters : and, their enemies themselves being
witnesses, not only were these worsted, but
“they were not able” even “to resist” (v. ro),
though they were exceeding shameless: so
mightily did it overthrow them, for all that
they could do with their preposterous figments
(as the saying that He had a devil—He that
cast out devils!). For the battle was not
man’s, but God’s against men. And there
were many combined together; not only they
in Jerusalem, but others as well. (v. 9.)
For “we have heard him,” say they, “speak-
ing blasphemous words against Moses and
against God.” (v. 11.) O ye shameless ones!
Ye work blasphemous deeds, and think noth-
ing of it. This is why Moses is added—be-
cause the things of God were no great con-
cern to them; and it is ever and always Moses
that they make mention of: “This Moses,
which brought us out.” (ch. vil. 40.) “And
they stirred up the people.” (v. 12.) Fickle-
ness* of the multitude! And yet how could
a man who was a blasphemer have so suc-
ceeded? How could a blasphemer work such
miracles among the people? But the undis-
ciplined multitude made them strong who had


3-C. N. have ovyi iS&twray bvTwy adAAa Kal éAavvOMEeVwY TaV-
todev: B. F. D. E. Edd. ovdé és Stxactyproy ayouevwr, adda Kat
é€A. m. In the translation we assume the full reading to be,
ovxi, Siwrov dvtwr, és 6. ayouevwv, aAAa Kai €, m. In the next
sentence E. alone (followed by Edd.) has the unnecessary
alteration, "Evred@ev kat WevSomaprupovyTwy av’T@v, ov movoy OvK
expatouv, add’ kK. T. A. A. ovxi Ld. OvTWY GAAG Kal pyTOpwY, ov
povov [ovx ?] HTT@vT0, aAAa Kai [KaTa?] KpaTos evikwy, KaiToL
x. 7. A. i. e. [‘* their adversaries”’] being not private individ-
uals, but public speakers too, they not only were [not]
worsted, but mightily conquered: [so that ‘they were not able
to resist’] though,’’ etc.—Below, for mAdtrovtas A. E. mpatzov-
ras C. we read mpattovtas Kat mAattovtas - after which, Edd.
have (from E. alone): ‘* As also in the case of Christ: who did
everything to compass His death: insomuch that it became
manifest to all men that the battle,’ etc. And, instead of the
next sentence ; ‘‘ And mark what say the false-witnesses, who
were got up by those who murderously dragged Him before
the council: ‘We have heard,’”’ etc. j

4 7d evpimarov Tov dxAov. Edd. add avepeOigorres, “‘irritating |
the fickle-minded multitude.’’? Below, for “AAA’ 6 6xAos_ 0
ataxtos Kk, T. A., A. has ’AAA’ ovy 6 OXAOs TadTa GAA’ oi ypaymarets.
‘Huets ax. x. T. A. ** But not the multitude (said) this, but the
scribes: We have heard,’”’ etc. Edd. from E., ‘‘ But such is ©
envy: it makes them demented whom it possesses, so that
they do not so much as consider the meaning of the words
they utter.”


Homity XV.]


the worst of it (in argument).—This was what
most annoyed them. “We have heard him,”
they say, “speaking blasphemous words
against Moses and against God” (v. 13): and
again, ‘This man ceaseth not to speak blas-
phemous words against this holy place and
the law,” and with an addition, “the cus-
toms” “ which Moses delivered to us” (v. 14);
Moses, not God. Upon the supposition of a
design to overturn their manner of life (ou
teiac), they accused him of impiety also. But
to show that it was not in the nature of such
a man to speak such things, and _ harshly
[“Then all,” it says, “which were in the
council, looking steadfastly upon him, saw his
face, as it had been the face of an angel ”’]
(v. 15): so mild was he even in countenance.
For, in cases where persons were not falsely
accused, Scripture mentions nothing of this
kind: but as in this case it was all false accu-
sation, with reason does God rectify it by the
very look of the man. For the Apostles in-
deed were not falsely accused, but were for-
bidden: but this man is falsely accused: and
therefore before all else his countenance
pleads for him. This abashed even the
pres. And he said,” etc. .(ch. ‘vii. 1.)
He shows here, that the promise was made
before the Place, before Circumcision, before
Sacrifice, before the Temple, and that it was
not of their merit that these received either
Circumcision or Law, but that the land was
the reward of obedience alone. Moreover,
that neither on the giving of circumcision
does the promise receive its fulfilment. Also,
that these were figures, and (so was) both the
leaving his country at God’s command—not !
against the law (for home and country is
where God shall lead): “‘ Then came he out,”
it says, ‘‘of the land of the Chaldeans” (v. 4):
—and that if one look closely into the matter,
the Jews are of Persian origin: and that, with-
out miracles, one must do as God bids, what-
ever hardships be the consequence ; since the
Patriarch left both the grave of his father and
all that he had, in obedience to God’s com-
mand. But ‘if Abraham’s father was not
allowed to take part with him in the privilege
of migrating to Palestine, because he was un-
worthy: much more shall the children (be ex-
cluded at last), for all that they may have
gone a good distance on the way. ‘“ And He
promised,” it says, “to give it to him, and to
his seed after him.” (v. 5.) Herein is shown
the greatness both of God’s goodness and of
Abraham’s faith. For the expression, “ when


1 ov mapa Tov vowov. For this, E. alone has nat ovyyévecay,
and instead of the text, ‘* Then came he out,”’ etc. «at 70
kAnpovomtay évtavda wy AaBecv: so Morel. Ben. Savile retains
the reading of E., but adds od mapa Tov vouov after ovyyéverar.


~


/


Pr ink. On: LE APOSTLES.


97


as yet he had no child,” does show his obedi-
ence and faith. ‘ Promised to give it to him
and to his seed.” And yet the events showed
the contrary: namely, after he came, he had
not ‘so much as to set his foot on,”’ had not
a child; which very things were contrary to
his faith.

These things having seen, let us likewise,
whatever God shall promise, receive the same,
however contrary may be the events. And
yet in our case, they are not contrary, but
very suitable. For where the promises are,
there, when the contraries turn out, they are
really contrary ; but in our case it is just the
reverse: for He has told us that we should
have tribulation here, but our rest there.
Why do we confound the times? Why do we
turn things upside down? Say, art thou
afflicted, and livest in poverty, and in dejec-
tion? Be not troubled: for it were worth be-
ing troubled at, wert thou destined to be af-
flicted in that world: as for this present afflic-
tion, it is the cause of rest. ‘* This sickness,”
saith He, “is not unto death.” (John xi. 4.)
That affliction is punishment: this, schooling
and correction. It is a contest, this life pre-
sent: if so, to fight is our business now: it is
war and battle. In war one does not seek to
have rest, in war one does’ not seek to have
dainty living, one is not anxious about riches,
one’s care is not about a wife then: one thing
only he looks at, how he may overcome his
foes. Be this our care likewise: if we over-
come, and return with the victory, God will
give us all things. Be this alone our study,
how we may overcome the devil: though after
all it is not our own study that does it, but
God’s grace does the whole business. Be it
our one study, how we may attract His grace,
how we may draw to ourselves that assist-
ance. ‘If God be for us, who can be against
us?” (Rom. villi. 31.) Let us make one thing
our study; that He be not our enemy, that
He turn not away from us.

Not the being afflicted is an evil; the evil
is, to sin. This is the sore affliction, however
we may pass our days in luxury :—not to
speak of the life to come, it is so even in this
life present. Think how our conscience is
stung with remorse, and whether this is not
worse than any kind of torture! I should
like to put the question searchingly to those
who live in evil ways (év xaxoic), Whether they
never come to reflect upon their own sins,
whether they do not tremble, and are in fear
and anguish, whether they do not think those
blessed who live in abstinence, them of the
mountains, them of the strict rule? (roi¢e &
rosy odocogia.) Dost thou wish to find rest in
the life to come? Suffer affliction in this life


98


THE WORKS’ OF ‘ST. CHRYSOS TOR


[HomILy XV.


for Christ’s sake: there is nothing equal
to this rest. The Apostles rejoiced when
scourged. Paul gives this exhortation, say-
ing, “ Rejoice in the Lord.” (Philip. iv. 4.)
And how can there be rejoicing, where there
are bonds, where there are tortures, where
there are courts of justice? There, most of
all, is rejoicing. But? say, how can there be
rejoicing, where these are not? For he who
is conscious of no evil, will have a sort of
exceeding delight, insomuch that in what
degree you speak of tribulation, in the same
you tell of his delight. The soldier who has
received numberless wounds and is come
home again, will he not return with exceeding
delight, with his wounds? as his title for speak-
ing up boldly, and as evidence of his glory and
renown? And thou, if thou be able to exclaim
as Paul does, “I bear the marks of Jesus”
(Gal. vi. 17), wilt be able to become great
and glorious and renowned. “ But there is no
persecution.”” Make thy stand against glory:
and should any one speak anything against
thee, fear not to be evil-spoken of for Christ’ S
sake : make thy stand against the tyranny of
pride, against the fighting of anger, against
the torment of concupiscence. These also
are “‘ marks,” ? these also are torments. For,
I ask, what is the worst in tortures? Is it
not, that the soul is pained, and is on fire?
For in the other case, the body too has its
share : but in this, the whole belongs to the
soul. On the soul alone comes all the smart,
when one is angry, when one is envious,
whatever else of this kind one does, or rather
suffers. For, in fact, it is not action, but
passion, not a doing, but a suffering—to be
angered, to feel envy: therefore indeed they
are called passions (or sufferings) (wafy, per-
turbationes) of the soul, yea wounds, and
bruises. For it is indeed a suffering, and
worse than suffering. Bethink you, ye that
are angry, that ye do such things in “ pas-
sion,” in a state of suffering. Therefore he
who is not angry suffers not. Do you mark
that not he who is abused is the sufferer, but
he that abuses, as I said above? For that he
is a sufferer, is plain in the first place from
the very fact, that such a thing is called by
this name of passion: and it is also plain
from the (effects on the) body: for these are
the affections (a#,) [or “ sufferings,’ as we
call them] engendered by anger, viz. dimness


1 E.F. D. Edd. ‘“ And how
these are, learn (thus).
evil,’ etc.

2 wappyolas Umdbeow Exwy Ta Tpavmara.
audacie.’ Erasm. “ testimonium libertatis.

3 ottyuara, i. e. *‘ the marks of Jesus may be gained in these
encounters also, and the spirit of a confessor may be exhibited
under these tortures likewise.


there may be rejoicing, where
He who in nothing is conscious of


Ben “


argumentum
”


and numberless others.
“ But he insulted my boy,” say you; “but [he
called him] clown.”* Deem it not weakness
thy not doing the same thing thyself. For, I
ask you, was it well done? “You will not say
that: then leave that undone which being
done were not well done. I know what pas-
sions are engendered in such cases. “But,”
Say you, “ how if he despise me, how if he say
it again ?”’ Show him that he is in the wrong :
rebuke him, entreat him: by meekness anger
is put down: go and expostulate with him.
For though in cases of wrong done to our-
selves it is right not to do even this, yet it is
quite necessary to do it in behalf of others.
Do not look on it as an insult to yourself that
your boy has been insulted: annoyed you
may be for his sake, yet not as if you were
insulted : for it does not follow because your
boy has been ill-treated, that you are dis-
graced, but he is disgraced that did the ill.
Quench (thine anger) that sharp sword: let
it lie in its scabbard. If we have it un-
sheathed, we shall be apt to use it even when
the time is not proper, being drawn on by it:
but if it be hidden, though a necessity should
arise, yet, while we seek it in order® to draw
it, the anger will be quenched. Christ would
not have us be angry on his account:
(hear what He saith to Peter: “ Put up again
thy sword into the sheath :”) (Matt. xxvi. 52)
and art thou angry on account of a boy?
Teach thy boy also to be philosophical : tell
him thy own sufferings: imitate (herein) thy
Teacher. (Matt. xxvi. 52.) When they too
(His disciples) were about to be treated with
dishonor, He said not, ‘‘I will avenge you:”
but, “to Me also,” saith He, “they have done
the same: bear it nobly, for ye are not better
than I.” These words too do thou speak to
thy son and thy boy: “Thou art not better
than thy master.” But these words of philos-
ophy are counted as the talk of a widow
woman. Alas! that it is not in the power of
words to bring it home to people in the way
that it is possible to be taught it by actual
experience! And that you may learn this;
stand between two combatants, take part
with the wronged, not with the wrong-doers


of vision, insanity,


4 adda Tov aypotkov, Edd. from E., adda roy oixéerny - which
is idle, for it appears below that the mais here is a servant.
We supply éxaAece or eivev: and indeed av madw eizn below
shows that the insult spoken of was some contumelious
oie aay before My voxtons, something needs to be sup-
plied, e.g. Mn ov Mieenon toutov, ‘** Do not thou imitate him.’
And perhaps indeed tov ayp. may belong to this: ‘* He insulted
my boy.’’ But do not thou imitate the rude, uncivil man:
deem it not, etc.

5 ws Gntovmev oxemacar. A. B.C. The other Mss. omit the
clause, and Edd. except Savile who reads from N, ov SyToupev —
avTyy oTacat, ‘‘ we do not seek to draw it.’ We adopt omaca,
—Below, E. 'F. D. Edd. roo Aeorortov, ‘thy Master’s suffer- —
ings,” for gavtov, which the context shows to be the’ true
reading.


HomiLy XV.]


gee; oes, OF THE APOSTLES:


99


[that you may learn]* whether you shall not
see the victory on your side, whether you
shall not get splendid crowns.—See, how God
is insulted, and how He answers ; how gently,
“Where,” saith He, “is Abel thy brother?”
and what saith the other: “ Am I my brother’s
keeper?” (Gen. vi. 9.) What could be
more contumacious than this? Would any one
have heard it (patiently) even from a son?
and if from a brother, would he not have
thought such conduct an insult? What then?
See how again God gently answers, “ The
voice of thy brother’s blood,” saith He
“crieth unto Me.” “ But God,” it will be said,
“is superior to wrath.” Yes, but for this rea-
son the Son of God came down, that He
might make thee a God as far as human
power can go. “But I cannot,” says one,
“seeing I am man.” Well then, let us give
you men for instances. And do not suppose
I speak of Paul or of Peter: no, but of some
of inferior sort, yea, very much lower down.
Eli’s menial insulted Hannah, saying, “ Put
away thy wine from thee.” (1 Sam. i. 1)
What could be more insulting than this?

What then said she? “I ama woman ofa
hard lot.” * Indeed, there is nothing equal to
affliction: she is the mother of true philoso-
phy. But this same woman, though she has
her rival, insulted her not: but what does
she? She takes refuge with God, and in her
prayer does not even make mention of her,
nor say, ““Avenge me, for such an one
reproaches me :”” so magnanimous was that
woman (let us men be ashamed) :—and yet ye
know, that there is nothing like jealousy.
The publican, when insulted by the Pharisee,
insulted not in return, though, had he wished
it, he might have done so: but he bore it like
a philosopher, saying, “Be merciful to me a
sinner.” (Luke xviii. 13.) Mephibosheth,’
having been accused and calumniated by his
servant, neither said, nor did, any evil to him,
not even in the presence of the king himself.
fesam. xix. 26.) Shall ‘I tell you ‘even ‘of
a harlot, what philosophic magnanimity she
showed? Hear Christ saying, as she was
wiping His feet with her hair, ‘‘ The publicans
and harlots go into the kingdom before you.”
(Matt. xxi. 31.) Do you see her standing, and
taking courage, and washing away her own
sins? Observe, how she was not angry even


l av py Tapa cavT® 7a VUKnTHpLa idns av pH Aapumpors AaByS
otepavovs. This depends on iva uaOns at the beginning of
the sentence. Erasmus wrongly, ‘‘Sz xox videas:’’ Ben.
5 Sz non videbis.”

2 yuvn év oxAnpa neépa eiwi, Chrys. yuvn 7 oxAnpa ymepa (or
muépa) LXX.

8 Memphibaal, Chrys. here and Syxops. Sacr. Script. t. vi.
349. and Theodoret Quest. 31, in lib. 2. Reg. MeudiBooe,
LXX. Elsewhere he is called Meribbaal, x Chron. Vili. 34.
So Jerubéaal, Judg. vi. 32. JerubJesheth, 2 Sam. Xi. 21.
Memphibaal is compounded of the two forms. Ben.


with the Pharisee, when reproached by him:
“for had He known,” says he, “that this
woman is a sinner, He would not have suf-
fered her (Luke vii. 39): and how she said
not to him, “What then? Say, art thou pure
from sins?” but felt more, wept more, and let
fall hotter tears. But if women and publicans
and harlots play the philosopher, and that
before grace (i.e. of Baptism), what pardon
can they deserve, who, after so great grace,
fight, and worry, and kick one another, worse
than beasts? Nothing is more base than
passion,» nothing more disgraceful, nothing
more frightful, nothing more odious, nothing
more hurtful. These things I say, not only
in order that towards men we may be gentle,
but also if a wife be a talker, that thou mayest
bear it: let thy wife be to thee a school for
training and exercise (xaraiorpa Kal yuuvacwov)
For how can it but be absurd, to submit to
exercises which yield no profit, where we
afflict the body, but not to practise exercises at
home, which, even before the contest, present
to us a crown? Does thy wife abuse thee?
Do not thou become a woman : to be abusive
is womanly: it is a disease of the soul, an
inferiority. Think not that it is unworthy of
thee, when thy wife abuses thee. Unworthy
it is, when thou art abusive, but she bears pa-
tiently (ocA0cogy)) : then dost thou act unseemly,
then art thou disgraced: but if, having been
abused, thou bear it, great is the proof of thy
strength. I do not say this, to induce wives
to. be abusive: God forbid: but only in case
it should so happen at the instance of Satan.
It is the part of men that are strong, to bear
the weak. And if thy servant cone ceie thee,
bear it philosophically: not what he deserves
to have said to him, do thou say or do, but
that which it behooves thee both to do and to
say. Never insult a girl by uttering some
foul word against her: never call thy servant,
scoundrel (wapav): not he is disgraced, but
thou. It is not possible to be master of one’s
self, being in a passion. Like a sea rolling
mountains high, it is all hurly-burly: or even
as a pure fountain, when mire is cast into it,
becomes muddied, and all is in turmoil. You
may beat him, you may rend his coat to rags,
but it is you that sustain the greater damage :
for to him the blow is on the body and the
garment, but to you on the soul. It is your
own soul that you have cut open; it is there
that you have inflicted a wound: you have
flung your own charioteer from his horses,
you have got him dragging along the ground
upon his back. And it is all one, as if one
driver being in a passion with another, should
choose to be thus dragged along. You may
rebuke, you may chide, you may do whatever


100 THE WORKS OF


ST, GHEY SOS FORT [Homity XVI.


if be, only let it be without wrath and passion.
For if he who rebukes is physician to him
who offends, how can he heal another, when
he has first hurt himself, when he does not
heal himself? Say, if a physician should go
to heal another person, does he first wound
his own hand, first blind his own eyes, and so
set about healing that other? God forbid.
So also, however thou rebuke, however thou
chide, let thine eyes see clearly. Do not
make thy mind muddy, else how shall the
cure be wrought? It is not possible to be in
the same tranquillity, being in a passion, and
being free from passion. Why dost thou first
overturn thy master from his seat, and then
discourse with him as he lies sprawling on the
ground? Seest thou not the judges, how,


EVO WEY ey a


ACTS VII. 6, 7.


“And God spake on this wise, That his seed should
sojourn in a strange land; and that they should
bring them into bondage, ‘and entreat them evil
four hundred years. And the nation to whom they
shall be in bondage will I judge, said God: and
after that shall they come forth, and serve Me in
this place.”


SEE, what a number of years the Promise
has been given, and the manner of the Prom-
ise, and nowhere sacrifice, nowhere circum-
cision! He here shows, how God Himself
suffered them to be afflicted, not’ that He had
anything to lay to their charge. “And they
shall bring them into bondage,” Ciera ouL
nevertheless, they did not these things with
impunity. “And the nation to whom they
shall be in bondage I will judge, said God.”
For,? to show that they are not to go by this,
in estimating who are pious (by reason of
their saying, “‘ He trusted in God, let Him
deliver Him,’’) (Matt. xxvii. 43).—He, the
Same that promised, He that gave the land,
first permits the evils. So also now, though
He has promised a Kingdom, yet He suffers
us to be exercised in temptations. If here
the freedom was not to be till after four hun-
dred years, what wonder, with regard to the
Kingdom? Yet he performed it, and lapse of
time availed not to falsify His word. More-


1 Katto. ovdev Exwv avdtois eyxadrev. A. B.C. N. Cat.—E. F.
D. Edd. omit this oe aus read: ‘‘ to be afflicted: and that
they did not,” etc. SoE

“Iva yap pH TOUT (Can. TOUTWY, At Cc. N. tovto B. om.)
voulowov evoeBets (N. evoeBetv) elvac, dua TO A€yerv kK. T. A. The
wording of the passage is not strictly grammatical, but the
sense seems to be as expressed above.—E. D. F. omit this sen-
tence, and substitute, ‘‘Seest thou?’’ So Edd.


when about to hold the assize, they seat them-
selves upon the bench, in their becoming
attire? Thus do thou likewise dress thy soul
with the judicial robe (which is gentleness).
“But he will not be afraid of me,” say you.
He will be the more afraid. In the other
case, though you speak justly, your servant
will impute it to passion: but if you do it with
gentleness, he will condemn himself: and,
what is of the first importance, God will
accept thee, and thus thou wilt be able to
attain unto the eternal blessings, through the
grace and loving-kindness of our Lord Jesus
Christ, with Whom to the Father together
with the Holy Spirit be glory, dominion, and
honor, now and ever, and world without end.
Amen.


over, it was no ordinary bondage they under-
went.* And the matter does not terminate
solely in the punishment of those (their op-
pressors) ; but they themselves also, He saith,
shall enjoy. a mighty salvation. Here he
reminds them too of the benefit which they


enjoyed. ‘And he gave him the covenant of
circumcision : and so he begat Isaac.” Here
he lets himself down to lower matters.


‘‘And circumcised him on the eighth day:
and Isaac (begat) Jacob, and Jacob the twelve
patriarchs.” (v. 8).—Here?* he seems to hint
now at the type. ‘“ And the patriarchs moved
with envy, sold Joseph into Egypt.” (v. 9.)
Here again, the type of Christ.t ‘Though they
had no fault to find with him, and though he
came on purpose to bring them their food, they
thus ill-treated him. Still here again the
promise, though it is a long while first, re-
ceives its fulfilment. ‘And God was with
him ”—this also is for them—‘“and delivered


* The relation of v. 6 and 7 to v. 5 is, as Chrys. intimates, to
show that the apparent incongruity between the promise of —
God to give the land to Abraham and his seed, and the fact
that Abraham never personally possessed the land, was not ©
accidental nor did it involve the failure of the divine promise. :
Accompanying the promise were divine assurances (Gen. xv.
13, 14) that a period of bondage and oppression was to precede R
the occupation of the land which was to be the inheritance of —
the nation.—G. Se .

3 E. Edd. omit this sentence: and below for “ Here again,”
etc. the same substitute: ‘‘ This happened also in the case of
Christ: for indeed Joseph is a type of Him: wherefore also he
narrates the history at large, hinting (at this meaning).”’ {

+ If it be too strong language to say, with Chrys., that.
Joseph is set forth here as a ‘‘ type of Christ,”’ it is clear that
the narrative of his ill-treatment by his brethren, subsequent
exaltation and his return of good for evil to those who had
sold him into bondage, is meant to suggest that their treat-
ment of Jesus had been similar.—G. B. S.


| el a 2 a 8


_ Homity XVI_]


him out of all his afflictions.” (v. 10). He
shows that unknowingly they helped to fulfil
the prophecy, and that they were themselves
the cause, and that the evils recoiled on their
own selves. “ And gave him. favor and wis-
dom in the sight of Pharaoh king of Egypt,
Gave him favor,” in the eyes of a barbarian,
to him, the slave, the captive: his brethren
sold him, this (barbarian) honored him,
“* Now there came a dearth over all the land
of Egypt and Canaan, and great affliction:
and our fathers found no sustenance. But
when Jaccb heard that there was corn in
Egypt, he sent out our fathers first. And at
the second time Joseph was made known to
his brethren.” (v. 11-13). They came down
to buy, and had to depend upon him for every-
thing. What then did he? [‘ He made him-
self known to his brethren:”] not to this
point only did he carry his friendliness; he
also made them known to Pharaoh, and
brought them down into the land. ‘“ And
Joseph’s kindred was made known unto Pha-
raoh. Then sent Joseph, and called his father
Jacob to him, and all his kindred, threescore
and fifteen souls. So Jacob went down into
Egypt, and died, he, and our fathers, and
were carried over into Sychem, and laid in the
sepulchre that Abraham bought for a sum of
money of the sons of Emmor the father of
Sychem. But when the time of the promise
drew nigh, which God had sworn to Abraham,
the people grew and multiplied in Egypt, till
another king arose, which knew not Joseph.
(v. 13-18). Then again, fresh disappoint-
ment (aveAnoria): first, famine, but they came
through that: secondly, the falling into the
hands of their enemy: thirdly, the being de-
stroyed by the king. Then (to show) God’s
fulness of ways and means (eimpyavov), “ In
which time,” it says, “‘ Moses was born, and
was exceeding fair.” (v. 20.) If the former cir-
cumstance was wonderful, that Joseph was sold
by his brethren, here again is another circum-
stance more wonderful still, that the king
“nourished” the very person who was to
overthrow his dominion, being himself the
person that was to perish. Do you observe
all along a figurative enacting, so to say, of
the resurrection of the dead? But it is not
the same thing for God himself to do a thing,
and for a thing to come to pass in connection
with man’s purpose (xpoaipecic). For these
things indeed were in connection with man’s
purpose [*but the Resurrection by itself, in-


1» S€ avactacis xa@ eautyv. This clause is found in the


Catena alone. Something seems to be required as the antith-
esis to the preceding clause, tavta mév yap meta mpoarp. avOp.
7v—for which E. Edd. have ratrta yodv ovK amd mpoacp. avOp. hv.
‘* These things however did not come of man’s purpose.’’—At
the end of the next sentence, Edd. (with E. alone) omit the


Toe nero. OF <THE “APOSTLES:


IO]


dependently. |—“ And he was mighty,” it says,
“in word and in deed” (v. 22): he that was
to have died. ‘Then again he shows how un-
grateful they were to their benefactor. For,
just as in the former instance, they were saved
by the injured Joseph, so here again they were
saved by another injured person, I mean,
Moses. ‘“ And when he was full forty years
old,” etc. For? what though they killed him
not actually? In intention they did kill, as
did the others in the former case. There,
they sold out of their own into a strange land:
here, they drive from one strange land into
another strange land: in the former case, one
in the act of bringing them food; in this, one
in the act of giving them good counsel; one
to whom, under God, the man was indebted
for his life! Mark how it shows (the truth of)
that saying of Gamaliel’s, “If it be of God,
ye cannot overthrow it.” (ch. v. 39.) See
the plotted-against eventually becoming the
authors of salvation to those plotting against
them: *the people, plotting against itself, and
itself plotted against by others; and for all
this, saved! A famine, and it did not con-
sume them: nor was this all: but they were
saved by means of the very person, whom they
had expected to be destroyed (by their means).
A royal edict, and it did not consume them:
nay then most did their number increase, when
he was dead “who knew” them. Their own
Saviour they wished to kill, but for all that,
they had not power to do it. Do you observe,
that by the means whereby the devil tried to
bring to naught the promise of God, by those
very means it was advanced?

“And God spake on this wise,” etc. (Re-
capitulation, v. 6, 7.) This* is suitable to be
said here also: that God is rich in ways and
means to bring us up from hence. For this
above all showed the riches of God’s re-
sources, that in its very reverses (azocrpooy) the
nation increased, while enslaved, while evil-


clause, 6 ode(Awy amo@averv: and for Eita maduw, have, “* This
he says, by way of showing both him (Moses) as saviour, and
these ungrateful to their benefactor.” f

2 Ti yap ei my avetAov avtov T@ TpayKaTL; T@ Adyw avetAov
omep kaxetvo.. N. and Catena read aveidev, both times, as if
the Compiler understood the passage in the sense of a preced-
ing comment extracted from S. Clem. Alex. Strom. “agi é€
oi pvaoTal Adyw povw avedeitv Tov Aly’mTLov. the initiated say
that Moses struck the Egyptian dead by a word, as in the Acts
Peter is related to have done in the case of Ananias,”’ etc.
But Chrys. nowhere thus interprets the fact, and the context,
@omep Kakelvot, iS against this view.—Below, Si ov €¢y mera
@cov; i. e. the Hebrew whom Moses saved, v. 24, who is here
supposed to be one of the parties in the strife mentioned in y.
26. This however not being clear, A., as usual omits : and the
innovator, assuming the passage to be corrupt, substitutes,
6t oy EgovTat wera Meov, giving them counsel by means of which
they shall be with God.’”’ So Edd.: only Sav. notes in the
margin the genuine reading of the other Mss. and Cat.

3 —. “ But do thou, observing this, stand amazed at the
riches of God's wisdom and resources: for, had those not
been plotted against, these had not been saved.’’ So Edd.

4 Tovto xac €vTavOa apuorre eimectv. Edd. from E. only, rovro
Kal avtTouvs npuotte ToTe eimecv: *‘ This was also suitable for
them to say at that time.’’ It was not perceived that the reca-
pitulation begins here. See note §, p. roz.


102 THE WORKS GFE


3 fs CRRY SOS Pes


[HomiLy XVI.


entreated, and sought to be exterminated.
And this is the greatness of the Promise.
For had it increased in its own land, it had
not been so wonderful. And besides, it was
not for a short time, either, that they were in
the strange land: butfor four hundred years.
Hence we learn! a (great lesson) of philo-
sophic endurance (@Avsogiav) :—they did not
treat them as masters use slaves, but as ene-
mies and tyrants—and he foretold that they
should be set in great liberty: for this is the
meaning of that expression, “ They shall serve
(Me): and they shall come up hither again”
(évraita éxavenevoovTat) 5 and with impunity.2 —
And observe, how, while he seems to con-
cede something to circumcision, he in fact
allows it nothing (v. 8); since the Promise
was before it, and it followed after.—‘‘ And
the patriarchs,” he says, “ moved with envy.
(v. 9.) Where it does no harm, he humors
(yapizerac) them: *for they prided themselves
much on these also.—* And he shows, that the
saints were not exempt from tribulation, but
that in their very tribulations they obtained
help. And that these persons did themselves
help to bring about the results, who wished to
cut short these same (afflictions): just as
these made Joseph the more glorious: just as
the king did Moses, by ordering the children
to be killed: since had he not ordered, this
would not have been: just as also that (He-
brew) drives Moses into exile, that there he
may have the Vision, having become worthy.
Thus also him who was sold for a slave,
makes He to reign as king there, where he
was thought to be a slave. Thus also does
Christ in His death give proof of His power:
thus also does He there reign as king where
they sold Him. “And gave him favor and
wisdom,” etc. (v. 10.) This ° was not only
by way of honor, but that he should have
confidence in his own power. ‘ And he made
him governor over Egypt and all his house.”
“Wow there came va dearth,’ ete. On ac
count of famine—such preparations is he
making—“ with threescore and fifteen souls,”


1 Edd. from E. D. F. ‘*‘ how they exhibited a great (example
of) philosophy.”’

2 Edd. (from E. alone) kat ovK atimpwpynti, “not unavenged
(upon their enemies).’’ But the meaning is, ‘‘ Their enemies
shall not be able to be avenged of them.’

3 E. D. F. insert for explanation, matptapxas Sé€ dyoe Tovs
mpoyovous. ‘‘he calls their ancestors, patriarchs.’’ This is the
‘“humoring’’ spoken of above: in C.’s time, “ patriarch’’ had
become a title of honor.

4 Edd. from E. ** But they not only did not loose (the afflic-
tions), but even codperated with those afflicting them, when
they ought rather to have cut through them (the afflictions).”

£ Morel. Ben. with E. D. F. omit this clause: Savile trans-
poses it. “ But as this (Joseph) reigns there as king where
they sold him, so does Christ in His death,’’ etc.—In the next
sentence, tovro seems to refer to the description in Gen. xli.
42, 43, of the distinctions conferred upon Joseph, which per-
haps Chrys. cited.—After this sentence, Edd. have (from E.
only) the formula of recapitulation, AAA’ iSwpmev x, 7. A., Which
is quite misplaced.—Below, A. and the mod. t. insert “Opa,
before dca Acjov ola Katackevacer.


he says, “ Jacob went down into Egypt, and
died, he and our fathers, and were carried
over into Sychem, and laid in the sepulchre
that Abraham bought for a sum of money
from the sons of Emmor the father of Sychem.*
(v. 11-16), It shows, that they were not mas-
ters even to the extent of a burying-place.
“But when the time of the promise drew
nigh, which God had sworn to Abraham, the
people grew and multiplied in Egypt, till an-
other king arose, which knew not Joseph”
(v. 17, 18). Observe, that it is not during the
four hundred years that He multiplies them,
but (only) when the end was about to draw
nigh. And yet already four hundred years
were passed, nay more, in Egypt. But this is
the wonder of it. “The same dealt subtly
with our kindred, and evil-entreated our fa-
thers, that they should cast out their young
children, to the end they might not live.” (v.
1g.) ‘‘ Dealt subtly:” he hints at their not
liking to exterminate them openly: “that
they should cast out their young children,”’ it


says. ‘In which time Moses was born and
was exceeding fair.” (v. 20.) This is the won-


der, that he who is to be their champion, is
born, neither after nor before, these things,
but in the very midst of the storm (@vyu)).
‘* And was nourished up in his father’s house.
three months.” But when man’s help was
despaired of, and they cast him forth, then
did God’s benefit shine forth conspicuous.
“And when he was cast out, Pharaoh’s daugh-
ter took him up, and nourished him for her
own son.” (v. 21.) Not a word of Temple,
not a word of Sacrifice, while all these Provi-
dences are taking place. And he was nour-
ished in a barbarian house. ‘And Moses
was learned in all the wisdom of the Egyp-
tians, and was mighty in words and in
deeds.” (v. 22:) #9 Was. trained,~ jboth *an
discipline and in letters. ‘“ And when he
was full forty years old.” (v. 23.) Forty
years he was there, and was not found out
from his being circumcised. Observe, how,
being in safety, they overlook their own inter-
ests, both he and Joseph, in order that they
may save others: ‘‘And when he was full
forty years old, it came into his heart to visit
his brethren the children of Israel. And see-
ing one of them suffer wrong, he defended
him, and avenged him that was oppressed,


* The reading of rod Svxéu (T.R.), doubtless meaning the
“father of Sychem"’ (Gen. xxxiii. 19), is replaced by Tisch., W.
and H. (after 8. B. C.) with ev Svxéu, making Zvxeu the name
of the place just mentioned—not of the person referred to in
the O. T. The Vulgate renders 7/77 Sichem thus coming into
collision with the O. T. 7. c.—G. B. S.

® Kat madela kat ypaupacv, as the comment an émacdev6y Vv.
2z, which must be supplied. Cat. has, cai waéeta cal ypauparta.
E. omits the clause, and substitutes, as the beginning of the
next sentence, “Evot @avuaew eémepxetac mas. ‘To me it
occurs to wonder how he could be forty years,’ etc. So Edd.


Homity XVI.]


ChE ACTS OF THE


AROS TILES. 103


and smote the Egyptian: for he supposed his
brethren would have understood how that
God by his hand would deliver them: but
they understood not.” (v. 23-25.)—See how
up to this point he is not yet offensive to
them ; how they listened to him while he said
all this. And ‘his face,” we read, “was as
the face of an angel ” (ch. vi. 15).—“ For he
supposed,” etc. And yet it was by deeds
that his championship was shown ; what intel-
ligence was there need of here? but still for
all this “they understood not. And the next
day he showed himself unto them as they
strove, and would have set them at one again,
saying, Sirs, ye are brethren; why do ye
wrong one to another?” (v. 26-28.) Do you
mark with what mildness he addresses them ?
He who had shown his wrath in the case of
the other, shows his gentleness’ in his own
case. ‘But he that did his neighbor wrong
thrust him away, saying, Who made thee a
ruler and a. judge over us? Wilt thou kill
me, as thou didst the Egyptian yesterday?”
Mark; the very words which they said to
Christ: ‘‘Who made Thee ruler and judge
over us?” So habitual a thing was it for
Jews to wrong (their benefactors) when in the
act of receiving benefits! And again, mark
the atrocious baseness: (wapiav al. poxOnpiav,
Sav. marg.) “As thou didst the Egyptian
yesterday! Then fled Moses at this saying,
and was a stranger in the land of Midian,
where he begat two sons.” (v. 29.) But
neither did flight extinguish the plan of Provi-
dence, as neither did death (i.e. the death
of Christ).

“And when forty years were expired, there
appeared to him in the wilderness of mount
Sinai an angel of the Lord in a flame of fire
in a bush.” (v. 30.) Do you mark that it is
not hindered by lapse of time? For when he
was an exile, when a stranger, when he had
now passed much time in a foreign Jand, so
as to have two sons, when he no longer ex-
pected to return, then does the Angel appear
to him. The Son of God he calls an Angel,
as also he calls Him man. (Appears) in the
desert, not in a temple. See how many mira-
cles are taking place, and no word of Temple,
no word of Sacrifice. And here also not sim-
ply in the desert, but in the bush. ‘ When
Moses saw it, he wondered at the sight: and
as he drew near to behold it, the voice of the
Lord came unto him.” (v. 31.) Lo! he was


1 éf éavrov, B. C. F. D. N. but A. E. Edd. émi rovrov
**in the case of this man.’’ So perhaps C&cumen. emeckws
vov T@ adtxovv7e mpogdeperar.—Below, E, Edd. ‘* With the
Same spirit they appear to say the same with reference to
Christ, ‘We have no king but Czsar.’ Thus was it ever
habitual to the Jews to act, even when receiving benefits. Do
you mark their madness? Him who was to save them, they
accuse, by saying, * As thou,’ ”’ etc.


deemed worthy of the Voice also. ‘I am the
God of thy fathers, the God of Abraham, and
the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob.”
(v. 32, 33-) Lo!? how He shows that He is
none other than “the God of Abraham, and
the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob ””—He,
“the Angel of the Great Counsel.” (Is. ix. 6.
LXX. “ Wonderful, Counsellor,” E. V.) Here
he shows what great loving-kindness God
herein exhibits. ‘‘ Then Moses trembled, and
durst not behold. Then said the Lord to
him, Put off thy shoes from thy feet ; for the
place where thou standest is holy ground.”
Not a word of Temple, and the place is holy
through the appearance and operation of
Christ. Far more wonderful this than the
place which is in the Holy of Holies: for
there God is nowhere said to have appeared
in this manner, nor Moses to have thus trem-
bled. And then the greatness of His tender
care. “I have seen, I’ have seen the afflic-
tion of My people which is in Egypt, and I
have heard their groaning, and am come
down to deliver them. And now come, I will
send thee into Egypt.” (v. 34.) See, how he
shows, that both by kindnesses, and by chas-
tisements, and by miracles, God was drawing
them to Him: but they were still the same.
That God is everywhere present, they learned.

Hearing these things, let us in our afflic-
tions flee to Him. “And their groaning,”
saith He, “I have heard:” not® simply, “ be-
cause of their calamities.” But if any should
ask, Why then did He suffer them to be evil
entreated there? Why, in the first place, to
every just man his sufferings are the causes
of his rewards. And in the next place, as to
why He afflicted them: it was to show His
power, that He can (do all), and not only so,
but that He may also train them. Observe
in fact; when they were in the desert, then
they ‘‘ waxed fat, they grew thick, they spread
out in breadth, they kicked” (Deut. xxxii. 15):
and ever and always ease was an evil.
Therefore also from the beginning He said to
Adam : “In the sweat of thy face thou shalt
eat thy bread.” (Gen. iii. 19.) Also * (it was)
in order that having come out of much suffer-
ing into rest, they might give thanks to God.
For affliction is a great good. For hear the
Prophet saying, “ It is good for me, that Thou


2 So A. B.N. Cat. (in C. the sentence "ISov—'Iaxw8 is omitted
by an oversight caused by the homceoteleuton ‘Iaxws.) Edd.
‘Not only does he here show that the Angel which appeared
unto him was the Angel of the Great Counsel, but he shows
also what loving-kindness God exhibits by this manifestation.”’

3 j, e. ‘IT have heard their groaning:”’ not simply (‘I have
come down) because of their calamities.’”’ The expression, ‘‘ I
have heard’’ denotes His ready sympathy.—But the modern
text: ‘* He does not simply say, ‘I have heard ;’ but because
of their calamities.”

4 Edd. from E. ‘‘ Therefore in order that having come out
of much affliction into rest, they may not be insolent, he per-
mits them to be afflicted.”


104


THE WORKS OF ‘ST. CHW SOS Tere


[HomiLy XVI.


hast humbled me.’ (Ps. \cxix. 71.) | But if to
great and wonderful men affliction be a great
good), much more to us. And,if you will,
let us examine into the nature of affliction as
it is in itself. Let there be some person re-
joicing exceedingly, and gay, and giving a
loose to jollity: what more unseemly, what
more senseless than this? Let there be one
sorrowing and dejected: what more truly
philosophic than this? For, “‘It is better,”
we read, ‘“‘to go into the house of mourning,
than into the house of laughter.” (Eccles. vil.
2.) But, likely enough, you! do not like the
saying, and want to evade it. Let us however
see, what sort of man Adam was in Paradise,
and what he was afterwards: what sort of
man Cain was before, and what he was after-
wards. The soul does not stand fast in its
proper place, but, like as by a running tide,
(pebuaroc, Edd. xvsiuaroc, ‘* wind ) is raised and
buoyed up by pleasure, having no steadfast-
ness; facile in making professions, prompt at
promising ; the thoughts all in restless com-
motion : laughter ill-timed, causeless hilarity,
idle clatter of unmeaning talk. And why
speak of others? Let us take in hand some
one of the saints, and let us see what he was
while in pleasure, what again, when in dlis-
tress. Shall we look at David himself?
When he was in pleasure and rejoicing, from
his many trophies, from his victory, from his
crowns, from his luxurious living, from his
confidence, see what sort of things he said
and did: “ But I said in my prosperity,” savs
fest shall) nevem be, moved.’ (Ps; xxx. 6)
But when he has come to be in affliction, hear
what he says: “ And if He say to me, I have
no mind for thee; lo! here am I, let Him do
that which is pleasing in His sight.” (2 Sam.
xv. 26.) What can be more truly philosophic
than these words? ‘“ Whatsoever may be
pleasme to, God,” saith he, “so let it be.”
And again he said to Saul: “If the Lord stir-
reth thee up against me, may thy sacrifice be
acceptable.” (1 Sam. xxvi. 19.) And then too,
being in affliction, he spared even his ene-
mies: but afterwards, not friends even, nor
those who had done him no injury. Again,
Jacob when he was in affliction, said: “ If the
Lord will give me bread to eat,.and raiment
to put on.” (Gen. xxvill. 20.) As also the son
of Noah did nothing of the kind erewhile ;
but when he was no longer afraid for his
safety, you hear how wanton he became. (ib.
ix. 22.) Hezekiah too, when he was in afflic-
tion, see what things he did in order to his


1 StaxpovedOc Ta Acyoueva. Edd. dtapwkxacée, ‘* make a mock
at.’’—Below, all the Mss. agree in olos jv 0 Katy mpo tovtov,
Either the text is corrupt, or something is needed for ex-
planation.


deliverance ; he put on sackcloth, and such
like; but when he was in pleasure, he fell
through the haughtiness of his heart. (2 Kings
ch. xix. 20.) For, saith the Scripture, ‘“ When
thou hast eaten, and drunk, and art filled,
take heed to thyself.” (Deut. vi. 11, 12.) For
perilous, as on a precipice’s brink, is the post
of affluence. ‘Take heed,” saith he, “to thy-
self.” When the Israelites were afflicted, they
became all the more increased in number:
but when He left them to themselves, then
they all went to ruin. And why speak of ex-
amples from the ancients?. In our own times,
let us see, if you please, is it not the case, that
when the most are in good case, they become
puffed up, hostile to everybody, passionate,
while the power is with them: but if it be
taken away, they are gentle, lowly (and as)
human beings, are brought to a consciousness
of their own natural condition. Therefore
the Scripture saith, “Pride hath holden them
unto the end: their iniquity shall go forth as
from fatness.” (Ps. Ixxili. 6. LXX.)

Now these things I have spoken, that we
should not make enjoyment every way our
object. How then does Paul say, “ Rejoice
alway?”’ He does not say simply, “ Rejoice,”
but he adds,"““in the “Lord. "(Phil aves
This is the greatest joy, such as the Apostles.
rejoiced withal; the joy of which prisons, and
scourges, and persecutions, and evil report,
and all painful things, are the source, and the
root, and the occasion; whence also it comes
to a happy issue. But that of the world, on
the contrary, begins with sweets and ends
in bitters. Neither do I forbid to rejoice in
the Lord, nay, I earnestly exhort to this.
The Apostles were scourged, and they re-
joiced : were bound, and they gave thanks:
were stoned, and they preached. ‘This is the
joy I also would have: from nothing bodily
has it its origin, but from spiritual things. It
is not possible for him who joys after the
fashion of the world, to rejoice also after a
godly sort: for every one who joys after the
world’s fashion, has his joy in riches, in lux-
ury, in honor, in power, in arrogance: but
he who rejoices after the mind of God, has
his joy in dishonor for God’s sake, in pov-
erty, in want, in fasting, in humbleness of
mind. Seest thou, how opposite are the
grounds (of joy)? To go without joy here, is
to be without grief also: and to be without
grief here, is to go without pleasure too.
And in truth these are the things which pro-
duce real joy, since the others have the name
only of joy, but they altogether consist of
pain. What misery the arrogant man en-
dures! How is he cut short (dvaxérrera) in
the midst of his arrogance, bespeaking for


~~


is
,
;


HomiLty XVI.]


PIE ACTS OP


himself numberless insults, much hatred, great
enmity, exceeding spite, and many an evil
eye !
greater men, he grieves: or that he cannot
make his stand against everybody, he is mor-
tified. Whereas the humble man lives in
much enjoyment: expecting honor from none,
if he receive honor, he is pleased, but if
not, he is not grieved. He takes it content-
edly that he is honored; but? above all, none
dishonors him. Now not to seek honor, and
yet to be honored—great must be the enjoy-
ment of this. But in the other, it is just
the reverse : he seeks honor, and is not hon-
ored. And the pleasure that the honor
gives is not the same to him who seeks it, as
it is to him who seeks it not. The one, how-
ever much he receives, thinks he has received
nothing: the other, though you give him ever
so little, takes it as though he had received
all. Then again, he who lives in affluence
and luxury has numberless affairs of business,
and let his revenues flow in to him ever so
easily, and, as it were, from full fountains, yet
he fears the evils arising from luxurious liv-
ing, and the uncertainty of the future: but
the other is always in a state of security and
enjoyment, having accustomed himself to
scantiness of diet. For he does not so be-
moan himself at not partaking of a sumptuous
board, as he luxuriates in not fearing the un-
certainty of the future. But the evils arising
from luxurious living, how many and great
they are, none can be ignorant: it is neces-
sary, however, to mention them now. Two-
fold the war, in the body, and in the soul:
twofold the storm: twofold the diseases ; not
only in this respect, but because they are both
incurable, and bring with them great calami-
ties. Not so, frugality: but here is twofold
health, twofold the benefits. “Sleep of
health,” we read, “is in moderate eating.”
BEicclus. xxxi. 20.) For everywhere, that
which keeps measure is pleasant, that which
is beyond measure, ceases to please. For say
now: on a little spark put a great pile of
fagots, and you will no longer see the fire
shining, but much disagreeable smoke. Ona
very strong and large man lay a burden which
exceeds his strength, and you will see him
with his burden lying prostrate on the ground.
Embark too large a freight in your vessel, and
you have ensured a grievous shipwreck. Just


1 padrota Sé ovdeis avrov atimacger. Savile justly retains this
sentence from the old.text. Montf. rejects it, as supsrfluous,
and disturbing the sense. Downe ap. Sav. proposes o7e ovx
HTiwacdn: ‘ xon ambit honorem, sed bene secum actum putat
si nulla affectus sit ignominia.’ But in the old text there is
no adda before ayama: and the meaning is not, “he thinks
himself well off,’’ etc., nor as Ben., ‘‘ he rejoices that,’’ etc.,
but, ‘he is content not to be honored; knowing this at any
rate, that nobody can dishonor him.”’


THE APOSTLES:


Whether it be that he is insulted by’


105


so itis here. For just as in overladen ships,
great is the tumult of the sailors, the pilot,
the man at the prow, and the passengers,
while they cast into the sea the things above
deck, and things below; so here too, with
their vomitings upwards, and their purgings
downwards, they mar their constitutions, and


destroy themselves. And what is the most
shameful of all, the mouth is made to do the
office of the nether parts, and that becomes
the more shameful member. But if to the
mouth the disgrace be such, think what must
it be in the soul! For indeed there it is all
mist, all storm, all darkness, great the uproar
of the thoughts, at being so thronged and
crushed, the soul itself crying out at the abuse
done to it: all? (the parts and faculties) com-
plaining of one another, beseeching, entreat-
ing, that the filth may be discharged some-
where. And after it is flung out, still the tur-
moil is not at an end; but then comes fever
and diseases. ‘‘ And how comes it,” say you,
“that one may see these luxurious livers, in
goodly plight, riding on horseback? What
idle talk is this,” say you, “to tell us of dis-
eases? It is I that am diseased, I that am
racked, I that am disgusting, while I have
nothing to eat.” Ah me! for one may well
lament at such words. But the sufferers with
the gout, the men that are carried on litters,
the men that are swathed with bandages, from
what class of people, I ask you, shall we see
these? And indeed, were it not that they
would deem it an insult, and think my words
opprobrious, I would before now have ad-
dressed them even by name. “ But there are
some of them, who are in good. health as
well.” Because they give themselves not
merely to luxurious living, but also ¢o labors,
Else show me a man, who does nothing what-
ever but fatten himself, free from pain as he
lies there, without an anxious thought. For
though a host of physicians without number
came together, they would not be able to res-
cue him from his diseases. It is not in the
nature of things. For I will hold you a med-
ical discourse. Of the matters sent down into
the belly, not all becomes nourishment ; since
even in the food itself, not all is nutritive, but
part of it in the process of digestion passes
into stool, part is turned into nourishment.
If then in the process of digestion the opera-
tion is perfect, this is the result, and each
finds its proper place; the wholesome and


2 E, Edd. ‘‘Thence also the gormandizers (yaoerpigonevor)
themselves complain of one another, are in ill humor, haste to
be rid of the filth within. Still, even after it is cast out,”’ etc,
And below :—‘‘fever and diseases. ‘ Yes,’ say you, ‘they are
sick and are disgusting ; it is waste of words to tell us all this,
and make a catalogue of diseases: for it is I that am diseased,
etc, .. while these luxurious livers one may see in good

| plight, sleek, merry, riding on horseback.’ ”’


100


useful part betakes itself to its appropriate
place, while that which is superfluous and use-
less, withdraws itself, and passes off. But if
it be in too great quantity, then even the nutri-
tive part of it becomes hurtful. And, to
speak by way of example, in order that my
meaning may be clearer to you: in wheat,
part is fine flour, part meal, part bran : now if
the mill be able to grind (what is put in), it
separates all these: but if you put in too
much, all becomes mixed up together. Wine
again, if it go through its proper process of
formation, and under due influence of the sea-
sons, then, whereas at first all is mixed to-
gether, anon part settles into lees, part rises
into scum, part remains for enjoyment to
those that use it, and this is the good part,
and will not readily undergo any change.
But what they call “ nourishment,” is neither
wine, nor lees, while all are mixed up together.
—The same may be seen in the river, when
its waters make a whirling flood. As at such
time we see the fishes floating at top, dead,
their eyes first blinded by the muddy slime:
so is it with us. For when gormandizing, like


iO MUE 26 i:
INE ANS) WIGS ie


“This Moses whom they refused, saying, Who made; in the Red sea, and in the wilderness forty


thee a ruler and a judge over us? the same did
God send to be a ruler and a deliverer by the
hand of the Angel which appeared to him in the
bush.”’


THIs is very suitable to the matter in hand.
“Chis ) Moses,” ) he says. .“‘ ‘This,’2+ the! ‘man
who had been in danger of losing his life; the
man who had been set at naught by them;
“this” the man whom they had declined ;
“this”? same, God having raised up, sent
unto them. ‘Whom they refused, saying,
Who made thee a ruler?” just as they them-
selves (the hearers) said, “ We have no king,
but Ceesar.” (John xix. 15.) He here shows
also, that what was then done, was done by
Christ. “The same did God send by the
hand of the Angel,” who said unto him, “ I am
the God of Abraham.” ‘This’? same Moses,
he says,—and observe how he points to
his renown—“ this”? same Moses, he says,
“brought them out, after that he had showed
wonders and signs in the land of Egypt, and


1 Edd. from E. ‘‘in the sea, under a violent storm in win-
ter,’ and below, “the fishes floating at top, dead, which by
reason of the cold had not power to sink to the bottom.”


THE’ WORKS OF (ST. CHRYSOSGG.


[HomILy XVI.


a flood of rain, has drenched the inward parts,
it puts all in a whirl, and makes that the fac-
ulties (Aoyouoi), healthy till then and living in
a pure element, drift lifeless on the surface.
Since then by all these examples we have
shown how great the mischief is, let us cease
to count these men happy for that, for which
we ought to think them wretched, and to be-
moan ourselves for that, for which we ought
to count ourselves happy, and let us welcome
sufficiency with a contented mind. Or do you
not hear even what physicians tell you, that
“want is the mother of health?” But what
I say is, that want is mother, not of bodily
health, but also of that of the soul. These
things Paul also, that. physician indeed, cries
aloud ; when he says, ‘‘ Having food and rai-
ment, let us therewith be content.” (1 Tim.
vi. 8.) Let us therefore do as he bids us,
that so, being in sound health, we may per-
form the work that we ought to do, in Christ
Jesus our Lord, with Whom to the Father and
the Holy Ghost together be glory, dominion,
honor, now and ever, world without end.
Amen.


years. This is that Moses, which said unto
the children of Israel, A prophet shall the
Lord your God raise up unto you of your
brethren, like unto me’ (v. 36, 37) Set ag
naught like me. Him, likewise,Herod wished
to kill, and in Egypt He found preservation ;
just as it was with the former, even when He
was a babe, He was aimed at for destruction.
“This is he, that was in the Church in the
wilderness with the Angel which spake to him
in the mount Sina, and with our fathers: who
received the lively oracles to give unto us.” —
(v. 38.) Again no mention of temple, none
of sacrifice. ‘‘ With the Angel,” it says, “he
received the lively oracles to give unto the
fathers.” It shows, that he not only wrought
miracles, but also gave a law, as Christ did.
Just as Christ first works miracles, and then
legislates: so did Moses. But they did not
hear him, keeping their disobedience, even
after the miracles: ‘To whom,” he says,j
“our fathers would not obey:” (v. 39) after
the wonders done in those forty years.
not only so, but just the contrary:
thrust him from them, and in their hearts


{
|
i


HomiLty XVIL.]


turned back again into Egypt. Saying unto
Aaron, Make us gods to go before us; for
as for this Moses, which brought us out of the
land of Egypt, we wot not what is become of
him. And they made a calf in those days,
and offered sacrifice unto the idol, and re-
joiced in the works of their own hands, Then
God turned, and gave them up to worship the
host of heaven; as it is written in the book of
the Prophets, O ye house of Israel, have ye
offered to me slain beasts and sacrifices by
the space of forty years in the wilderness?
Yea, ye took up the tabernacle of Moloch,
and the star of your god Remphan, figures
which ye made to worship them: and I will
carry you away beyond Babylon.” (v. 40, 43.)
The expression, “ gave them up,” means, He
suffered. “Our fathers had the tabernacle of
witness in the wilderness, as he had appointed,
speaking unto Moses, that he should make it
according to the fashion he*had seen.” (v. 44.)
Even when there was a Tabernacle, yet there
were no sacrifices. ‘Did ye offer unto Me slain
beasts and sacrifices?” (Amos v. 25.) There
was “the tabernacle of witness,” and yet it
profited them nothing, but they were con-
sumed. But neither before, nor afterwards,
did the miracles profit them aught. ‘ Which
also, our fathers that came after brought in.”
Seest thou, how the holy place is there wher-
ever God may be? For to this end also he
says, “in the wilderness,” to compare place
with place. Then the benefit (conferred upon
them): And our fathers that came after
brought it in with Jesus into the possession of
the Gentiles, whom God drave out before the
face of our fathers, unto the days of David;
who found favor before God, and desired to
find a tabernacle for the God of Jacob. (v.
45, 46.) David “desired to find favor: ”
and he builded not, he. the wonderful, the


eM great; but the castaway, Solomon. “ But
i. Solomon,” it says, ‘‘built Him an_ house.
*® Howbeit the Most High dwelleth not in


(places) made with hands. (v. 47-50.) This
was shown indeed already by what had been
before said: but it is shown also by the voice
of a prophet; “ What house will ye build for
Me? saith the Lord God. As saith the
prophet, Heaven is my throne, and earth is
my footstool: what house will ye build for
me? saith the Lord: or what is the place of
my rest? Hath not my hand made all these
things?” (Is. Ixvi. 1, 2.)


Marvel not, he savs, if they on whom Christ
confers His benefits refuse His kingdom, see-
ing in the case of Moses it was just the same,
‘Recapitulation). ‘“ He brought them out;”’
and rescued them not in a general way, but


2A ACTS “OF. THE APOSTLES,


107


also while they were in the wilderness,
“Wonders and signs,” etc. (v. 35-50.) Do
you mark that they themselves (Stephen’s
hearers) are concerned in those old miracles
also? “ This: is: that, Moses.:”, (v.37) he,
that conversed with God; he, that had been
saved out of situations so strange and wonder-
ful; he, that wrought so great works, and had
so great power. [‘‘ Which said unto the chil-
dren of Israel, A prophet,” etc.] He shows,
that the prophecy must by all means be ful-
filled, and that Moses is not opposed to Him.
*“This is he that was in the Church in the
wilderness, and, that said unto the children of
Israel.” (v. 38.) Do you mark that thence
comes the root, and that “salvation is from
the Jews?” (John iv. 22.) “With the Angel,”
it says, “which spake unto him.” (Rom. xi.
16.) Lo, again he affirms that it was He
(Christ) that gave the Law, seeing Moses
was with “Him” in the Church in the
wilderness.* And here he puts them in
mind of a great marvel, of the things done
in the Mount: ‘Who received living oracles
to give unto us.” On all occasions Moses is
wonderful, and (so) when need was to legis-
late. What means the expression, “ Living
oracles” (Adyia)? Those, whereof the end was
shown by words (dia 26yov) : in other words, he
means the prophecies.— Then follows the
charge, in the first instance, against the patri-
archs [after], the “signs and wonders,” after
the receiving of the “lively oracles: To whom,”
he says, “ our fathers would not obey.” (v. 39.)
But concerning those, Ezekiel says that they
are not “living; ’ as when he says, “ And I
gave you statutes that are not good.” (Ezek.
xx. 25.) Itis with reference to those that he
says, “Living. But thrust him from them,
and in their hearts turned back to Egypt ’—
the place where they groaned, where they


! Here the innovator, not perceiving that the renewed expo-
sition began above, inserts the formula ’AAA’ idwuev avwev Ta
eipnueva, and then has: ‘‘ This, it says, is Moses, which said, A
Prophet, etc. To this, I suppose, Christ refers, when He says,
‘Salvation is of the Jews,’ hinting at Himself. This is he that
was in the wilderness, with the Angel that spake unto him.
Lo, again he shows, that it was He,” etc. So Edd.

* The meaning of v. 38 is that Moses became (yevouevos) a
mediator between God (represented by the Angel) and the
people. Cf. Gal. iii. 19 where the law is said to have been
“ordained through angels, by the hand of a mediator”’
(Moses). No mention is made of angels as revealers of the
law in Exodus xix. the first mention of angels in connection
with the giving of the law being in a highly poetic passage in
Moses’ benediction, Deut. xxxiii. 2. (Even here the Heb. text
is uncertain. Cf. the 1xx. 72 doco). The function of angels in
the giving of the law has a prominent place in later Jewish
theology as opposed to the action of mere human ministers.
The New Testament notices on the subject reflect this later
phase of thought (Cf. Acts vii. 53; Heb. ii. 2). See Lightfoot
on Gal. ii. 19.—G. B. S.

+ By Aoyra Gavra are meant living oracles in the sense of op-
erative, effectual, as Jesus affirmed his words to be * spirit and
life ’? (John vi. 63). They contain vital truth. The law was
indeed ‘t weak” (Rom. viil. 3) but it was so “through the
flesh,” i.e. human sinfulness. It was not inherently weak
but was so relatively to the great power of sin in man which
needed to be overcome.-—G. B. S.


108


cried, whence they called upon God. ‘ And
said unto Aaron, Make us gods which shall go
BeLore.us. (v..40.) © the folly! Make?”
say they; “that they may go before us.”
Whither? “Into Egypt.”* See how hard
they were to tear away from the customs of
Egypt! What sayest thou? What, not wait
for him that brought thee out, but flee ‘the
benefit, and deny the Benefactor? And mark
how insulting they are: “For as for this
Moses,” they say :—‘ which brought us out of
the land of Egypt” nowhere the name of
God: instead of that, they ascribed all to
Moses. Where! they ought to give thanks
(to God), they bring Moses forward: where it
was, to do as the Law bade them, they no
longer make account of Moses. “We know
not what is become of him.” And yet he
told them that he was going up to receive the
Law: and they had not patience to wait forty
days. “Make us gods ”’—-they* did not say,
‘“*a God.”—And yet one may well wonder at
this, that they do not even know.—“ And they
made a calf in those days, and offered sacri-
fices unto the idol, and rejoiced in the works
of their own hands” (v. 41): for which they
ought to have hid their faces. What wonder
that ye know not Christ, seeing ye knew not
Moses, and God Who was manifested by such
wonders? But they not only knew Him not:
they also insulted in another way, by their
idol making. ‘Then God turned, and gave
them up to worship the host of heaven.” (v.
42.) Hence these same “customs ” date their
origin, hence the sacrifices: they were them-
selves the first that made sacrifices to their
idols! For that is why it is marked, * “ They


* It is not probable that this passage (v. 39, 40) means that
the people proposed to return to Egypt (as Chrys.). In the O.
T. the constant representation is that the golden calf (or bull)
was worshipped as the image of the divinity who had Zed them
out of Egypt (Ex. xxxii. 4; 1 Kings xii. 28). It seems clearly
implied in Ezek. xx. 7, 8, 24, that the Israelites while in Egypt
had been much addicted to the idolatry of the country. The
meaning here is that, being discouraged and disappointed on
account of Moses’ continued absence in the mount, they were
ready to transfer their allegiance from Jehovah to some of the
divinities to whose worship they had previously been accus-
tomed. The worship of cattle was especially common, as of
Apis at Memphis and Mnevis at Heliopolis.—G., B. S.

1 "Ev6a wév evxapiorecy der, A. B. C. D. F., but N. and Cat.
axaptotetv.—E, Kai €v0a pév avtovs axapiotety qv. Edd. evy.

* This clause, omitted by A. B. C., is preserved by N. and
the Catena. The calf was one, yet they called it Gods: on
which St. Chrys. remarks elsewhere, that they added polythe-
ism to idolatry.—The next sentence may perhaps be completed
thus: “that they did not even know that there is One God.’’—
Edd. from E. F. D. “So frantic are they, that they know not
what they say.”

3 §.a yap TOUT emtonuaiverar, The meaning is: Stephen was
accused of speaking against ‘‘ the customs,’’—sacrifices, temple,
feasts, etc. Therefore he significantly points to that critical
conjuncture from which these ‘*‘ customs”’ date their introduc-
tion: namely, the Provocation at Horeb. Prior to that, he
tells of ‘living oracles,” life-giving precepts: after it, and as
its consequence, sacrifices, etc., those statutes which were not
good, and ordinances by which a man shall not live, as God
says by Ezekiel. Not a word of sacrifice till then: and the first
mention is, of the sacrifices offered to the calf. In like manner,
“ they rejoiced,” ‘the people ate and drank, and rose up to
play: ’? and in consequence of this, the feasts were prescribed:
kat evdpaivovto, yo: bia TovTO Kau eoptarc.— Emionuwaivetar


THE’ WORKS -OF “ST: ‘CHEV SOs 2Onr


[HomiLy XVII.


made acalf in Horeb, and offered sacrifices to
the idol :” seeing that, before this the name of
sacrifice is nowhere mentioned, but only lively
ordinances, and “lively oracles. And _ re-
joiced ”—that is the reason for the feasts.
(Exod. xxxii. 5, 6.) “ As it is written in the Book
of the Prophets’’—and observe, he does not
cite the text without a purpose, but shows by
it that there is no need of sacrifices; saying:
“Did ye offer slain beasts and sacrifice to
Me ?”’—He lays an emphasis on this word (to
Me?) “Ye cannot say that it was from
sacrificing to Me, that ye proceeded to sacri-
fice to them :—‘“‘ by the space of forty years:”
and this too, “in the wilderness,” where He
had most signally shown Himself their Pro-
tector, “Yea, ye took up the tabernacle of
Moloch, and the star of your god Remphan:
images which ye made to worship them.T
The cause of sacrifices! “And I will carry
you away beyond Babylon.” (v. 43.) Even
the captivity, an impeachment of their wicked-
ness! ‘But a Tabernacle,” say you, “there
was (the Tabernacle) ‘of Witness.’” (v. 44.)
(Yes,) this is why it was: that they should


might be rendered, ‘“‘he marks,’ ‘‘puts a mark upon it’’ (so
the innovator, who substitutes, tovTo kai Aavid émionpatvopevos
Aéyet): We take it passively, ‘‘ there isa mark set over it—it is
emphatically denoted.” In the active, the verb taken intransi-
tively means ‘“‘to betoken or announce itself,’ ‘‘ make its first
appearance.’’—In the Treatise adv. /wd@os, iv. §. 6. tom. i. 624,
C. St. Chrysostom gives this account of the legal sacrifices :
**To what purpose unto Me is the multitude of your sacrifices >
etc. (Isaiah i., 11, ff.) Do ye hear how itis most plainly declared,
that God did not from the first require these at your hands?
Had He required them, He would have obliged those famous
saints who were before the Law to observe this practice.
‘Then wherefore has He permitted it now?’ In condescen-
sion to your infirmity. As a physician in his treatment of a
delirious patient, etc.: thus did God likewise. For seeing
them so frantic in their lust for sacrifices, that they were
ready, unless they got them, to desert to idols; nay not only
ready, but that they had already deserted, thereupon He per-
mitted sacrifices. And that this is the reason, is clear from the
order of events. After the feast which they made to the _
demons, then it was that He permitted sacrifices: all but say- —
ing: ‘Ye are mad, and will needs sacrifice: well then, at any
rate sacrifice to Me.’ ’’—(What follows may serve to illustrate
the brief remark a little further on, Kat 7 aixuadwora katnyopia —
77s Kaxtas.) ‘* But even this, He did not permit to continie to
the end, but by a most wise method, withdrew them from |
it. . . For He did not permit it to be donein any place of the
whole world, but in Jerusalem only. Anon, when for a short
time they had sacrificed, he destroyed the city. Had He
openly said, Desist, they, such was their insane passion for |
sacrificing, would not readily have complied. But now per- —
force, the place being taken away, He secretly withdrew them
from their frenzy.’’ So here: ‘‘ Even the captivity impeaches
the wickedness (which was the cause of the permission of —
sacrifice.’’)

+ Our passage here follows the Ixx. which speaks of Moloch ~
and Remphan. The terms in the original (vid. R. V.:-Amos v.
25-27) are ‘“Siccuth’’ and ‘‘Chiun.” It is a disputed point
whether these are in the prophecy names of divinities or
whether they mean respectively ‘‘ tabernacle” and *shrine”’
(or image). The difficulty lies in the ambiguity of the He-_
brew text. The name Moloch being akin to the Hebrew
word for king (q5n), confusion might easily arise. The N. T. —
text varies from the Ixx. only in adding the word mpooxvuveiw
(43) to lay emphasis upon the charge of idolatry, and in replac-
ing Damascus by Babylon (43), an interpretation from the
standpoint of subsequent history. The statement of our text
that the Israelites fell into the worship of these divinities z72
the wilderness rests upon extra-Pentateuchal tradition, de-
rived, perhaps, from such prohibitions of Moloch-worship and
similar idolatries as are found in Lev. xviii. 21, and Deut. xviii.
1o. The charge in the prophecy of Amos isa general one re-
ferring to the frequent lapses of the people into image-worship
down to his own time.—G. B. S.


—


Homity XVII.] THEO AGES OF


Bp is Bb ae 9 og Bos hy Bh ec


a“


109


have God for Witness: this was all. ‘ Ac-
cording to the fashion,” it says, “that was
shown thee on the mount:” so’ that on the
mount was the Original. And this Taber-
nacle, moreover, “in the wilderness,” was
carried about, and not locally fixed. And he
calls it, “Tabernacle of witness:” i. e. (for
witness) of the miracles, of the statutes.*
This is the reason why both it and those (the
fathers) had no Temple. ‘As He _ had
appointed, that spake unto Moses, that he
should make it according to the fashion that


he had seen.”” Again, it was none other than
He (Christ) that gave the fashion itself.
“Until the days of David” (v. 45): and


there was no temple! And yet the Gentiles
also had been driven out: for that is why he
mentions this: ‘‘ Whom God drave out,” he
says, “before the face of our fathers. Whom
He drave out,” he says: and even then, no
Temple! And so many wonders, and no
mention of a Temple! So that, although first
there is a Tabernacle, yet nowhere a Temple.
“Until the days of David,” he says :. even
David, and no Temple! ‘And he sought to
find favor before God” (v. 46): and_ built
not :—so far was the Temple from being a
great matter! ‘“ But Solomon built Him an
house.” (v. 47.) They thought Solomon was
great: but that he was not better than his
father, nay not even equal to him, is manifest.
““Howbeit the Most High dwelleth not in
temples made with hands; as saith the
prophet, Heaven is My throne, and earth is
My footstool.” (v. 48, 49.) Nay, not even
these are worthy of God, forasmuch as_ they
are made, seeing they are creatures, the works
of His hand. See how he leads them on by
little and little (showing) that not even these
are tobe mentioned. And again the prophecy
says openly, “ What house will ye build Me?”
eres", (veeos)

What is the reason that at this point he
speaks in the tone of invective (karagopixac) ?
Great was his boldness of speech, when at the
point to die: for in fact I think he knew that
this was the case. “‘ Ye stiffnecked,”’ he says,
“and uncircumcised in heart and ears.”
This also is from the prophets: nothing is of
himself. “Ye do always resist the Holy
Ghost: as your fathers did, so do ye.” (v.


1 wate év TH Oper Hy Uroypady yeyove. In the following sen-
tences, there are numerous variations in Edd. from the old
text, but they do not materially affect the sense, and certainly
do not improve it.

* The expression here used—y oxnvy rod papruptov is the
constant but inexact Ixx. translation of 719 24N ‘tent of
meeting ’’ —i. e. the tent where God met the people. Froma
misunderstanding of the etymology of yD (it being taken
from 3)y fo witness, instead of from 1p. Zo assemble) it was
translated by maptuptov—a rendering which has occasioned
frequent misunderstanding, Maprupcov is rightly used in the
Ixx. to render N17y (from ty) in Exod. xxv. 22 ; Num. ix. 15.—


51.) When it was not His will that sacrifices
should be, ye sacrifice: when it is His will,
then again ye do not sacrifice: when He would
not give you commandments, ye drew them to
you: when ye got them, ye neglected them.
Again, when the Temple stood, ye worshipped
idols: when it is His will to be worshipped
without a Temple, ye do the opposite. Ob-
serve, he says not, “‘ Ye resist God,” but, “ the
Spirit: ’’ so far was he from knowing any dif-
ference between Them. And, what is greater:
‘““As your fathers did,” he says, “so do ye.”
Thus also did Christ (reproach them), foras-
much as they were always boasting much of
their fathers. ‘“ Which of the prophets have
not your fathers persecuted? and they have
slain them which showed before of the coming
of the Just One:” he still says, “the Just
One,” wishing to check them: “fof Whom ye
have been now the betrayers and murderers ”
—two charges he lays against them ?—
““who have received the Law by the disposi-
tion of Angels, and have not kept it.” (v.
52.) How, “ By the disposition of Angels?”
Some say (The Law), disposed by Angels; or,
put into his hand by the Angel Who appeared
to him in the bush; for was He man? No
wonder that He® who wrought those works,
should also have wrought these.t ‘“ Ye slew
them who preached of Him.” much more Him-
self. He shows them disobedient both to
God, and to Angels, and the Prophets, and
the Spirit, and to all: as also Scripture saith
elsewhere: “Lord, they have slain Thy
Prophets, and thrown down Thine altars.” (1
Kings xix. 10.) They, then, stand up for
the Law, and say, ‘“‘ He blasphemeth against
Moses:” he shows, therefore, that it is they
who blaspheme, and that (their blasphemy is
not only against Moses, but) against God;
shows that “they” from the very beginning
have been doing this: that “they” have
themselves destroyed their ‘‘ customs,” that
there is no need of these: that while accusing
him, and saying that he opposed Moses, they
themselves were opposing the Spirit: and not
merely opposing, but with murder added to it:


2 E. F. D. Edd. add, ‘‘ that they knew (Him) not, and that
they murdered (Him):’’ but the meaning is, that they be-
trayed, and that they murdered: or, as below, Their fathers
slew the Prophets, and they, Him Whom they preached.

3 roy execva worjnoavtTa, A. B. C. N. Cat. i. e. that Christ, Who,
as the Angel, did those works, etc. The modern text trois éx.
moijoavras. that those who did those wickednesses, etc.: and so
(Ec. seems to have taken it: “If ye killed them who preached
Him to come, no wonder that ye kill Me,’’ etc.—Below, for Oi
ToivUY avTLTOLOUVTaL TOU vouoU, Kai EAeyor, A. B.N. (N. corrected
obdro viv) have Ov roivuy x. tT. A. and A. Aéyovtes.: ‘* Therefore
they claim not the Law (on their side), saying,”’ etc.

+AyyéAwv (53) cannot refer (as Chrys.) to the Jehovah-angel
of the bush. It refers to angels as the mediators in the giving
of the law, an idea which appears in the Ixx., the N. T. else-
where (Gal. iii. 9 ; Heb. ii. 2) and is prominent in later Jewish
theology (Cf. Josephus, At. XV. v. 3) Vid. note *, p. 107.—
GHB: Ss:


IIO


and that they had their enmity all along from
the very beginning. Seest thou, that he
shows them to be acting in opposition both to
Moses and to all others, and not keeping the
Law? And yet Moses had said, “‘ A Prophet
shall the Lord raise up unto you: and the rest
also told of this (Christ) that He would come:
and the prophet again said, ‘‘ What house will
ye build Me?” and again, “ Did ye offer to
Me slain beasts and sacrifices ” those “ forty
years?” (Deut. xviii. 18.)

Such is the boldness of speech of a man
bearing the Cross. Let us then also imitate
this: though it be not a time of war, yet it is
always the time for boldness of speech. For,
‘““T spake,” says one, “in Thy testimonies
before kings, and was not ashamed.” (Ps.
cxix. 46.) If we chance to be among heathens,
let us thus stop their mouths, without wrath,
without harshness. (Comp. Hom. in 1 Cor.
Iso: xeRS 4s COL x wSr2,), Shor wb
we do it with wrath, it no longer seems to be
the boldness (of one who is confident of his
cause,) but passion: but if with gentleness,
this is boldness indeed. For! in one and the
same thing success and failure cannot possibly
go together. The boldness is a success: the
anger is a failure. Therefore, if we are to
have boldness, we must be clean from wrath,
that none may impute our words to that. No
matter how just your words may be, when you
speak with anger, you ruin all: no matter how
boldly you speak, how fairly reprove, or what
not. See this man, how free from passion as
he discourses to them! For he did not abuse
them: he did but remind them of the words
of the Prophets. For, to show you that it was
not anger, at the very moment he was suffer-
ing evil at their hands, he prayed, saying,
“‘Lay not to their charge this sin.” So far
was he from speaking these words in anger ;
no, he spake in grief and sorrow for their
sakes. As indeed this is why it speaks of his
appearance, that ‘“ they saw his face as it had
been the face of an angel,’ on purpose that
they might believe. Let us then be clean
from wrath. The Holy Spirit dwelleth not
where wrath is: cursed is the wrathful. It
cannot be that aught wholesome should ap-
proach, where wrath goes forth. For as in a
storm at sea, great is the tumult, loud the
clamor, and then would be no time for lessons of
wisdom (vAoco¢eiv) : so neither in wrath. If the
soul is to be in a condition either to say, or to be
disciplined to, aught of philosophy, it must first
be in the haven. Seest thou not how, when
we wish to converse on matters of serious im-


1 Ov yap dvvarat Opod Kai Kata TavTOY (Kat avTov A. C. and N.
originally) kat katopOwua eivat Kai eAaTtTwua. “H mappyaia,
KaTopOwua* O Oupds, EAaTTWMa.


THE WORKS OF) ST? CHRYSOStOR


[HomiLy XVII.


port, we look out for places free from noise,
where all is stillness, all calm, that we may
not be put out and discomposed? But if
noise from without discomposes, much more
disturbance from within. Whether one pray,
to no purpose does he pray “ with wrath and
disputings:” (1 Tim. ii. 8) whether he speak,
he will only make himself ridiculous : whether
he hold his peace, so again it will be even
then: whether he eat, he is hurt even then:
whether he drink, or whether he drink not;
whether he sit, or stand, or walk; whether he
sleep: for even in their dreams such fancies
haunt them. For what is there in such men
that is not disagreeable? Eyes unsightly,
mouth distorted, limbs agitated and swollen,
tongue foul and sparing no man, mind dis-
traught, gestures uncomely: much to disgust.
Mark the eyes of demoniacs, and those of
drunkards and madmen; in what do they dif-
fer from each other? Is not the whole mad-
ness? For what though it be but for the
moment? The madman too is possessed for
the moment: but what is worse than this?
And they are not ashamed at that excuse;
“I knew not (saith one) what I said.” And
how came it that thou didst not know this,
thou the rational man, thou that hast the gift
of reason, on purpose that thou mayest not
act the part of the creatures without reason,
just like a wild horse, hurried away by rage
and passion? In truth, the very excuse is
criminal. For thou oughtest to have known
what thou saidst. “It was the passion,” say
you, ‘‘that spoke the words, not I.” How
should it be that? For passion has no power,
except it get it from you. You might as well
say, ‘“‘ It was my hand that inflicted the wounds,
not I.” What occasion, think you, most needs
wrath ? would you not say, war and battle? But
even then, if anything is done with wrath, the
whole is spoiled and undone. For of all men,
those who fight had best not be enraged: of
all men, those had best not be enraged, who
want to hurt (rove iBpifovrac). And how is it
possible to fight then? you will ask. With
reason, with self-command (ézvecxeia): since
fighting is, to stand in opposition. Seest thou
not that even these (common) wars are regu-
lated by definite law, and order, and times ?
For wrath is nothing but an irrational impulse:
and an irrational creature cannot possibly per-
form aught rational. For instance, the man
here spoke such words, and did it without
passion. And Elias said, ‘ How long will ye


halt on both your knees?” (1 Kings’ xviii. . ~


21) and spake it notin passion. And Phin-
ees slew, and did it without passion. For
passion suffers not a man to see, but, just as
in a night-battle, it leads him, with eyes blind-


Homity XVII.] ae: “ACS: OF


LEE -APOSPTLES.


3


folded and ears stopped up, where it will.
Then let us rid ourselves of this demon, at its
first beginning let us quell it, let us put the
sign of the Cross on our breast, as it were a
curb. Wrath is a shameless dog : but let it
learn to hear the law. If there be ina sheep-
fold a dog so savage as not to obey the com-
mand of the shepherd, nor to know his voice,
all is lost and ruined. He is kept along with
the sheep: but if he makes a meal on the
sheep, he is useless, and is put to death. If
he has learnt to “obey thee, feed thy dog: he
is useful when it is against the wolves, against
robbers, and against the captain of the rob-
bers that he barks, not against the sheep, not
against friends. If he does not obey he ruins
all: if he learns not to mind thee, he destroys
all. The mildness in thee let not wrath con-
sume, but let it guard it, and feed it up. And
it will guard it, that it may feed in much secu-
rity, if it destroy wicked and evil thoughts, if
it chase away the devil from every side. So
is gentleness preserved, when evil works are
nowhere admitted: so we become worthy of
respect, when we learn not to be shameless.
For nothing renders a man so shameless, as
an evil conscience. Why are harlots without
shame? Why are virgins shamefaced? Is it
not from their sin that the former, from their
chastity that the latter, are such?
ing makes a person so shameless, as sin.
“And yet on the contrary,” say you, “it puts
to shame.” Yes; him who condemns himself :
but him that is past blushing, it renders even
more reckless: for desperation makes daring.
For “ the wicked,” saith the Scripture, ‘‘ when
he is come into the depths of evils, despiseth.”’
(Prov. xviii. 3.) But he that is shameless, will
also be reckless, and he that is reckless, will
be daring. See in what way gentleness is de-

stroyed, when evil thoughts gnaw at it. This
is why there is such a dog , barking mightily :

we have also sling and stone (ye know what I
mean): we have also spear and enclosure and
cattle-fold: let us guard our thoughts unhurt.
If the dog be gentle (caivy) with the sheep, but
Savage against those without, and keep vigi-
lant “watch, this is the excellence of a dog :
and, be he ever so famished, not to devour
the sheep: be he ever so full, not to spare the
wolves. Such too is anger meant to be: how-
ever provoked, not to forsake gentleness;
however at quiet, to be on the alert against
evil thoughts: to acknowledge the friend, and
not for any beating forsake him, and for all
his caressing, to fly at the intruder. The
devil uses caressing full oft: let? the dog


1 Edd. from E. Saiver 6 dtaBoAos moAAakts ws 0 KUwyv, adda
yvwetw mas ote. ‘ The devil fawns full oft as the dog, but let
every man know that,” etc. A. B.C. N. ws o Kiwy edetw


For noth- |


| catyvwuev here has a different reference:


know at sight that he is an intruder. So also
let us caress (caivwuev) Virtue, though she put
us to pain, and show our aversion to Vice,
though she give us pleasure. Let us not be
worse than the dogs, which, even when
whipped and throttled, do not desert their
master: but if* the stranger also feed them,
even so they do hurt. There are times when
anger is useful; but this is when it barks
against strangers. What means it, ‘ Who-
soever is angry with his brother without a
cause?” (Matt. v. 22.) It means, Stand
not up in thine own quarrel, neither avenge
thyself: if thou see another suffering deadly
wrong, stretch out thy hand to help him.
This is no longer passion, when thou art clear
of all feeling for thyself alone. David had
gotten Saul into his power, and was not
moved by passion, did not thrust the spear
into him, the enemy he had in his power; but
took his revenge upon the Devil. (1 Sam.
xxvl. 7.) Moses, when he saw a stranger doing
an injury, even slew him (Exod. “ii 22)
but when one of his own people, he did
them that were brethren he would


not so:
have reconciled; the others not so. That
“most meek’” (Num. xii, 3) Moses, as


Scripture witnesseth of him, see how he was
roused! But not so, we: on the contrary,
where we ought to show meekness, no wild
beast so fierce as we: but where we ought
to be roused, none so dull and_ sluggish.
(Hom. vi. de laud. Pauli, ad fin.) On no
occasion do we use our faculties to the pur-
pose they were meant for: and therefore it
is that our life is spent to no purpose. For
even in the case of implements; if one use
them, one instead of other, all is spoilt: if one
take his sword, and then, where he should use
it and cut with it, uses only his hand, he does
no good: again, where ‘he should use his
hand, by taking the sword in hand he spoils
all. In like manner also the physician, if
where he ought to cut, he cuts not, and where
he ought not, he does cut, mars all. Where-
fore, I beseech you, let us use the thing
Tt) moayyart) at its proper time. The proper


We restore the true reading by omitting ws.
“The dog”’ is anger: the devil catve., not as the dog, but
upon the dog, as the addozpios in the preceding sentence.

“Let our faithful watch- dog see at once that he is an intruder.”
In the following sentence the image is so far incongruous, as
viz, ‘as the dog
faw ns upon the friend though beaten, so let us,”’ etc.

2 av S€ avTovs Kai Tpédyn Oo adAdTpLos Kai oUTw BAamtovew (A,
BAaWovow). The antithesis seems to require the sense to be,
‘* While, if the stranger even feed them, for all that, they do
him a mischief.’”’ But the words tpé$y and BAarrovow are
scarcely suitable in the sense, tpodyy d6@ and Avmatvovrat.
Edd. have from E. alone, m@s ov sadAov BAaWovow: in the
sense, ‘‘ If however the stranger (not merely caresses but) also
(regularly) feeds them, how shall they not do more hurt (than
good)?”’ i. e. ‘If the devil be suffered to pamper our anger,
that which should have been our safeguard will prove a bane
to us.’’—Perhaps this ts the sense intended in the old reading ;
but if so, kac ov7w is unsuitable.


(tSétTw C.) ore.


Tz,


THE WORKS‘OF ST. CHRYSOsT Gm:


e


[Homity XVII


time for anger is never, where we move in our
own quarrel: but if it is our duty to correct
others, then is the time to use it, that we may
by force deliver others. (Hom. in Matt, xvi.
§ 7.) So shall we both be like unto God,
always keeping a spirit free from wrath, and


shall attain unto the good things that are to
come, through the grace and loving-kindness
of our Lord Jesus Christ, with whom, to the
Father and the Holy Ghost together, be glory,
dominion, and honor, now and _ evermore,
world without end. Amen.


HOMEY Vai:


ACTS VII. 54.


‘** When they heard these things, they were cut to “the
heart, and they gnashed on him with their teeth.”


SEE,! once more, the wrong-doers in trouble.
Just as the Jews are perplexed, saying, ‘“‘ What
are we to do with these men?” so these also
are “cut to the heart.” (ch. iv. 16.) And yet
it was he that had good right to be incensed,
who, having done no wrong, was treated like
a criminal, and was spitefully calumniated.
But the calumniators had the worst of it in
the end. So true is that saying, which I am
ever repeating, “Ill to do, is ill to fare.”
And yet he (in his charges against them) re-
sorted to no calumny, but proved (what he
said). So sure are we, when we are shame-
fully borne down in a matter wherein we have
a clear conscience, to be none the worse for
it.—‘ If? they desired,” say you, “to kill him,
how was it that they did not take occasion,
out of what he said, that they might kill him ?”
They would fain have a fair-seeming plea to
put upon their outrage. ‘“‘ Well then, was not
the insulting them a fair plea?” It was not
his doing, if they were insulted: it was the
Prophet’s accusation of them. And besides,
they did not wish it to look as if they killed
him because of what he had said against them
—just as they acted in the case of Christ ; no,


1 In our Mss. the Homily opens abruptly with the question,
Ils ox €AaBov éx THY cipnuevwv ahopunv eis TO [uy Cat.] avedecy
avTov ; which is left unanswered, till some way further on.
See note ?.—Montf. notes, ‘** Unus, etsto my avedecv.”’ But
this reading does not appear in any of our Mss. though the
Catena has it. Edd. from E, have; “ How it was that they
did not take occasion from what he had said to kill him, but
are still mad, and seek an accusation, one may well wonder.
So ever in trouble are the wrong-doers. Just then as the chief
priests, in their perplexity, said,” etc. F. D. adopting part of
this addition, ‘* but are still mad, and seek an accusation. See,
once more,”’ etc.

2 ovdev magxouev. Kai éBovdAovto, dyaiv (om. D. F.) avedctv
avtov. (as if these words were part of the sacred text. Then)
Ilpopacwy (AAAa pod. D. F.) nOeAov evAoyov x. tr. A. A. B. C. D.
F. The modern text substitutes, "EBovAovro pév oby avedecy:
aAX’ ov ToLovat TOUTO, aitiay BéAovTes evVAoyor K. T. A.A—CEcume-
nius, however, begins his comment thus: Et €BovAovto avedecr,
ma@s ovK avetAov evOews TOoTE; "Ott mpohaciy evAoyov kK. T. A.
Hence we restore the true reading, and the proper order.
Namely, for Kat we read Ei, and transpose to this place, as
part of the interlocution, the question mas ov« éAaBov—; So, the
dnotv is explained, the question is followed by its answer, and
there is no abruptness.


but for impiety: now? this word of his was the
expression of piety. Wherefore, as they at-
tempted, besides killing him, to hurt his rep-
utation also, “they were cut to the heart.”
For they were afraid lest he should on the
contrary become an object of even greater
reverence. Therefore, just what they did in
Christ’s case, the same they do here also.
For as He said, “Ye shall see the Son of
Man sitting on the right hand of God” (Matt.
xxvi. 64), and they, calling it blasphemy, “ran
upon Him;” just so was it here. There, they
“rent their garments;” here, they “ stopped
their ears. But he, being full of the Holy
Ghost, looked up steadfastly into heaven, and
saw the glory of God, and Jesus standing on
the right hand of God, and said, Behold I see
the heavens opened, and the Son of Man
standing on the right hand of God. Then
they cried out with a loud voice, and stopped
their ears, and ran upon him with one accord,
and cast him out of the city, and stoned him,”
(v. 55-58.) And yet, if he lied, they ought to
have thought him beside himself, and to have
let him go.—But he wished to bring them
over, “and said, Behold,” etc., for, since he
had spoken of Christ’s death, and had said
nothing of His resurrection, he would fain add
this doctrine also, ‘Standing at the right
hand of God.” And in this manner He ap-
peared to him: that, were it but so, the Jews


3 toto 52 evoeBetas Hv TO pyua. i. e. all that Stephen had
spoken in accusation of their wickedness, especially v. 51-53,
was the language of piety, of a devout man zealous for the
honor of God: they could not say, ‘“‘ This is impious;”’ and
they were waiting to catch at something which might enable
them to cry out, ‘‘He blasphemeth:” and, disappointed of
this, they were cut to the heart.—Below Ben. retains (from E.
alone) uy 7aAtv Kavvov TL TEpi avTov aAAo yevyntat, though Savile
had restored the genuine reading my madw aideotmwtepos
yévntat. They had desired to injure his reputation for sanc-
Eby, and now feared that his speech would have the opposite
result.

4 Edd. from E, ovtw S¢ aio Aéyer havqvar, as mov dre~erow,
iva kav oUTw Sé&wvtar tov Adyov. ‘And Stephen describes


Christ as appearing to Him in this manner, as one somewhere |


relates at large. in order that,’’ etc.: meaning, that he might
have said “ sitting at the right hand,’’ but forbears to do this, —
because it was offensive to the Jews, and accordingly Tews
Tepl THS avagTagews Kivel AOyor, Kal Pyaw avTov iotagbar. The
clause ws mov SveSeraty seems to have been intended by the in-—


HomILy XVIII.]


might receive Him: for since the (idea of His)
sitting (at the right hand of God) was offen-
sive to them, for the present he brings forward
only what relates to His Resurrection. This
is the reason also why his face was glorified.
For God, being merciful, desired to make
their machinations the means of recalling
them unto Himself. And see, how many
signs are wrought! “And cast him out of
the city, and stoned him.” Here again, ‘ with-
out the city,” and even in death, Confession
and Preaching. (Heb. xiii. 21.) ‘“ And the
witnesses laid down their clothes at a young
man’s feet, whose name was Saul. And they
stoned Stephen, calling’ upon God, and say-
ing, Lord Jesus, receive my spirit.” (v. 59.)
This is meant to show them that he is not
perishing, and to teach them. ‘And he knelt
down, and cried with a loud voice, Lord, lay
not this sin to their charge.” (v. 60.) To
clear himself, and show that neither were his
former words prompted by passion, he says,
“Lord” “lay not this sin to their charge” :
wishing also even in this way to win them
over. For to show that he forgave their wrath
and rage in murdering him, and that his own
soul was free from all passion, was the
way to make his saying to be favorably re-
ceived.

‘“‘ And Saul was consenting unto his death.”
Hereupon arises a persecution, and it becomes
a greatone. “And at that time there was a
great persecution against the Church which
was at Jerusalem. And they were all scat-
tered abroad throughout the regions of Judea
and Samaria, except the Apostles.” (ch. viii.
1.) Mark how once more God permits temp-
tations to arise; mark, and well observe, how
the events are ordered by Divine Providence.
They were admired because of the signs : be-
ing scourged, they were none the worse for it:
(some) were ordained in the matter of the
widows”: the word increased: once more, God


novator, not as part of the text, but as a gloss, ‘‘as is some-
where shown at large.’’ But what Chrys. says is, that Christ
was pleased to appear in this attitude to Stephen for the sake
of the Jews, in order, etc.—Hom. vi. zz Ascens. (Cat. in 1,) he
says, ‘‘ Why standing, and not sitting? To show that He isin
act to succor His martyr. For thus it is said also of the
Father, ‘ Stand up, O God, and, Now will I stand up, saith the
Lord, I will set him in safety.” ""—Below, Ata todTo we. 7. A.
Comp. de Mundi Creat. Hom. ii. t. vi. 447. C. ‘* Why did He
cause the face of Stephen to shine? Because he was to be
stoned asa blasphemer for saying ‘ Behold,’ etc., therefore
God, forestalling this, crowned his face with angelic beauty,
to show those thankless ones, that if he were a blasphemer, he
would not have been thus glorified.” But E. (Edd.) azo
TovTov atoxaconar Sedo&. ‘I conjecture that it was from this
vision (Erasm. from this time: Ben. hence) that his face was
glorified.” In the next sentence, Edd. from E. & dy éeBov-
AevovTo éxetvor, di avt7w@y éBovAeto avTovs éxxadégadat, ci Kai
pydev mAcov eyeveto. Kat exBadovtes x. Tt. A. ‘** by means of the
very machinations wherewith those were assailed He desired
to call (the doers) themselves to Himself, even if nothing more
had been done.”’

1 A. E. N. Cat. omit the rov Oeov.

2 katéatnoav emi tov xnpav, A. C. N. Sav. xetpov, Cat.
xwpov, B. D. E. F. Morel. Ben. versati sunt in regionibus,
Erasm. constituti sunt per regiones, Ben.


8


Tr Gs OF. THE “APOSTLES:


113


|permits a great hindrance to arise. And a
persecution of no ordinary kind [and they
were all scattered,” etc.]; for they feared their
enemies, now become more daring: and at
the same time it is shown that they were but
men, these that were afraid, that fled. For,
that thou mayest not say after these things
that ® by grace alone they effected (what they
did), they were also persecuted, and them-
selves became more timorous, while their ad-
versaries were more daring. “And were all
scattered abroad,” it says, “except the
Apostles.” But this was divinely ordered, so
that they should no longer all sit there in Jeru-
salem. ‘And devout men,” it says, “carried
Stephen to his burial, and made great lamen-
tation over him.” (v. 2.) If they were “de-
vout,” why did they “make great lamentation
over him?” They were not yet perfect. The
man was gracious and amiable: this also
shows that they were men—not their fear
alone, but their grief and lamentation. Who
would not have wept to see that mild, that
lamb-like person stoned, and lying dead ?*
Fit eulogy to be spoken over his grave has the
Evangelist recorded, in this one speech, “ Lay
not this sin to their charge.”—‘ And made,”
he says, “ great lamentation over him.’’—But
let us look over again what has been said.


He+ mentions the cause of his (angelic) ap-
pearance (Recapitulation, vil 54; viii. 2.);
‘“‘ But he, being full of the Holy Ghost, looked
up steadfastly into heaven, and saw the glory
of God, and Jesus standing on the right hand
of God.” And when he said, “I see the
heavens opened, they stopped their ears, and
ran upon him with one accord.” (v. 56, 57.)
And yet in what respect are these things de-
serving of accusation? ‘Upon him,” the
man who has wrought such miracles, the man
who has prevailed over all in speech, the man
who can hold such discourse! As if they had
got the very thing they wanted, they straight-
way give full scope to their rage. ‘‘ And the
witnesses,” he says, “laid down their clothes


3 ore TH XapiTe povoy Katwptovv. Or, ‘that by grace they
only succeeded,”’ i. e. always, without failure.

* Chrys. seems to assume that avdpes evAaBeis refers to Chris-
tian men, a view that has been taken by some modern exposi-
tors (as Ewald and DeWette). It is better to understand by the
term. pious Jews who were favorably disposed to Christianity
(So Meyer, Olshausen, Lechler, Lange, Gloag, Hackett). ‘The
usage of evAaBys in the N. T. favors this view as it is re
to devout persons who were not Christians (vid. ii. 5 ; Luke ii.
25) in every case, except in xxii. 12 when it refers to Ananias, a
Christian, but is used in describing him in a legal point of
view: evAaBis cata Tov voxov. Moreover, if Christians had
been meant, they would not probably have been designated by
so vague a term, but, as uniformly, would have been called
disciples or brethren. The burial of Stephen by devout Jews
recalls the burial of Jesus by Joseph of Arimathza and Nicode-
mus (John xix. 38, 39).--G. B. S.

4 Thy aitiav ths OWews dyoiv. B. C. Sav. marg. meaning,
That his face was as the face of an angel was caused by the glory
of Christ which he now beholds. The modern text omits this,
having said the same thing above in the words azo rovrov, see


note 4, p. 112.


114


THE WORKS OF ST: ‘CHRYSOS iar


{HomiLy XVIII.


at the feet of a young man, whose name was
Saul. (v. 58.) Observe how particularly he
relates what concerns Paul, to show thee that
the Power which wrought in him was of God.
But after all these things, not only did he not
believe, but also aimed at Him with a thou-
sand hands: for this is why it says, ‘ And
Saul was consenting unto his death.’—And
this blessed man does not simply pray, but
does it with earnestness: ‘‘having kneeled
down.” Mark his divine death! So long?
only the Lord permitted the soul to remain in
him “And having said this, he fell asleep.”
(v. 60.)—‘‘ And they were all scattered abroad
throughout the region of Judea and Samaria.
(ch. viii. 1.) And now without scruple they
had intercourse with Samaria, whereas it had
been said to them, ‘“‘Go not into the way
of the Gentiles” ‘‘and into any city of the
Samaritans enter ye not.” ©(Matt. » 5.)
‘““Except the Apostles,” it says: they, in this
way also, wishing to win the Jews,—but not
to leave the city,—and to be the means of in-
spiring others with boldness.

“As for Saul, he made havoc of . the
Church, entering into every house, and hal-
ing men and women committed them to
prison.” (v. 3.) Great was his frenzy: that
he was alone, that he even entered into houses:
for indeed he was ready to give his life for the
Law. “ Haling,” it says, “men and women :”
mark both the confidence, and the violence,
and the frenzy. All that fell into his hands,
he put to all manner of ill-treatment: for in
consequence of the recent murder, he was
become more daring. “ Therefore they that
were scattered abroad went everywhere
preaching the word. Then Philip went down
to the city of Samaria, and preached Christ
unto them. And the people with one accord
gave heed unto those things which Philip
spake, hearing and seeing the miracles which
he did. For unclean spirits, crying with loud
voice, came out of many that were possessed
with them: and many taken with palsies, and
that were lame, were healed. And there was
great joy in that city. But there was a cer-
tain man, called Simon, which beforetime in
the same city used sorcery, and bewitched the


1 Ben. after Morel. from E. without notice of the true read-
ing (A. B.C. N. Cat.), received by Savile, has: “O@ev @etos
avTov kat fe) Bavaros yeyove. Mexpi yap tovTov avyKexwpyTo Tas
Wuxats €v To Gby eivar. (The latter part is adopted also by D.
F.) ‘Whence also his death became divine. For until this
time it had been granted to the souls to be in Hades.”’ This
comment is derived from St. Cyril. Al. from whom the Ca-
tena cites: ‘Since we are justified by faith in Him...
He hath wrought a new thing for us, 70 wyxeTt ev eis Sov
TpEXELV Tas TOV TWULATWOY amadAatTomevas Wuxas ka0a kai TpwHY,
meurregbar dé waddov eis Xetpas Meov Cwvtos: that our souls, on
their deliverance from our bodies, no longer as aforetime
haste into Hades, but are conveyed into the hands of the Liy-
ing God. And knowing this, Saint Stephen said, ‘* Lord Jesus
receive my spirit.’” C®cumen. repeats this, almost in the same
words.


people of Samaria.” (v. 4-9.) Observe 2
another trial, this affair of Simon, “Giving
out,” it says, “that he was himself some ereat
one. To whom they all gave heed, from the
least to the greatest, saying, This man is the
great power of God. And to him they had
regard, because that of long time he had be-
witched them with sorceries. But when they
believed Philip preaching the things concern-
ing the kingdom of God, and the name of
Jesus Christ, they were baptized, both men
and women. Then Simon himself believed
also: and when he was baptized, he continued
with Philip, and wondered, beholding the
miracles and signs which were done. Now
when the Apostles which were at Jerusalem
heard that Samaria had received the word of
God, they sent unto them Peter and John:
who, when they were come down, prayed for


them, that they might receive the Holy
Ghost.” (v. ro-15.) And (yet) great signs
had been done: how then had they not


received the Spirit? They had received the
Spirit, namely, of remission of" sins: but the
Spirit of miracles they had not received.
“For as yet He was fallen upon none of
them: only they were baptized in the name
of the Lord Jesus. Then laid they their
hands on them, and they received the Holy
Ghost.” (v.16, 17.) For, to show that this
was the case, and that it was the Spirit of
miracles they had not received, observe how,
having seen the result, Simon came.and asked
for this. ‘‘ And when Simon saw that through
laying on of the Apostles’ hands the Holy
Ghost was given, he offered them money, say-
ing. Give me also this power, that on whom-
soever I lay hands, he may receive the Holy
Ghost.” (v. 18, 19.)
“The? | persecution,


2 In the old text, v. 4-10, are given continuously, and v.
11-19; between them the brief comments which we have re-
stored to their proper places, viz. here and after v. 15: and
after v. 19, the comment which we have placed after v. 17. In
the modern text, the first comment (omitting A€ywv eivac x. 7. A.)
is placed after v. 10; in the second, the words, Kat onmeta
nee eyeveTo, are omitted; the rest is given after v. ro.

S$ The modern text E, F. D. Edd. * But although the per-
secution then most gained strength, nevertheless God again
delivered them, emtetxicas avtois Ta oypeta. Stephen’s death,
however, did not quench their rage, nay, increased it rather,
wherefore also the teachers, etc. But observe again how
good things take their turn with them, and how they are in
joy. ‘For there was great joy,’ it says, ‘in that city. And
yet there had also been ‘great lamentation.’ Thus is God
ever wont to do, and to temper things grievous with things
joyful, that He may be more held in admiration. But of a
long time had this disease been upon Simon; wherefore not
even thus is he rid of it.”’ But in the genuine text, (A. B. C.
N. Cat. ad. v. 15-17, and 3, 4.) the subject to ééciAeto and
emeTetxige iS NOt Weds, but Suwyuos. and the persons delivered
are not the disciples, but the Samaritans, described as mpoxate—
xXOmevot, viz. under the influence of Simon's sorceries. In the }
last sentence, the meaning is entirely mistaken: for the voonua —
is the infatuation of the Samaritans, not the wickedness of
Simon,— Emeretxice yap avtois Ta oymeca can hardly be rendered
without an awkward periphrasis: emerecx. Ti Tet, a phrase fre-
quently used by St. Chrys., means to raise up something
against a person as an emitetxicma, (as Decelea in Attica {
against the Athenians in the Peloponnesian war:) see Mr.
Field’s Index to Hom. in Matt.


say you, “gained


HomiLy XVIII]


tie mors OF THE: APOSTLES,


115


strength.” True, but at that very time to
men possessed before (by a hostile power) it
brought deliverance. For it planted the
miracles, like a stronghold, in the heart of
the enemy’s’ country.—Not even the death of
Stephen quenched their rage, nay, increased
it rather: it scattered wide the teachers, so
that the greater became the discipleship.—
*“And there was joy.” And yet there had
been “great lamentation:” true; but mark
again the good-—“ Of a long time” was the
malady, but this man brought them deliver-
ance.—And how came he to baptize Simon
also? Just as Christ chose Judas.—And
‘“beholding the signs” which he did, foras-
much as the others did not receive the (power
of working) signs, he durst not ask for it.—
How was it then that they did not strike him
dead, as they did Ananias and Sapphira ?
Because even in the old times, he that gath-
ered sticks (on the sabbath-day) was put to
death as a warning to others (Num. xv. 32)
and in no other instance did any suffer the
same fate. So too on the present occasion,
“ Peter said to him, Thy money perish, be-
cause thou hast imagined that the gift of God
is to be purchased with money.”—(v. 20.)
Why had not these received the Holy Ghost,
when baptized? Either because Philip kept
this honor for the Apostles; or, because he
had not this gift (to impart); or, he was one
of the Seven: which is rather to be said.
Whence, I take it, this Philip was one of the
Seven, the second of them, next to Stephen,
but he of the Eunuch one of the Apostles.1


+ So A. B. C. N. Cat. Of the Edd., Savile alone retains this
clause, the rest follow the mod. text, which rejects it. And
indeed it can hardly be doubted, that St. Chrys. himself would
have expunged, or altered this statement, had he revised
these Homilies: for in the next Hom. he shows that the Philip
of vv. 26 ff. was certainly not the Apostle, but probably one of
the seven deacons. The fact seems to be, that having had no
occasion until now to discuss this question, he had assumed
(as others had done before him) that the Philip of the
Eunuch’s history was the Apostle of that name: thus in Hovz.
ad Gen. xxxv. § 2 (delivered but a few years before), he takes
this for granted. Here, however, he perceives that the Philip
who preached at Samaria could not be the Apostle: but at
present he is still under the impression, that the person by
whom the Eunuch was converted was St. Philip the Apostle,
and accordingly speaks as in the text, ‘‘ This Philip, I take it,
was one of the Seven; he of the story of the Eunuch was one
of the Apostles.’’ Of course it was impossible on a review of
the circumstances to rest in this conclusion ; and in the very
beginning of the next Homily he tacitly revokes the notion
here advanced, and points out how the command, “‘ Arise, and

© to the south,’’ must have been addressed to Philip in

amaria (the deacon), and not Philip the Apostle in Jerusalem.
(See the note there.) The early writers frequently confound
the Philip of this chapter (the deacon and evangelist, Acts
Xxi. o, with the Apostle: Polycrates af. Eus. H. E. iii. 30, and
v. 24, (see Vales and Heinichen on the former passage.) Covst.
A pol. vi. 7. S. Clementine S¢vowz. iii. p. 192. Comp. St. Augus-
tin Serwz. 266. § 5.—S. Isadore of Pelusium, Ep. 448, in reply
to a correspondent who was not satisfied with his statement

(Ep. 447), that ‘‘ Philip who baptized the Eunuch and cate-
chized Simon was not the Apostle, but one of the Seven,”’ and
requested proof from Scripture (‘Ere:éy cat waptupiav Cnrteis
ypaducny .. . . Emecdn woAA@v aroderéewv epas,) bids him ob-
Philip the Apostle would have been competent to impart the
gift of the Spirit: and further suggests, that Philip the deacon,


to Czsarea his native place, (where we afterwards find him


serve, ch. viii. 1. that the Apostles remained at Jerusalem: that |


fleeing from the persecution, was on his way through Samaria |


But observe; those went not forth: it was
Providentially ordered that these should go
forth and those be lacking, because of the
Holy Ghost: for they had received power to
work miracles, but not also to impart the
Spirit to others: this was the prerogative of
the Apostles. And observe (how they sent)
the chief ones: not any others, but Peter
[and John*]. ‘And when Simon,” it says,
“saw that through laying on of the Apostles’
hands the Holy Ghost was given.” He would
not have said, ‘‘ And having seen,”® unless
there had been some sensible manifestation.*
“Then laid they their hands on them,” etc.
Just ‘as Paul also did, when they spake with
tongues. (ch. xix. 6.) Observe the execrable
conduct of Simon. “He offered money,”
with what object? And yet he did not see
Peter doing this for money. And it was not
of ignorance that he acted thus; it was be-
cause he would tempt them, because he
wished to get matter of accusation against
them. And therefore also Peter says, “ Thou
hast no part nor lot in this matter, for thine
heart is not right before God “ because thou
hast thought,” etc. (v. 21.) Once more he
brings to light what was in the thoughts, be-
cause Simon thought to escape detection.
“Repent therefore of this thy wickedness, and
pray God, if perhaps the thought of thine
heart may be forgiven thee. For I perceive
that thou art in the gall of bitterness, and in
the bond of iniquity. Then answered Simon,
and said, Pray ye to the Lord for me, that
none of these things which ye have spoken
come upon me.” (v. 22-24.) Even this* he
did only formally, as words of course, when


xxi. 9), when these events befell, viz. the preaching, etc., at
Samaria, and the conversion of the Eunuch.—In the next sen-
tence, éxecvor (i. e. the Apostles) ovx« eEjecav: wxovounby TovTous
(i. e. Philip the deacon and others) e&eA@etv: Kai exeivous (the
Apostles) vorepnoar: ‘* should come after,” or rather, ** should
be lacking, be behindhand, not be forthcoming (at the time):”’
but Cat. cat éxeivous étépws, ““ and those (the Apostles) other-
wise.’”’—The modern text, after ‘‘next to Stephen,’’ proceeds
thus: ‘‘ Wherefore also, when baptizing, he did not impart the
Spirit to the baptized, for neither had he authority to do so,
since the gift belonged only to the Twelve. But observe;
those went not forth; it was Providentially ordered that these
should go forth, ot cat barépovy THs xapiTos Sia 7O byw AaBeiv
Ilv. *A., who were deficient in the grace because they had not
yet received the Holy Ghost. For they received power, etc.
Consequently, this was the prerogative of the Apostles.”

2 Kat Opa tovs xopudaiouvs. ovK adAouvs Tivas adAa Ilerpov. B.
C. D. F. N. Cat. but A. adds, seemingly from a marginai gloss,
kat ‘Iwavynv wnv, ‘Sand John, however,” E, (Edd.) ovev nai
TOUS KOp. OUK aAAoUS TiVas EoTLV idety TOUTO TOLOUWTas. “ Whence
also the leaders, not any others, are to be seen doing this.”

3 Odw av dé elmev, A. B.D. F. ox av Std0rar rote eiev, C. ovx
av eidev, Cat. Sav. marg. idev N. Read, ov« av ** idmp dé" elev.
—E. ovx av ovitws eizev.

* Chrys. appropriately remarks that the word tSwyv (18) im-
plies that there were visible manifestations connected with the
gifts of the Spirit here spoken of. This would seem to show
that when it said (16) that the Holy Spirit had not fallen upon
any of the Samaritans, that the ordinary influences of the
Spirit which accompany conversion, were not referred to, but
some special and miraculous endowments such as the gift of
tongues, and of prophecy and perhaps of miracles were meant.
—G. B.S.

4 Kal rovro adoowoee (uovov add. D. F.) éroier, Sedv cAatoar
Kat mev@jcar. Cat. adooiwpevws, 1, adoorovpéevws, “as a mere
formal ceremony omnis causa.”


116


THE*WORKS OF SI. CHRYSOSFORL


{HomiLy XVIIL.


he ought to have wept and mourned as a pen-
itent. “If perchance it may be forgiven
thee.” Not as though it would not have been
pardoned, had he wept, but this is the manner
of the Prophet also, to denounce absolutely,
(arayopevew) and not to say, “ Howbeit, if thou
do this, thy sin shall be forgiven,” but that in
any wise the punishment shall take effect.

(a) ‘Therefore they that were scattered
abroad, went everywhere, preaching the
word.” But! I would have thee admire how
even in a season of calamity they neglected
not the preaching. ‘“ Hearing and seeing
the miracles which he did.” (Recapitulation,
v. 4-6.) Just as in the case of Moses by
contrast (with the magicians) the miracles
were evident miracles, so here also. ‘There
was magic, and so these signs were manifest.
(+) “For unclean spirits came out of many
that were possessed with them ” (v. 7); for this
was a manifest miracle :—not as the magicians
did: for the other (Simon), it is likely, bound
(men with spells);—‘‘and many,” it says,
“that were palsied and lame were healed.”
There was no deceit here: for it needed but
that they should walk and work. “And to
him they all gave heed, saying, This (man) is
the Power of God.” (v. 10.) And that was
fulfilled which was spoken by Christ, “ There
shall come false Christs and false Prophets in
My name.”—(Matt. xxiv. 24.) “And to him
they had regard, because that of long time
he had bewitched them with sorceries.” (v.
11.) (a) And yet there ought to have been
not one demoniac there, seeing that of a long
time he had been bewitching them with
sorceries: but if there were many demoniacs,
many palsied, these pretences were not truth,
But Philip here by his word also won them
over, discoursing concerning the kingdom
ot Christ, “(vi ra:) “And Simoni,” it says,
“being baptized, continued with Philip (v.
13): not for faith’s sake, but in order that he
might become such (as he), (4) But why did
they not correct him instantly? They were
content with his condemning himself. For


1 What follows, to the end of the Exposition, has by some
accident fallen into strange confusion. Inthe Translation we
have endeavored to restore the proper order. In the first
place it should be observed, that the portion beginning Oi péev
biapaptupamevor, p. 148. D. Ben and ending at ore mpwrov
éniotevoay, p, t4y. A, consisting of about 20 lines, is inter-
changed with the portion of about 25 lines, beginning Aecov
olv tovrov, and ending éxet rod dmoaroAov, p. t4o, C, These
being restored to their proper order, which is evident from
the contents of the two portions, we have, to the end of
the Recapitulation, two portions, dividing at ob« toyvoen éActv
rovs amogrddovs (efioraro,) p. 148, B. the former beginning
with the exposition of v. 4, the second with v. 7, and both
ending at v. 24. These, it may be supposed, are two several
and successive expositions. But it will be seen on comparing
them, that each in itself is often abrupt and incomplete, and
that their parts fit into each other in a way which can hardly
be accidental. It may also be remarked, that the length of
each is the same; each containing about 46 lines. We have
marked the order of the Mss, and Edd. by the letters a, 4, pre-
fixed to the several parts.


this too belonged to their work of teaching
(rig SibacKariag). But* when he had not power
to resist, he plays the hypocrite, just as did
the magicians, who said, “‘ This is the finger
of God.” And indeed that he might not be
driven away again, therefore he “ continued
with Philip,” and did not part from him.
“And when the Apostles which were at
Jerusalem,” etc. (v. 13, 14.) See how
many things are brought about by God’s
Providence through the death of Stephen!
(a) “ But they,” it says, having come down,
prayed for them that they might receive the
Holy Ghost: for as yet He was fallen upon
none of them, Then laid they their hands
upon them, and they received the Holy
Ghost.” (v. 15-17.) Seest thou that it was —
not to be done in any ordinary manner, but
it needed great power to give the Holy Ghost ? ©
For it is not all one, to obtain remission of -
sins, and to receive such a power. (6) By
degrees it is, that those receive the gift. It
was a twofold sign: both the giving to those, |
and the not giving to this man.*? Whereas |


asked to receive the Holy Ghost, he, because —
he cared not for this, asks power to give It to
others. And yet those received not this
power to give: but this man wished to be
more illustrious than Philip, he being among
the disciples! (a) ‘* He offered them money.”
(v. 18, 19.) What? had he seen the others
doing this? had he seen Philip? Did he


came to them? (4) ‘Thy money with thee
to perdition”’ (v, 20): since thou hast not
used it as it ought to be used. These are nof
words of imprecation, but of chastisement,
“To thee,” he says, be it (to thee): being
snch. As if one should say, Let it perish
along with thy purpose. Hast thou so mean
conceptions of the gift of God, that thou hast
imagined it to be altogether a thing of man?
It is not this, (a) Wherefore also Peter well
calls the affair a gift: “ Thou hast thought
that the gift of God may be purchased with
money.” Dost thou observe how on al
occasions they are clean from money? “ Fo
thine heart is not right in the sight of God,’
(v. 21.) Dost thou see how he does all of
malice? To be simple, however, was thé
thing needed, (4) For had it been doné
with simplicity, * he would have even wel


2 This sentence alone seems still to be out of its place
‘Ereién b¢ avriernvar oi ioxvoev «7, A, might be very
inserted in the passage below, ending ov« tay, €Aeiv 7.
which is otherwise mutilated: see the note there,

§ Between this and the following sentence the Mss. afi
Edd. give the exposition of v. 25.

‘ Et yap pera dercias éyivero, kai nav F.) amedé£aro (aed
tavro C. F.) avrod ray mpotvuiav. B. C. F, The precedini
sentence from (a) is kal pny abeAy éder elvac, The connectio


Homity XVIIL.]


tne ACS OF THE, APOSTLES.


117


comed his willing mind. Seest thou that to
have mean conceptions of great things is to
sin doubly? Accordingly, two things he bids
him: “ Repent and pray, if haply the thought
of thine heart may be forgiven thee.” (v, 22.)
Seest thou it was a wicked thought he had
entertained? ‘Therefore he says, “If haply it
may be forgiven thee: because he knew
him to be incorrigible. (a) “For I perceive
that thou art in the gall of bitterness, and in
the bond of iniquity.” (v. 23.) Words of
exceeding wrath! But otherwise he did not
punish him; that faith may not thereafter be
of compulsion; that the matter may not seem
to be carried ruthlessly; that he may intro-
duce the subject of repentance: or also,
because it suffices for correction to have con-
victed him, to have told him what was in his
heart, to have brought him to confess himself
overcome (ir: é44w). For that he says, ‘“ Pray
ye for me,” is a confession that he has done
wrong. , Observe him,! what a miscreant he
is; when he was convicted, then he believed :
when again he was convicted, then he _ be-
came humble.* ‘“Seeing* his miracles,”
(“he was amazed,” and came over.] He
thought to be able to escape detection: he
thought the thing was an art: but when he
had not power to defeat (éAriv) the Apostles,
== *, (6) Again, he fears the multitude,
and is afraid to deny it; and yet he might
have said, “I did not know: I did it in sim-
plicity : but he was struck with dismay, first
by the former circumstance, that he was over-
come (dr: 44), by the miracles and secondly
by this, that his thoughts are made manifest.


being lost, this passage was not understood, and A. omits it,
B. F. N. read dodadecas, and E. D. substitute, ‘‘ If however he
had come (mpoonAfev) as he ought to have come, he would
have been received, he would not like a pest have been driven
away.”

1 "Opa avrov wvapdv bvra. The modern text (Edd.) alters the
Sense : Opa mas, Kaito. piapos Wy, Ouws. See how, miscreant
though he is, nevertheless, etc.”

* Simon believed (13) only in an intellectual sense, being im-
pressed with wonder, rather than convinced of sin. So, now,
it is fear of calamity and penalty, not repentance, which leads
him to ask the apostles to pray for him.—G., B, S.

2 Mewpav avrov Ta anuera, evonige SuvadOar AavOaverv’ évource
Texvnv elvar To mpayua: ererdy S€ ovK Loxvaev ideiv (Sav. marg.
€Aeiv) TOUS aToTTOAOUS, éLiotato Kat mpoonADev, A, B,C, This,
which is the conclusion of (a), is both corrupt and defective.
He is enlarging upon the piapia of Simon's conduct, as shown
in the preceding ore nAéyxOn . . . , OTe mMaALY HAEyXAN : COMP.
the following sentence. he looks as if the sentence émeidy dé
ayriaThvar ovK iaxvoev kK, T. A, must belong to this place. The
reading éAew 7, an, is probably the true one: dre éadw is
twice said of Simon. Perhaps the passage may be restored
somewhat thus: ‘ Seein lis miracles, he was amazed,
and came over.’’ He thought to escape detection, he
thought the thing was an art: but when he had not power
to resist, he playS the hypocrite, as the magicians did, who
said, *‘ This is the finger at God, Having seen the Apostles,”
(hence the reading ideiv 7, am.) how by laying on of hands,
etc, ; again he thought it was an art, he thought to purchase
it with money: but when he was not able to defeat the
Apostles (as it was said above, ‘‘he wished to get matter of
accusation against them,"’) again he plays the hypocrite,
and says, ‘Pray ye for me, etc.’’—Edd. from E. “ Seeing
signs wrought he was amazed, showing that all was a lie (on
his part). It isnot said, IlpoonAdev, but, 'Efieraro, And why
did he not do the former at once? He thought to be able, etc.
érevdy Sé od iaxuoe Aadeiv 7, am., TpoTHADEV,’


Therefore he now takes himself a long way
off, to Rome, thinking the Apostle would not
soon come there,

“And they, when they had testified, and
preached the word of the Lord, returned to
Jerusalem. (v. 25.) ‘“Testified,” probably be-
cause of him (Simon), that they may not be
deceived ; that thenceforth they may be safe.
‘Having preached,” it says, ‘the word of the
Lord, they returned to Jerusalem,” Why do
they go thither again where was the tyranny
of the bad, where were those most bent upon
killing them? Just as generals do in wars,
they occupy that part of the scene of war
which is most distressed, ‘And preached
the Gospel in many villages of the Samari-
tans.” Observe them again, how they do
not (xpoyyouuévoc) Of set purpose come to Sama-
ria, but driven by stress of persecution, just
as it was in the case of Christ; and how when
the Apostles go thither, it is to men now
believers, no longer Samaritans, ‘“ But when
the Apostles,” it says, “ which were at Jerusa-
lem heard this, they sent unto them Peter and


John, Sent” them, again, to rid them of
magic, And * besides, (the Lord) had given


them a pattern at the time when the Sam-
aritans believed. “And in many villages,”
it savs, “of the Samaritans, they preached
the Gospel.” (John iv. 39.) Observe how
actively employed even their journeys were,
how they do nothing without a purpose.t
Such travels should we also make. And
why do I speak of travels? Many possess
villages and lands, and give themselves no
concern, nor make any account of this, “That
baths may be provided, their revenues in-
creased, courts and buildings erected, for this
they take plenty of pains: but for the hus-
bandry of souls, not so, When you see
thorns—answer me—you cut them up, you
burn, you utterly destroy them, to rid your
land of the hurt thence arising. And seest
thou the laborers themselves overrun with
thorns, and dost not cut them up, and art
thou not afraid of the Owner Who shall call


8 GAAws Sé, Kai rirov avroig ebeSwxee Tore, 6Te of Lamapeirac
éeriotevoay, A. B.D. F. Sav. marg. But C. “to rid them of
magic, to put them in mind of the doctrine which they learned
from Christ when first they believed;'’ which reading 1s
adopted by E, and Edd,

1y The preaching of Philip im Samaria was the first Gentile
mission, for the Samaritans were a mixed people and were
regarded as heathen by the Jews. An interesting concatena-
tion of events took its rise in the bold preaching of Stephen.
On the one side there proceeded from this the increased
opposition of the Jewish nation and the sad calamity of the
preacher's own death, but on the other there flowed from this
opposition and the persecution which was consequent upon it

reat benefit, The Christians were indeed scattered abroad
»y ill-treatment, but with them went the gospel message, and
the great work of heathen missions dated directly back to the
martyrdom of Stephen, Christian history furnishes no more
impressive illustration of the saying of Tertullian; ‘' The
blood of martyrs is seed,” —G, B.S


118


THE “WORKS OF ‘ST-\CHEYSOsiLGeE


[Homity XVIII.


thee to account? For ought not each indi-
vidual believer to build a Church, to get a
Teacher, to codperate (cvvai: pect) (with him),
to make this above all his object, that all may
be Christians? Say, how is it likely thy
laborer should be a Christian, when he sees
thee so regardless of his salvation? Thou
canst not work miracles, and so convert
(xeicac) him. By the means which are in thy
power, convert him; by kindness, by good
offices, by gentleness, by courting (xoZaxeig)
him, by all other means. Market-places,
indeed, and baths, the most do provide; but
no Churches: nay, sooner everything than
this! Wherefore I beseech and implore, as a
favor I entreat, yea as a law I lay it down,
that there be no estate to be seen destitute of
a Church.* Tell not me, There is one hard
by; there is one in the neighboring proper-
ties; the expense is great, the income not
great. If thou have anything to expend upon
the poor, expend it there: better there than
here. Maintain a Teacher, maintain a Dea-
con, and a sacerdotal body complete. As by
a bride, whether a wife whom thou takest, or
a daughter whom thou givest in marriage, * so
act by the Church: give her a dowry. So
shall thy estate be filled with blessing. For
what shall not be there of all that is good?
Is it a small thing, tell me, that thy wine-press


1 In St. Chrysostom’s time, littie had been done for the
conversion and instruction of the peasantry: hence in the
latter half of the fourth century Jagaxus came to be as synon-
ymous with “ heathen.” Even Christian proprietors neglected
their duty in this regard, while they improved their properties,
and swelled their revenues by great oppression of their ten-
ants and laborers: see Hom. tn Matt. xliii., |xi. and at the
same time often connived at the practice of the old idolatries,
for the sake of the dues accruing to them from the Temples
which still remained. Thus Zeno of Verona, Servs. xv. p. 120,
complains: lz prediis vestris fumantia undique sola fana
non nostis, gua, si vera dicenda sunt, disstmulanda subtiliter
custoditis. Jus templorum ne quis vobis eripiat, quotidie
litigatis, The Christianity which was outwardly professed in
the country parts was often for want of Churches and Clergy
little more than nominal: and the heathen orator Libanius, in
his Oratio pro Templis, addressed to the Emperor Theodosius,
perhaps did not greatly exaggerate in the following description:
** When you are told, that through this proceeding on your
part (viz. the destruction of the Temples and suppression of
the sacrifices) many are become Christians, you must not
forget to distinguish between show and reality. They are not
a whit changed from what they were before: they only say
they are so. They resort indeed to the public acts of religion,
and mingle themselves with the general body of Christians.
But when they have made a show of praying, they invoke
either none, or the Gods.’’—Moreover, the country clergy were
often themselves ill-taught and needing instruction. Thus
Hom. in Col. (t. xi. p. 392) delivered at Constantinople, Chrys.
says: ‘‘ How much instruction is needed by your brethren in
the country, and by their teachers (kat Tous éxetvwv didacKad-
ovs) !’’ Which perhaps was the result of a law passed a.D. 398,
Cod. Theodos. xvi. tit. 2 1. 33 which enacted, that the clergy
for the Churches founded on estates, or in villages, should be
ordained from no other estate or village, but that to which the
Church pertained: and of these a certain number, at the dis-
cretion of the bishop, according to the extent of the village,
etc.—On the other hand, Chrys. ‘‘on the Statues,” Or, xix. t.
ii. p. 189 dwells with much delight on the virtues and patriar-
chal simplicity of the rural clergy in Syria, and the Christian
attainments of their people.

2 ‘Ogavel yuvaika ayaywv 7 vuudny, 7 Ovyatépa, TH "ExkA. ovTw
Suakeroo. Before Ovy., A. B. F. N. insert xat, E. alone dovs,
and so Edd. Perhaps we may read woavet viudy, 7 yur. ay., 7
dovs Ovy.


should be blessed ;? a small thing, tell me,
that of thy fruits God is the first to taste,
and that the first fruits are there (with Him) ?
And then even for the peace of the laboring
people this is profitable. Then as one whom
they must respect, there will be the presbyter
among them and this will contribute to the
security of the estate. There will be constant
prayers there through thee* (z/ra, note }, p.
119) hymns and Communions through thee;
the Oblation on each Lord’s Day. For only
consider what a praise it will be, that, whereas
others have built splendid tombs, to have it
said hereafter: “‘Such a one built this,” thou
hast reared Churches! Bethink thee that
even until the coming of Christ thou shalt
have thy reward, who hast reared up the
altars of God.

Suppose an Emperor had ordered thee to
build an house that he might lodge there,
wouldest thou not have done everything to
please him? And here now it is a palace
of Christ, the Church which thou buildest.
Look not at the cost, but calculate the profit.
Thy people yonder cultivate thy field: culti-
vate thou their souls: they bring to thee thy
fruits, raise thou them to heaven. He that
makes the beginning is the cause of all the
test: and thou wilt be the cause that the
people are brought under Christian teaching
(Katnyouuéver), both there, and in the neigh-
boring estates. Your baths do but make the
peasants less hardy, your taverns give them a
taste for luxury, and yet you provide these for
credit’s sake. Your markets and fairs, (xavy-
yiperc) on the other hand, promote *® covetous-
ness. But think now what a thing it would be
to see a presbyter, the moving picture of
Abraham, gray-headed, girded up, digging
and working with his own hands? What
more pleasant than such a field! Their vir-
tue thrives. No intemperance there, nay, it is
driven away: no drunkenness and wanton-
ness, nay, it is cast out: no vanity, nay, it is
extinguished. All benevolent tempers shine
out the brighter through the simplicity of


3 ‘“* The first-fruits of corn and of grapes, or wine were pre-
sented as oblations at the Altar, and the elements for the Holy
Eucharist thence taken. See Cax. Afost. ii. Cod. Afr. c. 37.
Concil. Trudl. c. 28. Ina Sermon of St. Chrys. on the Ascen-
sion, this peculiar usage is mentioned, that a handful of ears
of corn in the beginning of harvest was brought to the Church,
words of benediction spoken over them, and so the whole field
was considered as blessed. "Omep yivetau émi Tov mediwy TeV
otaxunpopwv, odAlyous Tis oTaxvas AaBwy, Kal pixpov dpayua
Tooas Kal TpogeveyKwy TO Oca, Sia TOU MLKPOU TagaV THY apov-
pav evAoyet: oUTw Kai 6 XpiaTtos k. T. A. (t. ii. 450. C.)*’ Neander.

4 éca oé, Erasm. propter te, Ben. pro te, but this would be
UTep gov, as below where this benefit is mentioned, v7ép Tov
KEKTNILEVOV,

5 aitiat mAcoveéias. Edd. from E. itamovs: ra dé evtavda av
Tovvavtiov. ‘*make them forward and impudent. But here all
is justthe reverse.’ Below, ws eixova BadiGovta tov “ABp. in the
sense above expressed, as if it had been BadiGovgar. E. has ets
for ws, ‘‘ walking after the likeness:”” and Sav. marg, eis oixov
Bad. neta Tov ABp. ** walking into his house after (the manner
of) Abraham.”


Homity XVIII]


tae excrs OF THE: APOSTLES:


119


——————————— ee _ koe —---—-—-——“_"'-'-


manners: How pleasant to go forth and
enter into the House of God, and to know
that one built it himself: to fling himself on
his back in his litter, and’ after the bodily
benefit of his pleasant airing, be present both
at the evening and the morning hymns, have
the priest as a guest at his table, in associat-
ing with him enjoy his benediction, see others
also coming thither! This is a wall for his
field, this its security. This is the field of
which it is said, ‘“‘ The smell of a full field
which the Lord hath blessed.” (Gen. xxvii.
27.) If, even without this, the country is
pleasant, because it is so quiet, so free from
distraction of business, what will it not be
when this is added to it? The country with
a Church is like the Paradise of God. No
clamor there, no turmoil, no enemies at vari-
ance, no heresies: there you shall see all
friends, holding the same doctrines in com-
mon. The very quiet shall lead thee to
higher views, and receiving thee thus _pre-
pared by philosophy, the presbyter shall give
thee an excellent cure. For here, whatever
we may speak, the noise of the market drives
it all out: but there, what thou shalt hear,
thou wilt keep fixed in thy mind. Thou wilt
be quite another man in the country through
him: and moreover to the people there he will
be director, he will watch over them both by
his presence and by his influence in forming
their manners. And what, I ask, would be
the cost? Make for a beginning a small
house (év raze vaov) to serve as temple. ‘Thy
successor will build a porch, his successor
will make other additions, and the whole shall
be put to thy account. Thou givest little, and
receivest the reward for the whole. At any
rate, make a beginning: lay a foundation,
Exhort one another, vie one with another in
this matter. But now, where there is straw
Bijan piliavienvray UNTLOV Kai META THY alwpay THY TwMaTLKHV
au AVXVLKOLS Kal EwOLVois Uuvorts Tapayevedbar. This passage
has perplexed scribes and editors. Atwpa ** a swing, swinging
bed, hammock,”’ or, as here, ‘‘ litter,”’ or rather, ““a swinging
in such a conveyance: after the swinging motion in his litter,
pleasant and healthful for the body.”” The meaning is: “* with-
out fatigue, lying at his ease on his back, he is borne to
Church in his litter, and after this wholesome enjoyment for
the body, gets good for his soul, in attending at evening and
morning prayer. Ben. sezpsumgque projicere supinum, et post
tllan: corpoream guietem. as if it related to taking rest in his
bed, which is inconsistent with the scope of the description.
Erasmus, et guzescere ‘‘in villa’? securum, et habere “dean-
Sulationem’’ servientem corport, ‘*to sleep securely ‘in his
villa.” and to ‘take a walk’ which is good for the body.”
Neander simply, uxd sich niederzuwer/fen, * to prostrate him-
self,’ (viz. on entering the Church)—overlooking both wtmrvov
and aiwpayv gwu. Of the Mss., A., for cai piwar x. 7. A. substi-
tutes, kat peta tpodynv gw. ‘‘and after taking food for the
body.”’ C.excorr. gives ewav for aiwpav, F. wpav, Sav. marg.
*“‘@pay al. éwav:’’ both unmeaning: N. wpay with two letters
erased before it; and B. cai wera THv EvaTny Wpay THs TwLaTLKTS
#eTadaBeiv Tpopys kat ev Avxv., ‘‘and after the ninth hour to
partake of the tood for the body, and to attend at evening
and morning hymns:”’ gu@ lectio non spernenda videtur, Ben.
On the contrary, it is both needless and unsuitable, for the re-
ast is mentioned afterwards. The ‘‘hymns” are the Wadpos
€mAvxvios S. AvxviKos, ad fucensum lucerne, Which was Psalm


exli. Wadmos ewOivds, Psalm Ixiii. St. Chrysost. in Psalm cxl.
and Cozstit. A fost. ii. 59, Vili. 37.


and grain and such like tu be stored, you
make no difficulty of building: but for a
place where the fruits of souls may be gath-
ered in, we bestow not a thought; and the
people are forced to go miles and miles, and
to make long journeys, that they may get to
Church! Think, how good it is, when with
all quietness the priest presents himself in the
Church, that he may draw near unto God,
and say prayers for the village, day by day,
and for its owner! Say, is it a smali matter,
that even in the Holy Oblations evermore thy
name is included in the prayers, and that for
the village day by day prayers are made unto
God ?—How greatly this profits thee for all
else! It chances? that certain (great) per-
sons dwell in the neighborhood, and have
overseers: now to thee, being poor, one of
them will not deign even to pay a visit: but
the presbyter, it is likely, he will invite, and
make him sit at his table. How much good
results from this! The village will in the first
place be free from all evil suspicion. None
will charge it with murder, with theft: none
will suspect anything of the kind.—They have
also another comfort, if sickness befall, if
death.—Then again the friendships formed
there by people as they go side by side (to
and from the Church) are not struck up at
random and promiscuously : and the meetings
there are far more pleasant than those which
take place in marts and fairs. The people
themselves also will be more _ respectable,
because of their presbyter. How is it you
hear that Jerusalem was had in honor in the
old times above all other cities? Why was
this? Because of the then prevailing religion.
Therefore it is that where God is honored,
there is nothing evil: as, on the contrary,
where He is not honored, there is nothing
good. It will be great security both with
God and with men. Only, I beseech you, that
ye be not remiss: only may you put your hand
to this work. For if he who brings out “ the
precious from the vile,” shall be “as the
mouth of God” (Jer. xv. 19); he who bene-
fits and recovers so many souls, both that now
are and that shall be even until the coming of


2 SupBaiver twas ex yerrovwy oixeiv Kal emiTpomous exerv. Sav.
marg. A€yeew. The meaning is not clearly expressed, but it
seems to be this; ‘‘ It chances that some important personage
has an estate in your neighborhcod, and occasionally resides
there. His overseer informs him of your Church: he sends for

our presbyter, invites him to his table, gains from him such

information about your village, as he would never have ac-
quired otherwise ; for he thinks it beneath him even to call
upon you. In this way, however, he learns that yours isa
well-ordered village: and should any crime be committed in
that part of the country by unknown persons, no suspicion
even will light upon your people ; no troublesome inquisition
will be held, no fine or penalty levied on your estate.’’ The v.
1. Aéyecy cannot be the true reading, but something of this sort
must be supplied: ot cat A€youcw avrw. It seems also that
something is wanting between twas and é« yer. e. g. Tiwas Ex
tov Suvatwrepwv ex yeLT. OiKeELy,


120 Pte WORKS Or


ST. CHRYSOS TGR


[HomiLy XIX.


Christ, what favor shall not that person reap
from God! Raise thou a garrison against the
devil: for that is what the Churchis. Thence
as from headquarters let the hands go forth
to work: first let the people hold them up for
prayers, and then go their way to work. So
shall there be vigor of body; so shall the
tillage be abundant; so shall all evil be kept


aloof. It is not possible to represent in
words the pleasure thence arising, until it be


realized. Look not to this, that it brings in
no revenue: if? thou do it at all in this spirit,
then do it not at all; if thou account not the
revenue thou gettest thence greater than from
the whole estate beside; if thou be not thus
affected, then let it alone; if thou do not
account this work to stand thee more in stead
than any work beside. What can be greater
than this revenue, the gathering in‘ of souls
into the threshing-floor which is in heaven !
Alas, that ye know not how much it is, to gain
souls! Hear what Christ says to Peter,
“Feed My sheep.” (John xxi. 15-17.) If,
seeing the emperor’s sheep, or herd of horses,
by reason of having no fold or stable, exposed
to depredation, thou wert to take them in
hand, and build a fold or stables, or also pro-
vide a shepherd or herdsman to take charge


of them, what would not the emperor do for
thee in return? Now, thou gatherest the
flock of Christ, and puttest a shepherd over
them, and thinkest thou it is no great gain
thou art earning? But, if for offending even
one, a man shall incur so great a punishment,
how can he that saves so many, ever be pun-
ished? What sin will he have thenceforth?
for, though he have it, does not this blot it
out? From the punishment threatened to
him that offends, learn the reward of him that
saves. Were not the salvation of even one
soul a matter of great importance, to offend
would not move God to so great anger.
Knowing these things, let us apply ourselves
forthwith to this spiritual work. And let each
invite me, and we will together help to the
best of our ability. If there be three joint-
owners, let them do it by each bearing his
part: if but one, he will induce the others
also that are near. Only be earnest to effect
this, I beseech you, that in every way being
well-pleasing unto God, we may attain unto
the eternal blessings, by the grace and mercy
of our Lord Jesus Christ, with Whom to the
Father and the Holy Ghost together be glory,
dominion, and honor, now and ever world
without end. Amen.


HONE Ye 26s


ACIS ll 265 277


“ And the Angel of the Lord spake unto Philip, say-
ing, Arise and go toward the south unto the way
that goeth down from Jerusalem unto Gaza, which
is desert. And he arose and went.”


Ir seems to me, this? (Philip) was one of
the seven; for from Jerusalem he would not
have gone southwards, but to the north; but


from Samaria it was “towards the south.
The same is desert:” so that there is no
fear of an attack from the Jews. And he did


not ask, Wherefore? but “arose and went.
And, behold, ” it says, “a man of Ethiopia,
an eunuch of great authority under Candace,
queen of the Ethiopians, who had the charge
of all her treasure, and had come to Jerusa-


lem for to worship, was returning, and sitting
in his chariot read Esaias the prophet.”
(v. 27, 28.) High encomiums for the man,
that he, residing in Ethiopia and beset with
so much business, and when there was no
festival going on, and living in that super-
stitious city, came “to Jerusalem for to wor-
ship.” Great also is his studiousness, that
even “sitting in his chariot he read.* And,”
it says, “‘the Spirit said unto Philip, Go near,
and join thyself to this chariot. And Philip
ran thither to him, and heard him reading the
prophet Esaias, and said, Understandest thou


3 ‘Behold, an eunuch (comp. p. 122, note 4), a barbarian—
both circumstances calculated to make him indisposed to study


1 GAws €i OVTW TOLEts MH TOLHTNS. Ben. Sf omnino id facias,
ne facias tamen. Neander, Wenn duso handelst, wirst du
nichts thun, as if it were ov trotncets.

2 So all the Mss. and the Catena; except E. which having
already made Chrys. affirm that Philip was one of the seven,


supra, p. 115, and note !, gives a different turn to this pas-
sage. “It seems to me, that he received this command while


in Samaria: because from Jerusalem one does not go south-—
ward, but to the north: but from Samaria it is to the south.’
An unnecessary comment; for it would hardly occur to any
reader of the Acts to suppose that Philip had returned to
Jerusalem.


add to this, his dignified station and opulence: the very cir-
cumstance of his being on a journey, and riding in a chariot:
for to a person travelling in this way, it is not easy to attend
to reading, but on the contrary very troublesome: yet his
strong desire and earnestness set aside all these hindrances,”
etc. Hom.in Gen. xxxv.§1. Throughout the exposition of
the history of the eunuch there given (t. iv. p. 350-352) he is
called a barbarian: so in the tenth of the ‘‘ Eleven Homilies,”
§ 5, t. xii. 303, 394, he is called a “‘ barbarian,” and ‘ alien,”
addAddvaos, but also ‘‘a Jew:”’ add’ ovx 6 BapBapos TOTE Exetvos
TavTa eime (viz. excuses for delaying baptism) kat tavta lovéaios
@v x. 7. A. i.e. as Matthii explains in ]., ‘‘a Jewish proselyte.”
—Both expositions should be compared with this in the text.


HomILy XIX.]


what thou readest? And he said, How can
I, except some man should guide me?”
(v. 29-31.) Observe again his piety; that
though he did not understand, he read, and
then after reading, examines. ‘And he de-
sired Philip that he would come up and sit
with him. The place of the Scripture which
he read was this, He was led as a sheep to
the slaughter; and like a lamb dumb before
his shearer, so opened He not His mouth: in
His humiliation His judgment was taken
away: and who shall declare His generation ?
for His life is taken from the earth. And the
eunuch answered Philip, and said, I pray
thee, of whom speaketh the prophet this? of
himself, or of some other man? Then Philip
opened his mouth, and began at the same
Scripture, and preached unto him Jesus.”
(v. 32-35.) Observe how it is Providentially
ordered. First he reads and does not under-
stand; then he reads the very text in which
was the Passion and the Resurrection and the
Gift. “And as they went on their way, they
came unto a certain water: and the eunuch
said, See, here is water; what doth hinder me
to be baptized?” (v. 36.) Mark the eager
desire, mark? the exact knowledge. ‘‘ And he
commanded the chariot to stand still: and
they went down both into the water, both
Philip and the eunuch; and he baptized him.
And when they were come up out of the
water, the Spirit of the Lord caught away
Philip, that the eunuch saw him no more: and
he went on his way rejoicing.” (v. 38, 39.)
But why did the Spirit of the Lord bear him
away? (Hereby) the occurrence was shown
to be more wonderful. Even then, the eunuch
did not know him. Consequently this was
done, that Philip might afterwards be a sub-
ject of wonder to him.? “For,” it says, “he
went on his way rejoicing. But Philip was
found at Azotus: and passing through he
preached in all the cities, till he came to
Ceesarea.” (v. 40.) This (Philip, therefore)
was one of the seven; for there in fact he is
afterwards found at Cesarea. It was well and
expedient therefore that the Spirit caught
Philip away; else the eunuch would have de-
sired to go with him,* and Philip would have


1 axpiBerav. Below, opas ore ta ddyuata amnpticmeva eiye.
The 37th verse (Philip’s answer and the Eunuch’s confession)
seems to have been absent from St. Chrysostom’ copy (unless
indeed it is implied in the passage just cited). It is found in
Laud’s Gr. and Lat. copy of the Acts, part is cited by St.
Irenzus, p. 196. and part by St. Cypr. p. 318, but unknown to
the other ancient authorities.

2 wate ovv UoTEpoy avTov Bavpacbyvar, TOUTO eyEeVETO: i.e. aS
below, the eunuch saw that it was the work of God: it was
done in order that he might not think or: av@pwmds ear. amAds.
—Edd. from E. ‘‘ Why, it may be asked, did the Spirit of the
Lord carry Philip away? Because he was to pass through
other cities, and to preach the Gospel. Consequently this
was done, etc. that he might not think what had happened to
him was of man, but of God.”’


3 ouvaredAGety (Ec. cuprapedety) atta. As there isno ai’ror,


PELE eo cOPs TE


APOSTLES: 125


grieved him by declining to comply with his
request, the time being not yet come. (a)
But * at the same time here was an encourag-
ing assurance for them that they shall also
prevail over the heathen: for® indeed the high
character (rd agiérorov) of the (first) believers
was enough to move them. If however the
eunuch had stayed there, what fault could
have been found? [But he knew him not]:
for this is why it says, ““he went on his way
rejoicing :”? so that had he known him, he
would not have been (so) delighted.


“And the Angel of the Lord,” etc. (Re-
capitulation, v. 26.) (4) See Angels assisting
the preaching, and not themselves preaching,
but calling these (to the work). But the won-
derful nature of the occurrence is shown also
by this: that what of old was rare, and hardly
done, here takes place with ease,” and see
with what frequency! (¢) “An eunuch,” it
says, ‘‘a man of great authority, under Can-
dace, queen of the Ethiopians.” * (v. 27.) For
there women bore rule of old, and this was
the law amongthem. Philip did not yet know
for whose sake he had come into the desert:
(Z) but’ what was there to hinder his learning
all (these particulars) accurately, while in
the chariot? ‘Was reading the prophet
Esaias.” (v. 28.) For the road was desert,
and there was no display in the matter. Ob-
serve also at what time: in the most violent
heat (of the day). (e) “And the Spirit said


the meaning seems to be as above expressed, not, ‘‘ would
have desired Philip to go with him.”

4 What follows is confused in the Mss. and Edd., by trans-
position of the portions of text here marked a, 4; andc, d+
the order in the Mss. being 4, a, ad. c, e.

5 Kai yap T0 Tav mioTevovtwy aéidmioToy ikavov avTovs dapat
ei 5€ éméuecvey (B. émémevov) exet, Tolov To eyxkAnua; Meaning,
perhaps, that the character and station of such converts as the
eunuch would weigh much with their countrymen (rtov¢
adAopvAovs). Though if the eunuch had stayed behind in
Judea, who could have blamed him?—The modern text;
‘*____sufficient to persuade the learners to be roused up them-~
selves also to the same zeal.

6 ebxep@s, Spa pe’ Oons adovias. Cat. The Mss,
evxep@s. He means, angelic manifestations. :

*It is probable that this eunuch was an Ethiopian by birth
and a Jewish proselyte. It was customary for such foreign

roselytes, as well as for Jewish non-residents, to go up to
Peciealen to worship. Others suppose him to have been a
Jew, resident in Ethiopia; but he is designated as *‘an Ethio-~
pian.’’ The fact that those in his condition were not admitted
to full standing in the congregation of Israel (Deut. xxiii. 1)
is not a sufficient reason for the opinion of Meyer that this
man must have been an uncircumcised heathen—a “ proselyte
of the gate,’’ since he could occupy the same relation as native
Jews in his condition. Ethiopia lay to the S. of Egypt and
Candace was queen of Meroé, the northern portion of the
country. Eunuchs not only served as keepers of the harem
but sometimes, as here, as royal treasurers.—G. B. S.

7 ri Sé ExwAvoev TavTa avTov axpiBas mabey Kai Ev THO OXHMATE
évTa: Kal yap épnmos Fv Kat ovK iy To mpayuaeniderérs. We
conjecture the first clause to be meant as the answer to an
objection: How should Philip know all these particulars? It
may indeed relate to the eunuch’s accurate knowledge
(axpiBeca) above mentioned, note!. The latter part, however,
seems to belong to v. 28 to which the Catena refers the men-
tion of the xaAetwtarov xavma.—Edd. (from E. alone), *‘ Pray
what hindered, say you, that he should learn all, even when in
the chariot, and especially in the desert? Because the matter
was not one of display. But let us look over again what has
been read. And behold,” etc.


omit


THE. WORKS -OF) ST) (CHEV SOS axe


[Homity XIX.


unto him.” (v. 29.) Not now the Angel? but
the Spirit urges ce Why is this? ‘ Then,”
the vision took place, in grosser form, through
the Angel, for this is for them that are more of
the body, but the Spirit is for the more
spiritual. And how did He speak to him?
Of course, suggested it to him. Why does
not the Angel appear to the other, and bring
him to Philip? Because it is likely he would
not have been persuaded, but rather terrified.
Observe the wisdom of Philip: he did not ac-
cuse him, not say, “I know these things ex-
actly:” did not pay court to him, and say,
“Blessed art thou that readest.” But mark
his speech, how far it is from harshness alike
and from adulation; the speech rather of a
kind and friendly man. ‘“ Understandest
thou what thou readest?” (v. 30.) For it
was needful that he should himself ask, him-
self have a longing desire. He plainly inti-
mates, that he knows that the other knew
nothing : and says, *‘ Understandest thou what
thou readest?”’ at the same time he shows
him that great was the treasure that lay
therein. It tells well also, that the eunuch
looked not to the outward appearance (cyjuc)
(of the man), said not, “ Who art thou?” did
not chide, not give himself airs, not say that
he did know. On the contrary, he confesses
his ignorance: wherefore also he learns.”\ Hie
shows his hurt to the physician: sees at a
glance, that he both knows the matter, and is
willing to teach. Look? how free he is from
haughtiness; the outward appearance an-
nounced nothing splendid. So desirous was
he of learning, and gave heed to his words;

and that saying, “He that seeketh, findeth, ”
(Matt. vii. 8.) was fulfilled in him. “ Andy it
says, “he besought Philip, that he would
come up and sit with him.” (v. 31.) Do you
mark the eagerness, the longing desire? But
should any say he ought to have waited for
Philip (to speak), (the answer is), he does not


1 apwagec: but this, derived from v. 39 Is not the right word
here.—This, with the clause immediately preceding in the
Mss., is thus altered by the innovator (E. Edd.): “So little
did P. know (ovTws ovK dec ®.) for whose sake he was come
into the desert: because also (67. kai, F. D. 6@ev) not now an
Angel, but the Spirit bears him away. But the eunuch sees
none of these things, being as yet not fully initiated (ateAns,
tmperfectus Ben.) ; or because also these things are not for the
more bodily, but for the more spiritual: nor indeed does’ he
learn the things which Philip is fully taught (éxd:dacKerat).”

2 [dere (ide B.) TO (Tov N.) atudov: ovdév Aapumpov emedepeTo
oxnua. Read 70 oxyjua.—E. D. F. Edd., Eide and ovd€ yap.
Vidit illum esse a fastu alienum: neque enim splendidum
gestabat vestitum. Ben. and similarly Erasm. as if the mean-
ing were, ‘‘ the eunuch saw there was no pride in Philip, for
he had no splendid clothing.”’ But it is the eunuch in whom
this (ro atudoyv) is praised, (see below, § 4 zxzz¢.) that he did not
disdain Philip for the meanness of his appearance: comp. //ovz.
in Ger. XXXv. § 2. *‘ For when the Apostle (swfva, p. 115, note
*) had said, “* ‘Knowest thou,” and came up to him in mean
attire (mera evTeAovs oXHHaTOs), the eunuch did not take it
amiss, was not indignant, did not think himself insulted... .
but he, the man in great authority, the barbarian, the man
riding in a chariot, besought him, the person of mean aaa
ance, who might for his dress have easily been despised,
come up and sit with him,” etc.


know what is the matter: he could not in the
least tell what the other was going to say to
him, but supposed merely that he was about
to receive some (lesson of) prophecy. And
moreover, this was more respectful, that he
did not draw him into his chariot, but be-
sought him. ‘And Philip,” we have read,
‘ran to him, and heard him reading;” even
the fact of his running, showed® that he
wished to say (something). ‘“ And the place,’’
it says, “of the Scripture which he read was
this: Asa sheep He was led to the slaugh-
ter.” * (v. 32.) And this circumstance, also,

is a token of his elevated mind, (¢:Aoc0piac) that
he had in hand this prophet, who i is more sub-

lime than all others. Philip does not relate
matters to him just as it might happen, but
quietly: nay, does not say anything until he
is questioned. Both in the former instance
he prayed him, and so he does now, saying, “ I
pray thee of whom speaketh the prophet
this?” That* he should at all know either
that the Prophets speak in different ways
about different persons, or that they speak of
themselves in another person—the question
betokens a very thoughtful mind. f Let us be
put to shame, both poor and rich, by this
eunuch. Then; it\says; “they came to a cer-
tain water, and he said, Lo, here is water.”

(v. 36.) Again, of his own accord he requests,
saying, “What doth hinder me to be bap-
tized?”’ And see again his modesty: he does
not say, Baptize me, neither does he hold his
peace ; but he utters somewhat midway be-
twixt strong desire and reverent fear, saying,
“What doth hinder me?” Do you observe


3 eSeixvy BovAduevoy eimetvy, This seems meartt to explain
why the eunuch at once besought Philip to come up into the
chariot: his running showed that he wished to say something.
—E. Edd. “‘ was a sign of his wishing to speak, and the read-
ing (a sign) of his studiousness. For he was reading at a time
when the sun makes the heat more violent.”

* The rendering of » 6€ meproxyn THS ypadys given in the text
(A. V.) is also that of the R. V. Another “interpretation is
preferred by many scholars: ‘the content of the Scripture”
(ypap7 being used in the limited sense of the particular passage
in question). This view harmonizes with the derivation of
Tep.oxy (mepi-exerv) Meaning an enclosure, or that which is
enclosed. Tpady is also used in the limited sense in v. ag
(So, Meyer, Hackett, and Thayer’s Lex.)

4*H (N. om. Cat. 70) 6Aws eidévat OTL GAAWS Kai (om. C.) Epi
ad\Awv A€yovaty oi mpopyTat, H OTe K. T. A. A. B. C. Cat. We
read, 70 dAws eidevar 7 . . . . But the modern text: ‘It seems
to me that he knew not that the prophets speak of other per-
sons: or if not this, he was ignorant that they discourse con-
cerning themselves in another person;’’ omitting the last
clause, ohodpa emeokeupevov (Cat. meprerkenpmervy) 7 epwtnors.—In
the next sentence B. has retained the true reading, extouiar,
for which the rest have tautav. N. tamcecar,

+The eunuch must have heard much said about Jesus at
Jerusalem for he had been crucified but five or six years before.
In this time of persecution and excitement, discussions would
be rife concerning the Christian interpretation of prophecy.
The eunuch seems to have heard two theories concerning the
prophecies (e. g. Is. liii.) relating to the ‘* Servant af Jehovah,”’
one that the prophet was speaking of the Messiah (whom the
Christians asserted Jesus to be) and the other that the prophet
spoke concerning himself in these prophecies, ar opinion not
wholly abandoned in modern times. The eunuch’s sudden
conversion presupposes prolonged consideration of the claims
of Jesus to Hs the Messiah and a keen interest in religious
truth.—c. B.


Homity XIX.]


PE At oacOr THe APOSTLES;


123


that he has the doctrines (of faith) perfect?
For indeed the Prophet had the whole, In-
carnation, Passion, Resurrection, Ascension,
Judgment to’come. And if he shows ex-
ceeding earnestness of desire, do not marvel.
Be ashamed, all ye as many as are unbaptized.
“And,” it says, “he commanded the chariot
to stand still.” (v. 38.) He spoke, and gave
the order at the same moment, before hearing
(Philip’s answer). “And when they were
come up out of the water, the Spirit of the
Lord caught away Philip; ” (v. 39) in order
that the occurrence might be shown to be of
God; that he might not consider it to be
merely man. “And he went,” it says, “on
his) way. Tejoieine. | (P.. 121; note’ 2!) This
hints, that he would have been grieved had he
known: for the greatness of his joy, having
had the Spirit also vouchsafed to him, he did
not even see things present—‘ But Philip
was found at Azotus.” (v. 40.) Great was the
gain to Philip also :—that which he heard con-
cerning the Prophets, concerning Habakkuk.
concerning Ezekiel, and the rest, he saw done
in his own person. (Bel. & Dr. v. 363 Ez. iii.
12.) Thence it appears that he went a long
distance, seeing he ‘was found at Azotus.”
(The Spirit) set him there, where he was
thenceforth to preach: ‘ And passing through,
he preached in all the cities, until he came to
Ceesarea.”

“ And Saul, yet breathing out threatenings
and slaughter against the disciples of the
Lord, went unto the high priest, and desired
of him letters to Damascus to the syna-
gogues, that if he found any of this way,
whether they were men or women, he might
bring them bound unto Jerusalem.” (ch. ix.
1, 2.) He fiftly mentions Paul’s zeal, and
shows that in the very midst of his zeal he is
drawn. “Yet breathing out threatenings
and slaughter,” and not yet sated with the
murder of Stephen, he was not yet glutted
with the persecution of the Church, and the
dispersion. Lo, this was fulfilled which was
spoken by Christ, that “they which kill you
shall think they offer worship to God.”
(John xvi. 2.) He then in this wise did it,
not as the Jews: God forbid! For that he
did it through zeal, is manifest from his going
abroad even to strange cities: whereas they
would not have cared even for those in Jeru-
salem ; they were for one thing only, to enjoy
honor. But why went he to Damascus?
It was a great city, a royal city: he was
afraid lest that should be preoccupied. And
observe his strong desire and ardor (and),
how strictly according to the Law he went to
work: he goes not to the governor, but “to
the priest. That if he found any of this


way:”’ forso the believers were called, prob-
ably because of their taking the direct way
that leads to heaven. And why did he not
receive authority to have them _ punished
there, but brings them to Jerusalem! He
did these things here with more authority.
And mark on what a peril he casts himself.
He! was not afraid lest he should take any
harm, but (yet) he took others also with him,
‘that if,” it says, “ he found any of this way,
whether they were men or women ’’—Oh, the
ruthlessness !—‘‘ he might bring them bound.”
By this journey of his, he wished to show
them all (how he would act): so far were
they from being earnest in this matter.
Observe him also casting (people) into prison
before this. The others therefore did not
prevail: but this man did prevail, by reason
of his ardent mind. ‘And as he journeyed,
he came near Damascus: and suddenly there
shined round about him a light from heaven:
and he fell to the earth, and heard a voicc
saying unto him, Saul, Saul, why persecutest
thou: Me?” «(@vs)3, 4.) (Why. not in#jeru
salem? why not in Damascus? ‘That there
might be no opening for different persons
to relate the occurrence in different ways, but
that he alone should be the authentic narra-
tor (agdémoroc), he that? went for this purpose.
In fact, he says this [both in his oration on
the stairs], and when pleading before Agrippa.
“Fell torthe: earthy 2 (ch;)/xxiiz.6 seve xe)
for excess of light is wont to shock, because


1 Edd. *‘on what danger casting himself, still even so he is
afraid lest he should suffer some harm. This is the reason
why he takes others with him, probably to rid himself of his
fear: or also, because they were many against whom he was
going, he takes many, in order that the more boldly, whomso-
ever he should find, both men and women,” etc. Just the
opposite to C.’s meaning: viz. ‘“‘It is not to be supposed, be-
cause he took many with him, that he had any fears for him-
self: he was above all such regards. The fact is, he wished
to show them all (both the Jews at Jerusalem, and the com-
panions of his journey), how they ought to act:’’ dia rs odov
magw autos detfac <Bovdreto. C. however has mao. avrov,
N. waou.v avrovs, meaning: “by means of his journey, he
wished to show them (the Christians bound) to all.’’ Perhaps
the true reading is avrov thy mpobumiav, or the like. E. D. F.
Edd. ‘‘ Especially as by means of the journey he wished to
show them all (macy avrois), that all depended on him (avrov
TO Tav Ov).

2 6 dca TovTo amwwv. i.e. Who would havea right to be be-
lieved, because it was known that he left Jerusalem for the
purpose of persecuting. Had it taken place in Jerusalem or in
Damascus, some would have given one account of the matter,
some another—as, in the case of our Lord, when the voice
came to Him from heaven at Jerusalem, ‘‘some said it thun-
dered, some that an Angel spake to Him,”’ (so Chrys. explains
below, p. 125)—but, happening in the way it did, the person
most interested in it, and who by this very thing was caused
to take so momentous a step, was the authentic narrator; 1. e.
the story was to come from him, as the only competent au-
thority: GAA’ abtos agtomcetos hv Sinyovmevos (so Cat.; C., fv
Siyyjoagba: the other Mss. ydinyovmevos) 0 dca rovTo amiwy:
Infra, Pp. 125, obtos S€ akivomiatos hv amayyeéAAwy paddoy 7a
éavtov.—In the next sentence, Tovtro youw Aé€yet, Kat mpos
*Aypitmav aroAoyovpevos, Something seems wanting before xat,
as supplied in the translation: but also both before and
after these words: e. g. For the men which were with him,
heard not the voice, and were amazed and overpowered. In
fact, he says this in his oration on the stairs, ‘* They heard not
the voice of Him that spake to me,’’ and when pleading before
Agrippa, he says, **And when we were all fallen to the


| ground, I heard a voice,”’ etc.


124


THE’ WORKS OF, STCHEYSOST@i:


[Homity XIX. _


the eyes have their measure: it is said also
that excess of sound makes people deaf and
stunned (as in a fit) (azordqyac). But? him it
only blinded, and extinguished his passion by
fear, so that he should hear what was spoken.
re Saul, Saul,” saith He, “ why persecutest
thou me?” And He tells him nothing: does
not say, Believe, nor anything whatever of the
kind: but expostulates with him, all but say-
ing, What wrong, great or small, hast thou
suffered from Me, that thou doest these
things? “And he said, Who art Thou,
ord?” (v-5) thas. int ‘the? first; place .con-
fessing himself His servant. ‘And the Lord
said, I am Jesus, whom thou persecutest :”’
think not thy warring is with men.” And
they which were with him heard the voice of
Paul, but saw no person to whom he answered
—for (the Lord) suffered them to be hearers
of what was less important. Had they heard
the other Voice, they would not have be-
lieved ; but perceiving Paul answering (some
person), they marvelled. “ But arise, and go
into the city, and it shall be told thee what
thou must do.” (v. 6.) Observe, how He
does not immediately add all, but first softens
his mind. In the same way He called the
disciples also a second time.? “It shall be
told thee,” etc.: He gives him good hopes,
and (intimates) that he shall recover his sight
also. “And the men which journeyed with
him stood speechless, hearing a voice, but
seeing no man. And Saul arose from the
earth; and when his eyes were opened, he
saw no man: but they led him by the hand,
and brought him into Damascus” (v. 7, 8) :—
the spoils of the devil (ra ckeby airov), “ his
goods ” (Matt. xill. 29), as from some city, yea,
some metropolis which has been taken. And


1 "AAAG TovTOV MovoY emypwoe. may be rendered, They all
saw the light, but it blinded only Paul:—or, Him however it
only blinded, did not cast him into insensibility, but left him
otherwise in possession of his faculties.

2 The remainder of the verse and the first part of v. 6 to
mpos avtov, were absent from Chrysostom’s copy (and Cat.
(Ec. Theoph.) as from Codd. A. B. C. (of New Test.) and
Laud’s Gr. and Lat. of Acts: but the last have the clause,
oxAnpov oo 7. k. A. after duwxeus, v. 4. St. Hil. omits the clause
durum est, etc. but has, tremens et pavens, etc.—* The voice
of Paul:’’ Didymus in Cat. gives this as Chrysostom’s solu-
tion of the seeming contradiction between this statement and
that of St. Paul in xxii. 9. ‘In the first narrative, they heard
Paul’s voice, saying, Who art thou, Lord? But saw no man
save Paul: in the second, they saw the light, but did not hear
the voice of the Lord.”

3 oUTwW Kal Tovs mabyTas éxadecev Ex Sevtepov (Cat. and Sav.
marg. join €k 6. to the next sentence). The meaning is: As
here, there is an interval between the conversion of Saul, and
Christ’s announcement of the purpose for which he was
called (which in Acts xxvi. 15, 16 are put together as if all
was said at the same time), so in the case of the disciples,
Andrew, John, and Simon, there was a first call, related in
John i.; then after a w hile, Christ called them a second time,
(see Hom. in Matt. xiv. § 2) namely, to be fishers of men, Matt.
iv. In both cases there was an interval, during which he and
they were prepared for the further revelation of His will con-
cerning them. The mod. t. (E. Edd.) omits this clause, and
substitutes kai 6i @v TapaxeAcveTar avTov rovety Tapaxpnua


z
k. T. A. ‘““And by what He bids him do, straightway gives
him,” etc.


the wonder of it is, the enemies and foes
themselves brought him in, in the sight of all!
‘And for three days he neither did eat nor
drink, being blinded.” (v. 9.) What could
equal this? To compensate the discourage-
ment in the matter of Stephen, here is encour-
ment, in the bringing in of Paul: though that
sadness had its consolation in the fact of
Stephen’s making such an end, yet it also
received this further consolation: moreover,
the bringing in of the villages of the Samari-
tans afforded very great comfort.—But why
did this take place not at the very first, but
after these things? ‘That it might be shown
that Christ was indeed risen. This furious
assailant of Christ, the man who would not
believe in His death and resurrection, the
persecutor of His disciples, how should this
man have become a believer, had not the
power of His resurrection been great indeed ?
Be it so, that the other Apostles favored
(His pretensions’): what say you to this
man? Why then not immediately after His
resurrection? That his hostility might be
more clearly shown as open war. The man
who is so frantic as even to shed blood and
cast men into prisons, all at once believes!
It was not enough that he had never been in
Christ’s company: the believers must be
warred upon by him with vehement hostility :
he left to none the possibility of going beyond
him in fury: none of them all could be so
violent. But when he was blinded, * then he
saw the proofs of His sovereignty and loving
kindness: then he answers, ‘ Lord, what
wilt Thou have me to do?” that none may
say that he played the hypocrite, he that was
even eager for blood, and went to the priests,
and flung himself upon such dangers, in per-
secuting and bringing to punishment even
them that were in foreign parts—under these
circumstances he now acknowledges His
sovereignty. And why was he shone upon by
that light not within the city, but before it?
The many would not have believed, since


4 "Eotw éxetvor avtw éxapicovto. Hom. in tllud, Saulus adhuc
Spirans, etc. § 5, t. iii. p. 105. ‘* But shameless objectors may
say (of Peter), that because he was Christ’s disciple, because
he had been partaker at His table, had been with Him three
years, had been under His teaching, had been deluded and
cajoled by Him (éxoAaxev@y Um’ avTov amatnfeis), therefore it is
that he preaches His resurrection: but when thou seest Paul, a
man who knew Him not, had never heard Him, had never
been under His teaching: a man, who even after His cruci-
fixion makes war upon Him, puts to death them that believe in
Him, throws all into confusion and disorder, when thou seest
him suddenly converted, and in his toils for the Gospel out-
stripping the friends of Christ; what plea canst thou then
have for thine effrontery, in disbelieving the word of the Res-
urrection ?’

5 “Eevdy d€ ErAnpwOn (erAnpodopyAy, A. om., Cat. ernpwOn,
E. D. F. Edd.) ts Seomotetas avtod Ta Texuypia Kat HS
piravOpwrias TOTE amoKpiveTat (for 7. a. E. 1D R36 Edd. yvepicer,
Cat. elder): tva (yap add B.} my Ts etry ort UmeKptveETo, 0 Kal
aimatwv em Oupav K.7. A. (Kat va my Tis. . . Umexp. Tla@s yap
0 Kal aig. ew. x. 7. A. E. D. io Edd.) We read *Emecdy b€ emnpwOn,

. THs b. ede. Tote am. Kupre, x. 7. A. va An K. T. A.


HoMILy XIX.]


even there (at Jerusalem when the people
heard the voice which came from above, they
said that “it thundered” (John xii, 29, sz-
pra, note 2, p. 123); but this man was authority
enough in reporting what was his own affair.
And bound he was brought in, though not
with bonds upon him: and they drew him,
who had expected to draw the others. ‘ And
he eat not, neither drank:” he condemned
himself for the past, he confessed, prayed,
besought God. But should any say, This was
the effect of compulsion: (we answer) The
same thing happened to Elymas: then how
came it that he was not changed? (ch. xiii.
de Laud. Pauli Hom, iv. § 1, t. ii. p. 491.)
What (evidence) could be more compulsory
than the earthquake at the Resurrection, the
report of the soldiers, the other miracles, the
seeing Himself risen? But these things do
not compel (belief) they are calculated to
teach (it) (oi avayxactixnd arra diaxrixa ). Why
did not the Jews believe when they were told
of these things? That he spoke truth was
manifest: for he would not have been
changed, had this not happened; so that all
were bound to believe. He was not inferior
to them that preached the Resurrection, and
was more credible, by being all at once con-
verted. He had no intercourse with any of
the believers; it was at Damascus that he
was converted, or rather before he came to
Damascus that this happened to him. I ask
the Jew: Say, by what was Paul converted?
He saw so many signs, and was not con-
verted: his teacher (Gamaliel, supra, p. 87,
note 1) was converted, and he remained
unconverted. Who convinced him—and not
only convinced, but all at once inspired him
with such ardent zeal? Wherefore was it,
that he wished even to go into hell itself’ for
Christ’s sake? The truth of the facts is man-
ifest.


But, as I said, for the present let us take
shame to ourselves (when we think of) the
eunuch, both in his baptism and his reading.
Do ye mark how he was in a station of great
authority, how he was in possession of wealth,
and even on his journey allowed himself no
rest? What must he have been at home, in
his leisure hours, this man who rested not
even on his travels? What must he have
been at night? Ye that are in stations of
dignity, hear: imitate his freedom from


1 Aca Te ai eis yeevvay nvtato areAOety UTép TOU Xptatov ; The
modern text substitutes, ** that he wished even to be accursed
(Rom. ix. 2.) for Christ,’’ See Hom. xvi.ad Rom. in 1. But
Chrys. elsewhere uses as strong expressions as he does here.
Hom. ii. in 2 Thess. § 4 o¥dé thy wetpav THs yeevyns HyetTo TL elvac
Sca tov Tov Xprorov woPov. And, dca roy tov X. wodov, natade-
XETAL Kal eis yeevvay euTemety Kal THS BactAclas Exremecv, (cited
in the Ecloga de Laud. Paul. t. xii. p. 659, E.)


Pot vole OF THE APOSTLES:


125


pride, ? (de Lazaro, Conc. iii. § 3, t. i. p. 748.


c) his piety. ‘Though about to return home,
he did not say to himself : “I am going back
to my country, there let me receive baptism ;”
those cold words which most men use! No
need had he of signs, no need of miracles:
from the Prophet merely, he believed. (4)
But? why is it (so ordered) that he sees
(Philip) not before he goes to Jerusalem, but
after he has been there? It was not meet
that he should see the Apostles under _perse-
cution. Because* he was yet weak, the Pro-
phet was not easy; (but yet the Prophet)
catechized him. For even now, if any of you
would apply himself to the study of the Pro-
phets, he would need no miracles. And, if


2 ro atugov, above, p. 122, 2. Comp. x. § 5. of the Eleven
Homilies, t. xii. p. 393. ‘‘ Admire how this man, barbarian as
he was, and alien, and liable to be puffed up with his great
authority, demeaned himself towards a man, poor, beggarly,
unknown, whom until then he had never set eyes on... . It
our rulers now, believers though they be, and taught to be
humble-minded, and with nothing of the barbarian about
them, meeting in the public place, I do not say an unknown
stranger, but one whom they know, would be in no great
hurry to give him a seat beside him (in their carriage), how
came this man to condescend so much to a perfect stranger—
for I will not cease to insist upon this—a stranger, I say, one
whom he had never seen, a mean-looking person, apt to be de-
spised for his appearance, as to bid him mount and sit beside
him? Yet this he did, and to his tongue committed his salva-
tion, and endured to put himself in the position of a learner:
yea, beseeches, intreats, supplicates, saying, ‘I pray thee, of
whom saith the Prophet this?’ and receives with profound
attention what he says. And not only so, but having re-
ceived, he was not remiss, did not put off, did not say, ‘ Let
me get back to my own country, let me see my friends, my
family, my kinsfolk ’—which is what many Christians say now-
a-days when called to baptism: ‘let me get to my country, let
me see my wife, let me see my children with my other kins-
folk: with them present, and making holiday with me, so will
l enjoy the benefit of baptism, so partake of the Grace.’ But
not these words spake he, the barbarian: Jew as he was, and
trained to make strict account of places, especially with (the
Law) ever sounding in his ears the duty of observing the
Place, insomuch that he had gone a long journey to Jerusa-
lem, on purpose that he might worship in the place which God
commanded: and behold, all at once casting away all that he
had been used to in this regard, and relinquishing this strict
observance of place, no sooner is the discourse finished, and
he sees a fountain by the roadside, than he says, ‘ See, here is
water, what doth hinder me to be baptized?’ ”’

3 The letters (a) (4) denote the order_of the two parts in
Mss. and Edd.

4 dca To agbeves ert: Edd, give this to the preceding sentence,
and then: Ovdé mpdrepov ovtws iy (evKoAoV, ws OTe O mpodyTys
avrov KaTnxynoev: ‘nor was it so easy before, as (it was) when
the Prophet had catechized him :’’ which 1s irrelevant to the
question : for Philip might have found him engaged in the
same study then as afterwards. The old text has: ovx hv
eUKOAOS, 0 TpodyTNs yap avTov Katyxnoev, but A. rightly omits
yap. Something is wanting; e. g. either, ‘“‘ until Philip cate-
chized him,” or rather, ‘‘ but yet the prophet catechized him.”’
What follows is much confused inthe Mss. By ** the prophecy
itself’? Chrys. probably means more than the two verses given
in the Acts, viz. Isai. lili. 7-12.—‘‘ It is likely he had heard that
He had been crucified,”’ so C. D. F. (i. e. as appears further
on, the eunuch when at Jerusalem had heard of the Cruci-
fixion, had seen the rent in the rocks, etc., another reason why
it was fit that he should have first visited Jerusalem:) but B.,
‘*Perhaps he had wot heard:’’ and E. Edd., ‘‘Hence he
learnt.’’ After ‘‘ taken from the earth,’’ C. alone has, «ai 7a
aAAa ba" (Sic) a4uaptiay ovK eroinoerv, the others, oTe au. ovK er.
after which Savile alone adds, *‘nor was guile found in His
mouth.’ After éoravpw8n something is wanting, e. g. vow ée
€uadev or xatnx7On. In xai ta adda there seems to be a refer-
ence to the sequel in ‘“the prophecy itself,’’ viz. ‘‘ and the rest
which may be read in Isaiah, as that He did no sin,”’ etc.—A.,
as usual, omits the whole passage: E. refashions it thus;
‘*Hence He learnt that He was crucified, that His life is
taken away from the earth, that He did no sin, that He pre-
vailed to save others also, that His generation is not to be de-
clared, that the rocks were rent, that the veil was torn, that
dead men were raised from the tombs: or rather, all these
things Philip told him,”’ etc. so Edd.


126 THES WORKS: OF


ol: CHRYSOUStGAL


[HomILy XIX.


you please, let us take in hand the prophecy
itself. “ie was led. ‘as. a sheep to: the
slaughter; and like a lamb dumb before his
shearer, so opened He not His mouth: in His
humiliation His judgment was taken away:
and who shall declare His generation? for
His life is taken from the earth. * (v. 22, 23.)
It is likely he had heard that He was cruci-
fied, [and now he learns], that “His life is
taken away from the earth,” and the rest:
that ‘‘He did no sin, nor deceit in His
mouth:” that He prevailed to save others
also: [and] who He is, Whose generation is
unutterable. It is likely he had seen the
riven rocks there (on the spot), and (had
heard) how the veil was rent, and how there
was darkness, and so forth: and all these
things Philip mentioned, merely taking his
text from the Prophet. It is a great thing,
this reading of the Scriptures! That was ful-
filled which was spoken by Moses, “ Sitting,
lying down, rising up, and walking, remember
the Lord thy God:" (Deut. vi.7,) For the
roads, especially when they are lonely, give
us opportunity for reflection, there being none
to disturb us. Both this man is on the road,
and Paul on the road: howbeit the latter no
man draws, but Christ alone. This was too
great a work for the Apostles: and, greater
still, in that, the Apostles being at Jerusalem,
and no person of authority at Damascus, he
nevertheless returned thence converted: yet
those at Damascus knew that he did not come
from Jerusalem converted, for he brought
letters, that he might put the believers in
bonds. Like a consummate Physician, when
the fever was at its height, Christ brought
help to him: for it was needful that he should


* In the quotation the N. T. follows the LXX. (Is. liii: 7, 8),
which but imperfectly renders the original. The meaning is
obscure in Hebrew, but the best rendering is probably that of
the R. V. which renders v. 8 thus: ‘* By oppression and judgment
he was taken away ; and as for his generation, who anwong them
considered that he was cut off out of the land of the living?”
for which the LXX. and N. T. have: ‘In his humiliation his
judgment was taken away: His generation who shall declare,
for his life is taken from the earth.”’ It is almost useless to in-
quire what the LXX. translators could have meant by this
rendering. Concerning the meaning of the first clause, there
are four theories: (1) The judgment announced by His
enemies was taken away, i. e., annulled by God (Bengel,
Lechler). (2) His judicial power was taken away during his
humiliation, i, e., he did not appear as men’s judge (Humph-
rey). (3) His judgment (punishment) was taken away, i. e.,
ended—by death (Meyer, Robinson). (4) The judgment due
him—the rights of justice—was withheld by his enemies
(Gloag, Hackett).

The latter part of the LXX. trans.: ‘‘ who shall declare,”
etc., has been understood in the following ways: (1) Who
shall declare his divine Sonship ?—the reference being to the
“eternal generation”’ of the Son (the Patristic view). (2) Who
shall declare the number of his spiritual seed, i. e.. predict
the extent of his kingdom? (the Reformers). (3) Who shall
declare the wickedness of his contemporaries, for he was put
to death (Meyer, De Wette, Lechler, Alford, Gloag). This
interp. assigns to the word ‘generation,’ the same mean.
ing which the R. V. gives to it in the original passage and
is the preferable view. It should be admitted that this is
a probable theory of what the LXX. ought to have meant by
the words which they used; that they did consciously mean
this is far less certain.—G. B. S.


be quelled in the midst of his frenzy. For
then most of all would he be brought down,
and condemn himself as one guilty of dread-
ful audacity. (a) For these things Paul
deplores himself, saying, ‘“ Howbeit for this
cause I obtained mercy, that in me first Jesus
Christ might show all His long suffering.
(1 Tim. i. 13-16.) Verily one has reason
to admire this eunuch. He did not see
Christ, he saw no miracle: he beheld Jeru-
salem standing yet entire (cwecrara): he
believed Philip. How came he to behave
thus? His soul was earnest (wewepyuvyuéry).
Yet the thief (on the cross) had seen mira-
cles: the wise men had seen a star; but this
man, nothing of the kind. So great a thing
is the careful reading of the Scriptures!
What of Paul then! did he not study the law?
But he, it seems to me, was specially reserved,
for the purpose which I have already men-
tioned by anticipation, because Christ would
fain draw to Himself the Jews by induce-
ments from every quarter. For had _ they
been in. their right mind, nothing was so
likely to do them good as this; for this, more
than miracles and all else, was calculated to
attract them: as,* on the other hand, nothing
is so apt to prove a stumbling block to men of
duller minds. See then how, after the Apos-
tle, we have God also doing miracles. They
accused the Apostles after these [miracles of
theirs}; they cast them into prison: see
thereupon God doing the miracles. For
instance, the bringing them out of prison,
was His miracle: the bringing Philip, His
miracle: the bringing Paul over, was His.—
Observe in what way Paul is honored, in
what way the eunuch. There, Christ appears,
probably because of his hardness, and because
Ananias* would not (else) have been per-
suaded. Conversant with these wonders, let
us show ourselves worthy. But many in these
times, even when they come to church, do not
know what is read ; whereas the eunuch, even
in public (é7 ayopac) and riding in his chariot,
applied himself to the reading of the Script-
ures. Not so you: none takes the Bible
in hand: nay, everything rather than the
Bible.

Say, what are the Scriptures for?
much as in you lies, it is all undone.


For as
What is


1 @omep ody ovdev ot Tw TkavdadrcCety ElwHe TOUS maxUTEpOUS: i.e.
Saul’s conversion would have weighed with the Jews ei voov
eixov, but it was a great stumbling-block to them as mayvrepot:
*“as indeed nothing is so apt to prove a stumbling-block to
men of duller minds,”’ as this is—viz. the sudden conversion of
one of their own party to the opposite side.

2 Kat OTL ovK ay ereiobn ’Avavias, A. B. C. But Edd. omit
Ananias: ‘‘ because he (Paul) would not otherwise have been
persuaded.’’ In the next sentence, C. F. have ’Evtpedomevor,
“nurtured:”’ B, evtpupertes, “ luxuriating:’’ A. E. D. Edd.
evoTpepomevor,


- Homity XIX.] THE ACTS OF


PHE “AGOST LES


127


the Church for? Tie up?! the Bibles: per-
haps the judgment would not be such, not
such the punishment: if one were to bury
them in dung, that he might not hear them, he
would not so insult them as you do now. For
say, what is the insult there? That the man
has buried them. And what here? That we
do not hear them. Say, when is a _ person
most insulted—when he is silent, and one
makes no answer, or, when he does speak
(and is unheeded)? So that the insult is
greater in the present case, when He does
speak and thou wilt not hear: greater the
contempt. “Speak not to us” (Is. xxx. 10),
we read, they said of old to the Prophets : but
ye do worse, saying, Speak:* we will not do.
For there they turned them away that they
should not even speak, as feeling that from
the voice itself they got some sort of awe and
obligation ; whereas you, in the excess of your
contempt, do not even this. Believe me, if
you stopped our® mouths by putting your
hands over them, the insult would not be
sO great as it is now. For say, whether shows
greater contempt, he that hears, even when
hindering by this action, or, he that will not
even hear? Say—if we shall look at it asa
case of an insult offered—suppose one person
to check the party insulting him, and to stop
his mouth, as being hurt ‘by the insults, and
another person to show no concern, but pre-
tend not even to hear them: whether will
show most contempt? Would you not say
the latter? For the former shows that he
feels himself hit: the latter all but stops the
mouth of God. Did ye shudder at what was
said? Why, the mouth by which God speaks,
is the mouth of God. Just as our mouth is
the mouth of our soul, though the soul has no
mouth, so the mouth of the Prophets is the
mouth of God. Hear, and shudder. There,
common (to the whole congregation) stands
the deacon crying aloud, and saying, “‘ Let us
attend to the reading.” It is the common
voice of the whole Church, the voice which he
utters, and yet none does attend. After him
begins the Reader, “The Prophecy of
Esaias,” and still none attends, although
Prophecy has nothing of man in it. Then


1 dngov. i.e. tie them up, and keep them shut, E. Edd. xara-
xwoov, “ Bury.” Below, for cai wi axovor avtav, we read wa
un. C. however has axover, which may imply that the sentence
should be joined to the preceding one, ov ToLavTH KoAaats, €l TIs
KaTAXWOELEV avTa év KOT Pw, Kal €t Te) aKoveL avuT@v : “not such
the punishment, were one to bury, etc., as it is if he refuse to
peas them.’

2 All the Mss. and Edd. Mn Aadeire, ‘“*Speak not.”’ But the
context plainly requires the sense, ‘Speak on, if you will: we
will not do what you bid us:” though it should rather be,
Ovx« dKovouer.

3 E, vucv, “ your mouths,” so Edd. except Sav. and below,
6 axovwv Kal uy TecBdnevos merCovws katadpovec, where the old
text has, 0 axovwv meg. kat. kai dia TovTov KwAvwy, ‘ by this,”’
viz. by putting his hand on the speaker’s mouth.


after this, he says, ‘‘ Thus saith the Lord, 4
and still none attends. Then after this
punishments and vengeances, and still even
then none attends. But what is the common
excuse? “It is always the same things over
again.’ This it is most of all, that ruins you.
Suppose you knew the things, even so you
certainly ought not to turn away : since in the
theatres also, is it not always the same things
acted over again, and still you take no dis-


gust?) How dare you talk about “ the same
things,’ you who know not so much as the
names of the Prophets? Are you _ not


ashamed to say, that this is why you do not
listen, because it is “the same things over
again,” while you do not know the names
of those who are read, and this, though always
hearing the same things? You have yourself
confessed that the same things are said.
Were I to say this as a reason for finding
fault with you, you would need to have re-
course to quite a different excuse, instead of
this which is the very thing you find fault
with.—Do not you exhort your son? Now if
he should say, “ Always the same things !”
would not you count it an insult? It would
be time enough to talk of “the same things,”
when we both knew the things, and exhibited
them in our practice, Or rather, even then,
the reading of them would not be superfluous.
What equal to Timothy? tell me that: and
yet to him says Paul, “Give attention to
reading, to exhortation. (Tim. iv. 13.) For
it is not possible, I say not possible, ever to
exhaust the mind of the Scriptures. It is a
well which has no bottom. “I said,’’ saith
the Preacher, ‘‘I am become wise:°* and then
it departed from me.”— (Eccles. vii. 24.)
Shall I show you that the things are not “the
same?” How many persons, do you sup-
pose, have spoken upon the Gospels? And
yet all have spoken in a way which was new
and fresh. For the more one dwells on them,
the more insight does he get, the more does
he behold the pure light. Look, what a
number of things I am going to speak of :—
say, what is narrative? what is prophecy?
what is parable? what is type? what is alle-
gory? what is symbol? what are Gospels?
Answer me only to this one point, which is


4 When the Deacon had ordered silence by proclaiming, if
need were, several times, IIpovéxwyer ! the Reader commenced
the Lesson, if from the Old Testament or the Gospels, with
the formula, Tade Aéyec Kvpios, *‘ Thus saith the Lord:”’ (for


the Epistles, with, ‘*‘ Dearly beloved Brethren.’’) See Hom.
in 2 Thess. ili. § 4, p. 527. D.
5 Elrov, éaodicOnv, dyat, Kai TOTE ameorn an’ éuov. Ben. ren-


dering the passage with Erasmus, ‘* Deceptus sum, et tunc
recessit a me,’ remarks, ‘‘I do not see how this agrees with
what precedes.’’ The Paris Editor, “ Nowz. ingutunt, et tum
mihi effiuxit,’ as if it were a proverb. In the LAX. it. is,
Eira, codicOncouat, kai ality é€uaxpivOn an’ euov. E, V. “I
said I will be wise, but it was far from me.”


128 THE WORKS (OF SP? (Coin yY SOS f@nr [Homity XIX.
plain: why are they called Gospels, “good good tidings? For they tell the same things :
tidings?” And yet ye have often heard that|for instance, ‘* The lame shall leap as an
good news ought to have nothing sad in it:|hart.” (Is. xxxv. 6.) “The Lord shall
yet this “ good news ” has abundance of sad-} give the word to them that preach the
ness init. “ Their fire,” it saith, “shall never| Gospel” (Ps. Ixviii. 11): and, “A new
be quenched: their worm shall not die:”|heaven and a new earth.” (Is. lxv. 17.)
(Mark ix. 44.) ‘Shall appoint his portion,” | Why are not those alsacalled Gospels? But


it saith, ‘ with the hypocrites,” with them that
are ‘‘cut asunder: then shall He say, I know


you not: Depart from Me, ye that work ini-
quity?”'’ (Mattexxiv: 1. vitzs 23.) | Surely, 2
we do not deceive ourselves, when we


imagine that we tell you in your own mother-
tongue (‘E#Amuori) these good tidings? You
look downcast; you are stunned; you are
struck all of a heap, unable to hold up your
heads. “Good news” should have nothing in
it of a duty to be done, but rather should
counsel what is good: whereas these “ Gos-
pels” have endless duties to be done. And
again, to mention other things, as for instance,
Except 4 man hate father and mother, he is
not worthy of Me” (Luke xiv, 26): and
“T am not come to bring peace upon earth,
but a sword” (Matt. x. 34; Luke xii. 51): and
“In the world ye shall have tribulation—
John xvi. 33.) excellent? good tidings these,
are they not! For good news is such as
this—‘* You shall have this and that good
thing :” as in common life men say one to
another, “What shall I have for my good
news? Your father is coming, or, your
mother :’
this or that.”—Again, tell me, how do the
Gospels differ from the Prophets? Why
are not the Prophecies also called Gospels,


1*Apa wy amaTouev EavTovs, vouiCovTes TavTa éAAnVLOTL Liv
Aéyey; Mss. and Edd., dpa « without the interrogation.
Ben. “/gitur ne decipiamus nosmetipsos hec Greco more
dici.’ The meaning seems to be, ** When we tell you these
things as evayyéAva, da we deceive ourselves in thinking that
we are speaking Greek—that we are using the term aright ?—
Yet to judge from your looks, one may see that they are any-
thing but evayyeAca to you. ‘Ypets Katnpeite, Upets KeKabwobe:
amoTmAnKTOL TUyXaveTe KaTwW KUmTOVTEs.’’ The innovator (E.
Edd.) quite alters the meaning, as if it were, ‘‘ You look as in-
different as if it were no concern of yours;’’ viz. ‘‘Or, have
you nothing to do with these things? But you are struck deaf
(exw pune), and as if you were in a fit, hang down your
heads.’’—Below, for cat maAuv érepa ep, olor, the same have,
olamep €OTL Kal TA TovavtTa, such as are also these.’

* Edd. Kada ye: pv yap tavta evayyeAra. read Kadaye (ovyap; )
TavTa evayyedca. In the next sentence, Tc po. Tov evayyeAtwr ;
Ben. “ Quid mihi est evangeliorum.”


st


Why Gospels?


he does not say, “ You must do_
_aloss, let another seek the answer, and contrib-


/now we will hold our peace.


if, while you do not so much as know what
“Gospels” mean, you so despise the reading
of the Scriptures, what shall I say to you ?—
Let me speak of something else. Why four
Gospels? why not, ten? why not twenty? If
“many have taken in hand to set forth a
narrative ” (Luke i. 1), why not one person?
Why they that were disciples (i. e. Apos-
tles)? why they that were not disciples? But
why any Scriptures at all? And yet, on the
contrary, the Old Testament says, “I will
give you a New Testament.” (Jer. xxxi. 31.)
Where are they that say, ‘“ Always the same
things?” If ye knew these, that, though a
man should live thousands of years, they are
not “the same things,” ye would not say this.
Believe me, I will not tell you the answers to
any of these questions; not in private, not in
public: only, if any find them out, I will nod
assent. For this is the way we have made you
good-for-nothing, by always telling you the
things ready to your hands, and not refusing
when we ought. Look, you have questions
enough: consider them, tell me the reasons.
Why not Prophecies? Why
duties, to be done, in the Gospels ? If one is at


ute each to the others from what he has: but
For if what has
been spoken has done you no good, much less
would it, should we add more. We only pour
water into a vessel full of holes. And the
punishment too is all the greater for you.
Therefore, we will hold our peace. Which
that we may not have to do, it rests with your-
selves. For if we shall see your diligence,
perhaps we will again speak, that both ye may
be more approved, and we may rejoice over
you, in all things giving glory to the God and
Father of our Lord Jesus Christ : to Him be
glory and dominion now and ever, and world
without end. Amen.


Homity XX.]


THE ACTS (OF THE APOSTLES:


129


HOMILY XX.


ACTS IX 10; 12>


** And there was a certain disciple at Damascus, named
Ananias; and to him said the Lord ina vision,
Ananias. And he said, Behold, I am _ here,
Lord. And the Lord said unto him, Arise, and go
into the street which is called Straight, and inquire
in the house of Judas for one called Saul, of Tarsus:
for, behold, he prayeth, and hath seen in a vision
a man named Ananias coming in, and putting his
hand on him, that he might receive his sight.”


Wuat may be the reason that He neither
drew any one of high authority and impor-
tance, nor caused such to be forthcoming for
the purpose of instructing Paul?! It was,
because it was not meet that he should be
induced by men, but only by Christ Himself:
as in fact this man taught him nothing, but
merely baptized him; for, as soon as baptized
(guticbeic), he was to draw upon himself the
grace of the Spirit, by his zeal and exceeding |
earnestness. And that Ananias was no very
distinguished person, is plain. For, ‘“ the)
Lord,” it says, ‘‘spake unto him in a vision,
and Ananias answered and said, Lord, I have
heard by many of this man, how much evil he
hath done to Thy saints at Jerusalem.” (v.
13.) For if he spoke in objection to Him,
much more would he have done so, had He
sent an Angel. And this is why, in the former
instance, neither is Philip told what the matter
is; but he sees the Angel, and then the Spirit |
bids him go near to the chariot. But observe
here how the Lord relieves him of his fear:
“He is blind,” saith He, “and prayeth, and
art thou afraid?” Inthe same way Moses
also is afraid: so that the words betokened
that he was afraid, and shrunk from the task, |
not that he did not believe. He said, “I
have heard from many concerning this man.”
What sayest thou? God speaketh, and thou
hesitatest? They did not yet well know the:
power of Christ.


‘““And here he hath author- |
ity from the chief priests to bind all that call,
on Thy name.” (v. 14.) How was that|
known? It is likély that they, being in fear, |


1 Ccumen. adds from some other source, *‘ but Ananias who |
was one of the Seventy:’' and afterwards, ‘* And this Ananias |
was a deacon, as Paul himself testifies in the Canons:”’ the late |
ter from Ammonius the Presbyter, in the Catena.—Below, Kai |
Ore (Cat., "Ore yapjov trav odddpa excajuwy hv, SnAov, C. comp. p. |
279. But Edd. ‘‘ But that Ananias also was one of the very
distinguished persons, is plain both from what (the Lord) re- |
veals and says to him, and from what he himself says in an- |
swer: Lord, I have heard,” etc.‘ |


9


made minute enquiries. He does not say
this, as thinking that Christ does not know
the fact, but, “such being the case, how,”’ says
he, “can these things be?” As in fact those
(in the Gospel) say, “‘ Who can be saved ? ’—
(Mark x. 26.) This is done, in order that
Paul may believe him that shall come to him:
“he hath seen in a vision:” it hath showed
him beforehand: “he prayeth,” saith (the
Lord): fear not. And observe, He speaks
not to him of the success achieved: teaching
us not to speak of our achievements, And,”
though He saw him afraid, for all this He
said it not. ‘‘ Thou shalt not be disbelieved :”
“he hath seen,” saith He, “in a vision a man
(named) Ananias:” for this is why it was
“in a vision,’ namely, because he was blind.
And not even the exceeding wonderfulness of
the thing took possession ot the disciple’s
mind, so greatly was he afraid. But observe:
Paul being blind, in this way He restored to
sight. ‘ But the Lord said unto him, Go thy
way: for he is a chosen vessel unto Me, to
bear My name before the Gentiles, and kings,
and the children of Israel: for I will show
him how great things he must suffer for My
name’s sake.” (v. 15, 16.) ‘ Not only,” saith
He, “shall he be a believer, but even a
teacher, and great boldness shall he show:
‘before Gentiles and kings’—such shall be
the spread of the doctrine !—that just as He
astonished (him) by the former, so He may
(startle him even more) by the latter ‘“ And
Ananias went, and entered into the house, and
laid his hands upon him, and said, Brother


2 Kai doBovmevov idwv, ovdé ovTws elmev. Ovdx amcatnOynon.
The mod. t. prefixes MaAAov S€, and adds, adda te; "Avacras
mopevOnr, ‘* Nay, even seeing him afraid, even then He said
not, Thou shalt not be disbelieved: (Erasm. negligently, Be
not unbelieving:) but what? Arise,’ etc. So Morel. Sav,
but Ben. puts a full stop at iéwv: as if the meaning were, “ be-
cause He would teach us,” etc.: or rather. because He also
saw him to be afraid. Nor did He speak thus. Thou shalt
not,” etc. But the full stop should be placed at elwev: ‘‘ nay,
though he saw him afraid, He did not tell him what had hap-

ened to Paul—the victory He had won over this adversary.
se only, Fear not to be disbelieved for he hath seen,’’
Ete;

3 iva worep ekerAntTev TOUTY, OUTW Kaxeivw, (Sav. Marg. TovTO,
kaxecvo.) ‘* That as He (Christ) astonished (Ananias) by the
one, so He may by the other.”’ tovrw, by the announcement of
Saul as a believer; éxetvw, by that of his becoming a preacher,
and before Gentiles and kings. (Chrys. is negligent in his use
of the pronouns odtos and éxetvos.) Or it may be, “that as he
(Saul) astonished (men) by his conversion, so by his wonderful
boldness as a preacher.—E. Edd. omit this, and substitute, ‘‘ as
to prevail over all nations and kings.”


THE WORKS OF ySi) -GHky SOS tae


[HomiLty XX.


Saul”’—he straightway addresses him as a
friend by that name—‘ Jesus, Who appeared
unto thee in the way in which thou camest”—
and yet Christ had not told him this, but he
learnt it from the Spirit—‘‘ hath sent me unto
thee, that thou mayest receive thy sight, and
be filled with the Holy Ghost.” (v. 17.) As
he said this, he laid his hands upon him.
“ And immediately there fell from his eyes as
it had been scales.” (v. 18.) Some say this
was a sign of his blindness. Why did he not
blind his eyes (entirely)? This was more won-
derful, that, with his eyes open, he did not See:
(v. 8) which was just his case in respect Of
the Law, until’ the Name of Jesus was put on
him. “And he received sight forthwith, and
arose, and was baptized. And having taken
food, he recovered strength.” (v. 19.) He
was faint, therefore, both from his journey and
from his fear; both from hunger, and from
dejection of mind. Wishing therefore to
deepen his dejection, He made the man blind
until the coming of Ananias: and, that he
might not imagine the blindness to be (only)
fancy, this is the reason of the scales. He
needed no other teaching: that which had be-
fallen was made teaching (to him). ‘“ And he
was with the disciples which were at Damascus
certain days. And straightway in the syn-
agogues he preached Jesus,” that He is the
Son of God.” (v. 20.) See, straightway he was
a teacher in the synagogues. He was nota
ashamed of the change, was not afraid while
the very things in which he was glorious afore-
time, the same he destroyed. Even® from his
first appearance on the stage here was a man,
death-dealing, ready for deeds of blood : seest
thou what a manifest sign (was here)? And
with this very thing, he put all in fear: for,
said they, Hither also is he come for this very
thing.. “ But all that heard him were amazed,
and said: Is not this he that destroyed them
which called on this name in Jerusalem, and
came hither for that intent, that he might
bring them bound unto the chief priests ?
But Saul increased the more in strength, and


1 ‘“* But when was the name of Jesus put upon Paul, that he
should recover his sight? Here is either something wrong in
the text, or we must say that Ananias put the name of Jesus
on Paul, when, having laid his hands on him, he told him that
it was Jesus from whom he should receive his sight.’’ Ben.,—
who surely must have overlooked the clause omep eradev emt Tov
vomov, to which these words belong.—Above, Tivés dace tis
Tpwrews Elva TOUTS onmecov, the meaning is, that this falling
off the scales, etc., isan emblem of his mental blindness, and
of his recovery therefrom, The innovator, not understanding
this, alters it to, Tavtas tivés hace THS m7. aVTOU eEivat aiTias.
‘** Some say that these were the cause of his blindness: ’? which
is accepted by Edd.—And below, *‘ lest any should imagine,”
etc., where zs, E. bracketted by Sav., adopted by the other
Edd. is due to the same hand.

2 For ‘Ingody (the reading accredited by the leading author-
ities in v. 20) here and in the second exposition, E. alone has
Xptorov (with text recept.) adopted by Edd.

3 Kai ev@ews éx mpooiniwv, Oavatav 0 avOpwros Hv viz. ch. Vii.
58. C. has @avatwyv, for which A. conjecturally substitutes
bavpactos.


confounded the Jews which dwelt at Damas-
cus, proving that this is very Christ.” (v. 21,
22.) As one learned in the Law, he stopped
their mouths, and suffered them not to speak.
They thought they were rid of disputation in
such matters, in getting rid of Stephen, and
they found another, more vehement than
Stephen.*

(Recapitulation.) Butlet us look at what re-
lates to Ananias.* The Lord said not to him,
Converse with him. and catechize him. For if,
when He said, “ He prayeth, and hath seen a
man laying his hands upon him.” (v. 11, 12.)
He did not persuade him, much less had He
said this. So that he shall not disbelieve
thee, “he hath seen in a vision.” Observe
how in the former instance neither is Philip
told all immediately. Fear not, He saith::
“for this man is a chosen vessel for Me.
(v. 15.) He more than sufficiently released
him of his fear, if the case be so that this man
shall be so zealous in our cause, as even to


* The narratives given by Paul himself of his conversion in
Acts xxii. and xxvi. as well as allusion to the subjects in his
epistles, present some harmonistic difficulties, which have,
however, been greatly exaggerated by a criticism which is
unfavorable to the historical character of the Acts. The con-
stant factors in all the accounts are: the light from heaven,
the voice of Jesus and Saul’s answer, and the solemn charge
commissioning Saul to bear the name of Christ to the Gentiles.
In Acts xxvi. the interview with Ananias is omitted ; in chap.
Xxil. it is narrated, but the occasion of Ananias’ going to
Saul is not given; in chap. ix. the Lord is represented as speak-
ing to him and bidding him go, and it is affirmed that at the
same time Saul has a vision of his coming. In xxii. the address
of Ananias is considerably more extended than in ix. Some
minor points of difference have been noted, as: in ix. 7 it is
said that Saul’s companions heard the voice but saw no one,
while in xxii. 9, it is said that they saw the light but heard not
the voice of Him whospoke. The discrepancy is resolved by
many by translating jKoveayr (xxii. g) ‘‘ understood ’’—an admis-
sable sense (so, Lechler, Hackett, Lange). It is certainly an
unwarranted criticism which rejects the common matter of the
various narratives upon the ground of such incidental varia-
tions in the traditions in which a great and mysterious expe-
rience has been preserved.—G. B. S

4 Skevos dé kadeitat dikaiws: Seckvivtos Tov Adyou dre ovK éoTL
gpvotkn 7 Kakia* oKEvos, Pyaiv, exAoyns: To Soxisov yap exAey-
oueGa, A. B.C. N. i.e. ‘‘Justly is he called a oxevos, for he is
well-fitted for the work of Christ by his energy and earnest-
ness. These need but to be turned to the right objects. It is
contrary to right reason to say. that evil is a2 physical quality
or essence, and therefore unchangeable. (See this argued
Hlon. ix. in Matt. p. 596.) A fit implement, therefore, and of
no common kind: a oxevos éexAoyys, of all others to be chosen,
because of its approved suitableness for the purpose.’’ Thus
St. Chrysostom constantly interprets this expression. Hom.
Xviil. 272 Rom. § 6 t. ix. 638. ‘‘ When the stars were created,
the Angels admired: but this man Christ Himself admired,
saying, A chosen vessel isthismanto Me!” Com. zn c.1. Gad.
§ 9, t. x. 674 ‘‘ Called me by His grace. Yet God saith, that He
called Him, because of his virtue, (6a Thy aperyy,) saying, A
chosen vessel, etc.: i.e. fit to doservice, and do a great work. .
But Paul himself everywhere ascribes it all to grace.”’ Howz.
ili, 72 « Time. § 1,t. xi. 562. ‘*God, foreknowing what he would
be before he began to preach, saith, A chosen vessel,etc. For
as they who in war bear the royal standard, the /adarumz as we
call it, have need of much skill and bravery not to deliver it
into the enemy’s hands, so they that bear the name of Christ,’’
etc. And de Compunct. ad Demetr. lib. i. § 9, t. i138. ‘* Since
grace will have our part, (7a map’ yuov Cnrer,) therefore some
it follows and abides with, from some it departs, and to the
rest it never even reaches. And to show that God first exam-
ined well the bent of-the will (mpoatpeots,) and thereupon gave
the grace before this blessed man had done aught wonderful,
hear what the Lord saith of him: A chosen vessel,’’ etc.—The
modern text: ‘‘ And having said =xevos, so as to show that the
evil in him (7 kakta avtov) is not physical, He adds, éxAoyjs, to
declare that he is also approved; for,’’ etc.—C£cumen. de(kvvaw
OTe OUK eoTt dugtKH 7 Kakia avTw, ‘* The Lord shows that vice is
not natural to him.”’


HomILy XX.] THE: - ACTS OF


THE #POSTLEs,


131


suffer many things. And justly he is called
“a vessel” (or, instrument)—for reason
shows that evil is not a physical quality: “a
vessel of election” (or, chosen instrument),
He saith; for we choose that which is ap-
proved. And let not any imagine, that
(Ananias) speaks in unbelief of what was told
him, as imagining that Christ was deceived :
far from it! but affrighted and trembling, he
did not even attend to what was said, at hear-
ing the name of Paul. Moreover, the Lord
does not tell that He has blinded him: at the
mention of his name fear had prepossessed
his soul: “see,” he says, “to whom Thou art
betraying me: ‘and hither for this very pur-
pose is he come, to bind all that call upon
Thy Name.’ I fear, lest he take me to Jeru-
salem: why dost Thou cast me into the mouth
of the lion?” He is terrified, even while he
speaks these words; that from every quarter
we may learn the energetic character (dperj)
of the man. For that these things should be
spoken by Jews, were nothing wonderful : but
that these (the believers) are so terrified, it is
a most mighty proof of the power of God.
Both the fear is shown, and the obedience
greater after the fear. For there was indeed
need of strength. Since He says, “a vessel
of election,” that thou mayest not imagine
that God is to do all, He adds, “to bear My
Name before Gentiles and kings, and the chil-
dren of Israel. Ananias has heard what he
most desired—that against the Jews also he
will take his stand: this above all gave him
courage. ‘For I,” saith He, “will show him
how great things he must suffer for My
Name’s sake.” At the same time also this is
said by way of putting Ananias to the blush:
If he, that was so frantic, shall suffer all
things, and thou not willing even to baptize
him! “It is well,” saith he: “let him con-
tinue blind” (this? is why he says these
words): “he is blind: why dost Thou at all
bid me open his eyes, that he may bind (men)


again?” Fear not the future: for that open-
ing of his eyes he will use not against you,


but for you (with reference to that saying,
‘that he may receive: his) sight’: (v. 12),
these words are spoken): for not only will he
do you no harm, but he “will suffer many
things.” And what is wonderful indeed is,


1 $a tovTo tTavTa Aé€ye. i.e. Ananias’ objection, (v. 13) in
fact comes to this: this was the feeling which prompted
his words. The innovator substitutes, éca todro vuv quepos,
ave . . “therefore is he now gentle, because he is blind:” E.
Edd.—The meaning is; “In saying, ‘I will show him how
much he shall suffer,’ etc. the Lord rebukes Ananias’ reluc—
tance to baptize him, and restore his sight: his answer, ‘ Lord,


I have heard,’ etc. was in fact as good as saying, Let him |


remain blind, it is better so.’’ The parenthetic, mpds 70, "Iva
avaBAeWy, TavTa elpnrat, looks like a marginal note of one who
did not perceive the connection.—E. makes it, ‘‘To that say-
ing, ‘ That he may receive his sight,’ let this be added.”


*that he shall first know “ how great things
he shall suffer,” and then shall take the field
against the perils.—*‘ Brother Saul, the Lord
Jesus ’—he saith not, “* Who made thee blind,”
but, ““Who appeared with thee in the way,
hath sent me unto thee that thou mayest
receive thy sight” (v. 17): observe this man
also, how he utters nothing boastful, but just
as Peter said in the case of the lame man,
‘““Why look ye on us, as though by our own
power or holiness we had made him to walk,”
(ch. iii. 12) so here also he saith, “ Jesus,
Who appeared unto thee.’’ (0) Or, * (he saith
it) that the other may believe: and he saith
not, He that was crucified, the Son of God,
He that doeth wonders: but what? “He
that appeared unto thee:” (speaking) from
what the other knew: as Christ also added
no more, neither said, I am Jesus, the Cruci-
fied, the Risen: but what? ‘Whom thou
persecutest.” Ananias said not, ‘ The perse-
cuted,” that he may not seem as it were to
rave over him (ézevfovciav), to deride him,
““Who appeared unto thee in the way:” and
yet He did not (visibly) appear, but was seen
by the things done. And immediately he
added, wishing to draw a veil over the accu-
sation: “That thou mayest receive thy sight.”
I came not to reprove the past, but to bestow
the gift: “that thou mayest receive thy sight,
and be filled with the Holy Ghost.” (a)
With hands laid on, he spake these words.
“And immediately there fell from his eyes,”
etc. (v. 18): a double blindness is re-
moved.—And why saith it, ‘“‘Having taken
food, he was strengthened?” (v. 19.) Be-
cause they that are in such case become re-
laxed : he had no heart to partake of food be-
fore, until he obtained the mighty gifts. (c)
It seems to me, that both Paul and Cornelius,
at the very instant when the words were
spoken, received the Spirit. And yet (in this
case) the giver was no great one. So true is
it, that there was naught of man’s in the
things done, nor aught was done by man, but
God was present, the Doer of these things.
And at the same time (the Lord) both teaches
him to think modestly of himself, in that He
does not bring him to the Apostles who were
so admired, and shows that there is nothing
of man here. He was not filled, however,
with the Spirit which works signs: that in this
way also his faith might be shown; for he


2 Kai 70 67 @avuacrov ort mpotepov meigetat, kai toTe. So all
our Mss. (Cat. 70 zp.) We conjecture the true reading to be,
O7t mpoTepov eioeva. “he shall first know,’’ viz. ‘*how many
things he must suffer,” etc. v. 16.

3 In the Mss. and Edd. the portions here marked 4, a, c,
occur in the order a, 6,c. The clause 7 ®ore mioredoar Exeivor
being thus thrown out of its connection, perplexed the scribes:
Cat. omits 7, ‘‘ until he obtained the mighty gifts, so that he
(exetvovy, Ananias ?) believed.” A. E. F. D. reject the clause
altogether. N. wore xai 7. €.


L32


THE WORKS. OF 'ST.\CHRYSOSTONE


[HomILy XX.


wrought no miracles.
says, “in the synagogues he preached Jesus
—(v. 20) not that He is risen—not this:
no, nor that He liveth: but what? immedi-
ately he strictly expounded the doctrine—
“that this is the Son of God. And all that
heard him were amazed,” etc. (v. 21.) They
were reduced to utter incredulity. And yet
they ought not to have wondered only, but to
worship and reverence. “Is not this he,”
etc. He had not merely been a persecutor, but
* destroyed them which called on this Name”
—they did not say, “on Jesus;” for hatred,
they could not bear even to hear His name—
and what is more marvellous still, ‘‘ and came
hither for this purpose,” etc. ‘We cannot
say, that he associated with the Apostles be-
fore.’ See by how many (witnesses) he is
confessed to have been of the number of the
enemies! But Paul not only was not con-
founded by these things, nor hid his face for
shame, but “increased the more in strength,
and confounded the Jews” (v. 22), i. e. put
them to silence, left them nothing to say for
themselves, “ proving, that this is very Christ.”
““ Teaching,” it says: for this man was a
teacher.

“And after that many days were fulfilled,
the Jews took counsel to kill him.”* (v. 23.)
The Jews again resort to that valid argu-
ment (icyupav ovidoyioudv) Of theirs, not now seek-
ing false-accusers and false-witnesses; they
cannot wait for these now: but what do they?
They set about it by themselves. For as
they see the affair on the increase, they do
not even use the form of atrial. “ But their
laying await was known of Saul.
watched the gates day and night to kill him.”
(v. 24.) For this was more intolerable to
them than the miracles which had taken
place—than the five thousand, the three
thousand, than everything, in short. And
observe him, how he is delivered, not by
(miraculous) grace, but by man’s wisdom—
not as the apostles were—(éixeivo, ch. v. 19)
that thou mayest learn the energetic (aperjv)
character of the man, how he shines even
without miracles. ‘‘ Then the disciples took
him by night,” that the affair might not be
suspected, “and let him down by the wall in


“ And straightway,” it
”


* It is noticeable that in chap. xxii. 17, Paulis reported as con-
necting his going to Jerusalem directly with the narrative of
his conversion, while in Gal. i. 16, 17 he states that it was not
until three years after his conversion that he went up to Jeru-
salem. The various notices can only be matched together on
the view that the coming to Jerusalem mentioned in ix. 26 was
the same as that of Gal. 1. 18, and that this occurred about three
years after his conversion. The nmépar ixavat of v. 23 must
therefore include the time spent in Arabia (Gal. i. 17), after
which Paul must have returned to Damascus, before going up
to Jerusalem. In this way the narratives can be harmonized
without admitting a contradiction (as Baur, Zeller, De Wette);
it is probable, however, that Luke did not know of the visit to
Arabia, but connected Paul’s going to Jerusalem closely with
his conversion.—G. B.S.


And they |


a basket.” — (v. 25.) What then? having
escaped such a danger, does he flee? By no
means, but goes where he kindled them to
greater rage.


(Recapitulation, v. 20, 21.) “ And straight-
way in the synagogues he preached Jesus”
—for he was accurate in the faith—“ that
this is the Son of God. But all that
heard him were amazed,” etc., for indeed it
was incredible. ‘* But Saul increased,” etc.
Therefore “* after many days” this happens:
viz. the Jews “took counsel to kill him.
And their laying await was known of Saul.”
(v. 22-24.) What does this mean? It
is likely that for awhile he did not choose to
depart thence, though many, perhaps, besought
him ; but when he learnt it, then he permitted
his disciples : for he had disciples immediately.

‘Then, the disciples,”’. etes9.-(@v. :25)eoe
this occurrence he says: ‘The ethnarch of
Aretas the king kept the city of the Damascenes
with a garrison, desiring to apprehend me.”
(2. Cor. xi. 32.) But observe the Writer
here,! that he does not tell the story ambi-
tiously, and so as to show what an important
person Paul was, saying, ‘“‘ For they stirred up
the king,’ and so forth: but only, “ Then
the disciples took him by night, and let him
down by the wall—in a basket:” for they
sent him out alone, and none with him. And
it was well they did this: the consequence
being, that he showed himself to the Apostles in
Jerusalem. Now they sent him out, as bound
to provide for his safety by flight : but he did
just the contrary—he leaped into the midst
of those who were mad against him. This
it is to be on fire, this to be fervent indeed!
From that day forth he knew all the com-
mands which the Apostles had heard: ‘“ Ex-
cept a man take up his cross, and follow
Me.” (Matt. x. 38.) The very fact that he
had been slower to come than the rest made
him more zealous: for “to whom much is
forgiven ”’ (Luke vil. 47) the same will love
more, so that the later he came, the more he


+ The best textual authorities (A. B. C. 8.) and critics (Tisch.
W. and H., Lechler, Meyer, Gloag) here read: ‘* his (Saul’s)
disciples,’ SoR.V... . The reference is to the band of con-
verts whom he had been successful in winning at Damascus.
In Paul’s own narrative of his escape from Damascus (2 Cor.
xi. 33) he states more specifically that he was let down
“through a window, through the wall.” This may have been
either through the window of a house overhanging the wall.
or through a window in the face of some portion of the wall
(Cf. Josh. ii. 15; 1 Sam. xix. 12).—G. B. S.

! rovtov: Edd. tov evayyeAtoTnv. and below from E. alone,
“ aAAa movor oT exyyetpay Tov BactAe€a, not speaking ambitiously,
and making Paul illustrious, but only (saying) that they stirred
up the king.’’ But he does not say it, and his not saying it is
the very thing which Chrys. commends: aad’ dpa TodTov ov
didotinws A€yovTa, oVSE Aaumpoy Secxvvvta Tov II., ‘ ’Emyjyecpav
yap,”’ dyoy, ** Tov BactAéa.”’ The dnoiv here is put hypotheti-
cally, ‘tas if he had said,’’ or ‘‘ when he might have said.”
The sentence, however, requires something to complete it,
such as we have added in the translation.


Homity XX.]


loved: * * *1 and having done ten thousand
wrongs, he thought he could never do enough
to cast the former deeds into the shade.
“Proving ” (v. 22), it says: i. e. with mild-
ness teaching. And observe, they did not say
to him, Thou art he that destroyed: why art
thou changed? for they were ashamed: but
they said it to themselves. For he would
have said to them, This very thing ought to
teach you, as in fact he does thus plead in his
speech before Agrippa. Let us imitate this,
man: let us bear our souls in our hands
ready to confront all dangers.—(That he fled
from Damascus) this was no cowardice :” he
preserved himself for the preaching. Had he
been a coward, he would not have gone to
Jerusalem, would not immediately have com-
menced teaching: he would have abated
somewhat of his vehemence: for he had been
taught by the fate of Stephen. He was no
coward, but he was also prudent (oixovoucxde)
(in husbanding himself). | Wherefore he
thought it no great thing to die for the Gos-
pel’s sake, unless he should do this to great
advantage: willing not even to see Christ,
Whom most of all he longed to see, while the
work of his stewardship among men was not
yet complete. (Phil. i. 23,24). Such ought
to be the soul of a Christian. From ® his first
appearance from the very outset, the charac-
ter of Paul declared itself: nay even before
this, even in the things which he did “not
according to knowledge ” (Rom. x. 2), it was
not by man’s reasoning that he was moved to
act as he did.* Forif, so long afterwards, he
was content not to depart, much more at the
beginning of his trading voyage, when he had
but just left the harbor! Many things Christ
leaves to be done by (ordinary) human wis-
dom, that we may learn that (his disciples)
were men, that it was not all everywhere to
be done by grace: for otherwise they would
have been mere motionless logs: but in many
things they managed matters themselves.—
This is not less than martyrdom,—to shrink
from no suffering for the sake of the salvation
of the many. Nothing so delights God.
Again will I repeat what I have often said:
and I repeat it, because I do exceedingly


1 "AAN’ évedpa (N. Evedpa) eroter Tov mp@Tov xpovov, Kai wupia
nduxnxws, ovdev nyecto ixavov, x. T. A. So all our Mss. except E.
If evedpa be not corrupt, it seems to be used in a sense
unknown to the Lexicons.—Edd. from E. ‘‘ Therefore it is
that he so pillories (ornActevwv) his former life, and brands
(origwv) himself repeatedly, and thinks nothing enough,” etc.
_? Hom. xxv. in 2 Cor. p. 615. Hom. v. de Laud. S, Pauli, t.
ii 501.

3 Hom. xxvi. in 2 Cor. p. 617, B.

4 MaAAov 8 nai mpd TovTov, Kai é€v ols ov KaTa yr@ouv éroleL,
ovx (B. ovde, A. om. avOpwrivw xivotmevos Aoyrouw dterpatrero.
i.e. ‘‘ Even as a persecutor, he was not swayed by common
worldly considerations.”’ The mod. t. (Edd.) perverts the
Author’s meaning: ‘ nay even before this. For in the
things, etc. he was moved by man’s reasoning to act as he
did.


fii sore OF THE APOSTLES:


| being useful to another.


133


desire it: as Christ also did the same, when
discoursing concerning forgiveness: ‘ When
ye pray, forgive if ye have aught against any
man :” (Mark xi. 25.) and again to Peter He
said, “I say not unto thee, Forgive until
seven times, but until seventy-times seven.”
(Matt. xviii. 22.) And Himself in fact for-
gives the transgressions against Him. So do
we also, because we know that this is the
very goal of Christianity, continually discourse
thereof. Nothing is more frigid than a
Christian, who cares not for the salvation of
others. Thou canst not here plead poverty:
for she that cast down the two mites, shall be
thie: accuser. ‘(Luke xxi. 1.)°> md) Petes
said, ‘‘ Silver and gold have I none.” (Acts
iii. 6.) And Paul was so poor, that he was
often hungered, and wanted necessary food.
Thou canst not plead lowness of birth: for
they too were ignoble men, and of ignoble
parents. Thou canst not allege want of edu-
cation: for they too were “unlearned men.”
(Acts iv. 13.) Even if thou be a slave there-
fore and a runaway slave, thou canst
perform thy part: for such was Onesimus :
yet see to what Paul calls him, and to how
great honor he advances him: “that he may
communicate with me,” he says, “in my
bonds.” (Philem. ' v..-13;)", * Thou: ecanse
not plead infirmity : for such was Timothy,
having often infirmities ; for, says the apostle,
“Use a little wine for thy stomach’s sake,
and thine often infirmities.” (1 Tim. v. 23.)
Every one can profit his neighbor, if he will
fulfil his part. See ye not the unfruitful
trees, how strong they are, how fair, how
large also, and smooth, and of great height ?
But if we had a garden; we should much
rather have pomegranates, or fruitful olive
trees: for the others are for delight to the
eye, not for profit, which in them is but
small. Such are those men who only con-
sider their own interest: nay, not such even
since these persons are fit only for burning:
whereas those trees are useful both for build-
ing and for the safety of those within. Such
too were those Virgins, chaste indeed, and
decent, and modest, but profitable to none
(Matt. xxv.:1) wherefore they are burned.
Such are they who have not nourished Christ.
For observe that none of those are charged
with particular sins of their own, with forni-
cation, for instance, or with perjury ; in short,
with no sin but the having been of no use to
another. Such was he who buried his talent,
showing indeed a blameless life, but not
(ib. 25.) How can
such an one be a Christian? Say, if the
leaven being mixed up with the flour did not
change the whole into its own nature, would


134 THE “WORKS: OF


ST. \CHRYSCsT@r [Homity XXI.


such a thing be leaven? Again, if a perfume
shed no sweet odor on those who approach it,
could we call it a perfume? Say not, “It is
impossible for me to induce others (to become
Christians)’”’—for if thou art a Christian, it is
impossible but that it should beso. For as
the natural properties of things cannot be
gainsaid, so it is here: the thing is part of the
very nature of the Christian. Do not insult
God. To say, that the sun cannot shine,
would be to insult Him: to say that a Chris-
tian cannot do good, is to insult God, and call
Him a liar. For it is easier for the sun not
to give heat, nor to shine, than for the Chris-
tian not to send forth light: it is easier for
the light to be darkness, than for this to be
so. Tell me not that it is impossible: the
contrary is the impossible. Do not insult
God. If we once get our own affairs in a
right state, the other will certainly follow as a
natural and necessary consequence. It is
not possible for the light of a Christian to be
hid; not possible for a lamp so conspicuous


as that to be concealed. Let us not be care-
less. For, as the profit from virtue reaches
both to ourselves, and to those who are
benefited by it: so from vice there is a two-
fold loss, reaching both to ourselves, and to
those who are injured by it. Let there be (if
you will) some private man, who has suffered
numberless ills from some one, and let no one
take his part, yet let that man still return good
offices ; what teaching so mighty as this ? What
words, or what exhortations could equal it?
What wrath were it not enough to extinguish
and soften? Knowing therefore these
things, let us hold fast to virtue, as knowing
that it is not possible to be saved otherwise,
than by passing through this present life in
doing these good works, that we may also
obtain the good things which are to come,
through the grace and mercy of our Lord
Jesus Christ, with Whom to the Father to-
gether with the Holy Spirit be glory, might,
honor, now and ever, world without end.
Amen.


HOM TE yo


ACA Xen 2O e275


“And when Saul was come to Jerusalem, he assayed to
join himself to the disciples: but they were all
afraid of him, and believed not that he was a dis-
ciple. But Barnabas took him, and brought him
to the Apostles, and declared unto them how he
had seen the Lord in the way.”


ONE may well be much at a loss here to un-
derstand how it is that, whereas in the Epistle
to the Galatians Paul says, “I went not to Jeru-
salem,” but “into Arabia” and “ to Damascus,”
and, “‘ After three years I went up to Jerusa-
lem,” and “ to see Peter” (Gal. i. 17), (ioropjoa
Cat.) here the writer says the contrary. (There,
Paul says,) ‘“‘ And none of the Apostles saw I;
but here, it is said (Barnabas), brought him to
the Apostles.”—Well, then, either (Paul)
means, “I went not up with intent to refer
or attach myself to them (dvaféotac)—for what
saith he? “I referred not myself, neither
went I to Jerusalem to those who were Apos-
tles before me:’! or else, that the laying


1 St. Chrysostom's exposition cannot be correctly reported
here. Perhaps what he did say, was in substance as follows:
““but I went into Arabia, and returned again unto Damascus:
whence we learn, that the plot against him at Damascus was
after his return from Arabia, and then the visit (to Jerusalem),
after the escape from Damascus. Certainly of his own accord
he went not to the Apostles,”’ etc.—(So far, the first hypothesis,
viz. that the visit, Acts ix. and the visit in Gal. are one and the
same. Then) “ orelse, Paul does not mean ¢/7s visit (viz. after
the flight from Damascus), but passes it by, so that the order


/await for him in Damascus was after his
return from Arabia;? or else, again, that the
visit to Jerusalem was after he came from
Arabia. Certainly of his own accord he went
not to the Apostles, but “assayed to join him-
self unto the disciples ”—as being ® a teacher,
not a disciple—“ I went not,” he says, “for
this purpose, that I should go to those who
were Apostles before me: certainly, I learnt
nothing from them.” Or, * he does not speak


(in his narration) is as follows: I went to Arabia, then to
Damascus, then viz.,at some time during the residence in
Damascus, to Jerusalem (to see Peter), then to Syria, i. e. back
to Damascus: whereas, had he related matters fully, it should
have been, that he went into Arabia, thence to Damascus, then
to Jerusalem to see Peter, thence to Damascus again, then
again to Jerusalem after the escape from D., thence to
Czesarea.”’

2 For 7 €i wy TovTo, E. gives (as emendation) eita radu, and
execOev for amd ’ApaBias, but retains the 7 et xy TodTO of the pre-
ceding clause, which equally needs correction.

3 E. F. D. Edd. ‘‘ As zo¢ being a teacher, but a disciple:”’
the reading of A. B. C. N. is attested by Cat. Cec. but below it
is said that he joined himself to the disciples, are waOynrny ovta,
Infra, note !, p. 135.

* Here should begin the alternative to the former hypothesis
(beginning 7 totvuy tovto dyaiv) perhaps, with 7, et mn TovTO.
Cat. has amnAOov, 7APov, which we adopt, as the mention of
Syrza shows that the narrative in Gal. 1. 17-21, is referred to ;
the subject therefore of Aéyer, adinow is Paul, and tavrnv
means the visit in Acts ix. The next sentence, for 7 et nn TovTO
maduv kK. T. A. requires to be remodelled as above, e. g. d€ov
A€yetv ote €€ "ApaBias eis Aay. troatpewas, avyiAGev cis “Iepoo-
oAupa, €ita eis Aan. amnrAOe Tad, eita mad eis ‘Iepoc., eita
efeweuhOn eis Katoapetav. The reporter, or redactor, seems to
| have intended a recital of St. Paul’s movements before as well
| as atter his conversion: viz. (from Tarsus) he went up to


Homity XXI.}


of this visit, but passes it by, so that the order
is, ‘“‘I went into Arabia, then I came to
Damascus, then to Jerusalem, then to Syria:”
or else, again, that he went up to Jerusalem,
then was sent to Damascus, then to Arabia,
then again to Damascus, then to Caesarea.
Also, the visit “after fourteen years,” prob-
ably, was when he brought up the [alms to
the] brethren together with Barnabas: (Gal.
ii. 1) or else he means a different occasion.
(Acts xi. 30.) For the Historian for concise-
ness, often omits incidents, and condenses the
times. Observe how unambitious the writer
is, and how he does not even relate (related
in c. xxii. 17-21) that vision, but passes it by.
“He assayed,” it says, “to join himself to
the disciples. And they were afraid of him.”
By this again is shown the ardor of Paul’s
character: not (only) from the mouth of
Ananias, and of those who wondered at him
there, but also of those in Jerusalem: “they
believed not that he was a disciple:” for
truly that was beyond all human expectation.f
He?! was no longer a wild beast, but a man
mild and gentle! And observe how he does


Jerusalem, then was sent (by the high-priest) to Damascus:
then (after his conversion) went into Arabia (the mod. substi-
tutes, Syria): then returned to Damascus: then (omitting all
the rest) to Czesarea.—In the Comment. on Gal. i. t. X. 675, D.
Chrys. expounds thus: ‘“‘ Whereas he says, ‘I went not up,’ this
also may be said, that he went not up at the outset of his preach-
ing, and, when he did, it was not for the purpose of learning.

* Chrys. here confuses the visits of Paul to Jerusalem.
That mentioned in Acts xi. 30, was the second visit, when he
went to carry the giftof almstothe poor. The visit men-
tioned in Gal. ii.1, synchronizes with Acts xv. 1,sq., when
Paul went to attend the Apostolic council.—G. B. S.

+ The incredulity of the Christians at Jerusalem concerning
the genuineness of Saul’s conversion is difficult to understand,
especially since they must have heard of the miraculous man-
ner of it. It can, however, more readily be conceived of if, as
.We suppose, the three years absence from the city had inter-
vened, and during this period, Saul had been unheard of. The
impression might have gone abroad that he had fallen back into
his old Jewish life. ertainly the persecution which the
Christians at Jerusalem had suffered at his hands would incline
them to be incredulous concerning his conversion, unless there
were positive proof of it. When it is said (27) that Barnabas
brought Paul ‘‘to the apostles’’ in Jerusalem, we must hold
this statement subject to the modification made in Paul’s own
statement (Gal. i. 18) that during this visit he saw, of the apos-
tles, only Peter and James, the Lord’s brother. These may
have been the only apostles then in the city, for Paul’s stay
‘was but for fifteen days. The purpose of this visit was to see
Peter (Gal. i. 18).—G. B. S.

1 A.B. C. éxetvo. BapvaBas 5¢ avOpwros emeckns Kai nuEpos HY"
«aiépax.7.A. Cat. éxet. BapyaBas avOpwmos emeckns Hv" Kat Opa.
‘The epithet juepos, ‘‘tamed,’’ was felt to be unsuitable to
Barnabas, hence Cat. omits it, CEc. substitutes (from below)
kai xpynoTos afodpa. The mod. t. transposes the clause to the
comment on v. 27. The fact seems to be, that BapvaBas S€ is
out of its place, and that av@p. em. Kat nu. is a description of
Saul’s present bearing contrasted with his former character:
and that the sentence should begin with éexetvo, somewhat in
this way: ov yap jv dvtws mpocdoxias avOpwrivys. ‘Exetvoe. g.
7d Ojprov, that raging wild-beast, now was a man, mild and
gentle.—Below, all the Mss. have dre wa@nrhy ovta, which is
not easily reconciled with the former passage (note c). There
it is represented, that he assayed to join himself to the disciples
as being a teacher, and not a disciple; here, that he did this as
being a disciple, and dia 7d petpragery. CEc. combines this
with the former statement: *‘ he went not to the Apostles, but
assayed,” etc., wetpidgwv. ate 65. Oy, kat ov wad., where Henten.
renders, modeste de se sentiens “ gquum tamen”’ preceptor esset
et non discipulus ; rather, forbearing to put himself forward
as he might have done, seeing he was himself a teacher, etc.
The Catena has the éca ro petpiagery after amidvra, and again
after évra. Hence the true reading may be, «ai dpa avrov ov
mpos T. aw, amiovta, adAa mpds Tos maOnTas ovX ate Badnrhy |
Svta, adda da TO meTpracery. |


Sie ACES: OF: THE APOSTLES.


135


not go to the. Apostles, such is his forbear-
ance, but to the disciples, as being a disciple.
He was not thought worthy of credit. ‘ But
Barnabas’”—* Son of Consolation” is his ap-
pellation, whence also he makes himself easy
of access to the man: for “ he was a kind man”
(ch. xi. 24), exceedingly, and this is proved
both by the present instance, and in the affair
of John (Mark)—“ having taken him, brought
him to the Apostles, and related to them how
he had seen the Lord in the way.”? (xv. 39.)
It is likely that at Damascus also he
had heard all about him: whence 4e was not
afraid but the others were, for he was a man
whose glance inspired fear. ‘‘ How,” it says,
“he had seen the Lord in the way, and that
He had spoken unto him, and how in Damas-
cus he had spoken boldly in the name of the
Lord. And he was with them coming in and
going out at Jerusalem, and speaking boldly
in the name of Jesus” (v. 28): these things
were demonstrative of the former, and by his
acts he made good what was spoken of him.
“ And he spake, and disputed with the Hel-
lenists.” (v. 29.) So then the disciples were
afraid of him, and the Apostles did not trust
him; by this therefore he relieves them of
their fear. ‘With the Hellenists:” he means
those who used the Greek tongue: and this he
did, very wisely; for those others, those pro-
found Hebrews had no mind even to see him.
“But they,” it says, ““went about to slay
him:” a token, this, of his energy, and
triumphant victory, and of their exceeding
annoyance at what had happened. ‘Thereupon,
fearing lest the issue should be the same as in
the case of Stephen, they sent him to Czsarea.
For it says, “‘ When the brethren were aware
of this, they brought him down to Czxsarea,
and sent him forth to Tarsus” (v. 30), at the
same time to preach, and likely to be more in
safety, as being in his own country. But ob-
serve, I pray you, how far it is from being the


2°A. B.C. (and Cat.) give the text, ‘‘ But Barnabas—in the
way,” continuously, and then the comments all strung to-
gether. Also the Clause “it is likely—about him”’ is placed
last, after yopyos jv o avyp. This expression (Cat. adds yap)
may denote either the quick, keen glance of Paul’s eye, or the
terror with which he was regarded—‘ to them the man had a
terrible look with him.””—The modern text: *** But Barnabas—
in the way.’ This Barnabas was a mild and gentle sort of
man. ‘Son of Consolation’ is the meaning of his name:
whence also he became a friend to Paul. And that he was ex-
ceedingly kind and accessible, is proved both from the matter
in hand, and from the affair of John. Whence fe is not afraid,
but relates ‘how he had seen,’ etc.—‘in the name of the Lord
Jesus.’ For it is likely, etc. Wherefore also ravta éxetvwy
KATACKEVACTLKA TOLOY, a Tov épywy €BeBaiwoe Ta Aexdévta.”’
In the original text it is simply Tadra exetvwy xatagKevagtixa,
kai dca Tav epywr €BeBaiwoe Ta Aexdevta, which being put before
v. 28, would mean, that the conduct of Paul ** in Damascus,” the
mas erappyno., evidenced the truth of what he said, about the
Lord’s appearing to him in the way. Hence in the mod. text:
““wherefore Barnabas making the latter prove the former,
confirmed by (Paul’s) deeds the things told of him.’’ (But
Ben., /deo hac ad illa preparant, dum ille opertbus dicta con-
firmat. Erasm., Ideo et hec pig. ge he Jacit operibus
‘confirmans ea que dicta erant.) We have transposed the
clause, as comment on vy. 28.


136


THE. WORKS OF STACHEYSOsST OR


[HomiLy XXI.


case that everything is done by (miraculous)
grace; how, on the contrary, God does in
many things leave them to manage for them-
selves by their own wisdom and in a human
way; so? to cut off the excuse of idle people:
for if it was so in the case of Paul, much more
im theirs.” « 0+ Dhén, it says, 4he. Chureh
throughout all Judea and Galilee and Samaria
had peace (they), being edified, and walking
in the fear of the Lord, and abounded in the
comfort of the Holy Ghost.”2 (v.31.) He is
about to relate that Peter goes down (from
Jerusalem), therefore that you may not impute
this to fear, he first says this. For while there
was persecution, he was in Jerusalem, but
when the affairs of the Church are everywhere
in security, then it is that he leaves Jerusalem.
See how fervent and energetic he is! For he
did not think, because there was peace, there-
fore there was no need of his presence. Paul ®
departed, and there was peace: there is no
war nor disturbance. ‘Them, they respected
most, as having often stood by them, and as
being held in admiration by the multitude:
but him, they despised, and were more savage
against him. See, how great a war, and imme-
diately, peace! See what that war effected.
It dispersed the peace-makers. In Samaria,
Simon was put to shame: in Judea, the affair
of Sapphira took place. Not that, because
there was peace, therefore matters became re-
laxed, but such was the peace as also to need
exhortation. ‘And it came to pass, as Peter
passed throughout all quarters, he came down
also to the saints which dwelt at Lydda.”


1 This and the next clause are transposed in the Mss. so
that én’ av7®y would mean “‘in the case of the brethren.’

* The reason given in v. 30 for Paul’s leaving Jerusalem is,
that he was in danger of being slain by his opponents ; that
assigned by himself in xxii. 17, 18 isa revelation of the Lord
piven to him when in a trance in the temple, warning him that

erusalem would not receive his message, and charging him to

go unto the Gentiles. The two explanations have a common
element in the opposition of the Jews and Hellenists at Jerusa-
lem to Paul and their rejection of his message. ‘‘ Paul, not-
withstanding the opposition and machinations of the Jews,
may have felt desirous to remain: he had a warm heart
toward his brethren according to the flesh; he was eager for
their conversion; and it required a revelation from Christ
himself to cause him to comply with the importunity of his
friends and to depart. Luke mentions the external reason ;
Paul the internal motive.’’ (Gloag.)—G. B. S.

2 A.B. C, of N. T. and vulg. Hieron. have the singular
throughout; and so Cat. in 1. Edd. from E. the plural
throughout: our other Mss. oixodopovmevor and opevdpevor
(F. D. meptocevomevoc), “ they being edified,’”’ etc., in apposition
with ’ExxAnata,

Sere Seba Paul had remained there would not have been
peace and quiet.” It is doubtful, as the text stands, whether
the subject to #dovrTo is, the Jewish believers, or, the adver-
saries: and xatedpovour, nyplacvov seem inconsistent as _pred-
icated of the same persons. Perhaps what Chrys. said is not
fully reported, and the text may be completed thus: (comp. p.
304,) ‘““ther2 is no war from without, nor disturbance within.
For the Jewish believers respected the Apostles, as having
often stood by them, and the unbelievers durst not attack
them as being had in admiration by the people: but as for
Paul, the one party—viz. the zealous Jewish believers, ‘the
profound Hebrews,’ despised him, while the others—viz. the
unbelievers were more savage against him.” Edd. (from E.
alone). *‘ And why, you may ask, does he this, and ‘ passes
through’ when there is peace, and ‘after Paul’s departure, inte.
why does Peter delay his journey until Paul is gone, and all is
quiet? Because them they most respected, as having,” etc.


(v. 32.) Like the commander of an army, he
went about, inspecting the ranks, what part
was compact, what in good order, what need-
ed his presence. See how on all occasions he
goes about, foremost. When an Apostle was
to be chosen, he was the foremost: when the
Jews were to be told, that these were “not
drunken,” when the lame man was to be
healed, when harangues to be made, he is
before the rest: when the rulers were to be
spoken to, he was the man; when Ananias,
he (chy deen; 1, ce eo Vr
3-15.): when healings were wrought by the
shadow, still it was he. And look: where
there was danger, he was the man, and where
good* management (was needed); but where
all is calm, there they act all in common, and
he demands no greater honor (than the
others). When need was to work miracles, he
starts forward, and here again he is the man to
labor and toil. ‘And there he found a cer-
tain man named /Eneas, which had kept his
bed eight years, and was sick of the palsy.
And Peter said unto him, A‘neas, Jesus Christ
maketh thee whole: arise, and make thy bed.
And, he arose immediately.” (v. 33-34)
And why did he not wait for the man’s faith,
and ask if he wished to be healed? In the
first place, the miracle served for exhortation
to many: hear then how great the gain.
“And all that dwelt at Lydda and Saron saw
him, and turned to the Lord.” (v. 35.) For
the man was notable. ‘ Arise, and make thy
bed:” he does well to give a proof of the
miracle : for they not only released men of
their diseases, but in giving the health they
gave the strength also. Moreover, at that
time they had given no proofs of their power,
so that the man could not reasonably have
been required to show his faith, as neither in
the case of the Jame man did they demand it.
(ch. ili. 6.) As therefore Christ in the begin-
ning of His miracles did not demand faith,
so neither did these. For in Jerusalem
indeed, as was but reasonable, the faith of
the parties was first shown; ‘they brought
out their sick into the streets, but as Peter
passed by, his shadow at least might fall upon
some of them” (ch. v. 15); for many
miracles had been wrought there; but here
this-is the first that occurs.’ ‘For ofthe
miracles, some were wrought for the purpose
of drawing others (to faith); some for the
comfort of them that believed. ‘‘ Now there
was at Joppa a certain disciple named Tabi-


4 Kai €v@a oixovouia: Eva 5é,x. T. A. It does not appear what
oixovouzia can be intended, unless it be the order taken for the
appointment of the deacons, but this was the act of all the
Apostles, vi. 2. Hence perhaps the reading should be: €v6a d€
OlKovouta, kai evita, ‘* But where management (or regula-
tion) only is concerned, and where all is peace,”’ etc.


Homity XXI.] THE ACTS OF


TRE


APOSTLES.


137


tha, which by interpretation is called Dorcas :
this woman was full of good works and alms-
deeds which she did. And it came to pass in
those days, that she was sick, and died: whom
when they had washed, they laid her in an
upper chamber. And forasmuch as Lydda
was nigh to Joppa, and the disciples had heard
that Peter was there, they sent unto him two
men, desiring him that he would not delay to
come to them.” (v. 36-38). Why did they
wait till she was dead? Why was not Peter
solicited (écxity) before this? So right-minded
(d:Aocogowvrec) Were they, they did not think it
proper to trouble (cxiArew) the Disciples about
such matters, and to take them away from the
preaching: as indeed this is why it mentions
that the place was near, seeing’ they asked
this as a thing beside his mark, and not now
in the regular course. ‘‘ Not to delay to come
unto them:” for she was a disciple. And
Peter arose, and went with them. And
when he was come, they led him into the upper
chamber.” (v. 39.) They do not beseech, but
leave it to him to give her life (cwrmiav.) See?
what a cheering inducement to alms is here!
“ And all the widows,” it says, “stood round
him weeping, and showing the coats and gar-
ments which Dorcas had made while she was
with them.” Peter went into the apartment,


and turning him to the body said, Tabitha,
arise. And she opened her eyes: and when
she saw Peter, she sat up.” (v. 40.) Why
does he put them all out? That he may not
be confused nor disturbed by their weeping,


“And having knelt down, he prayed.” Ob-
serve the intentness of his prayer. ‘“ And3
he gave her his hand.” (v. 41.) So did
Christ to the daughter of Jairus: “And


(says the Evangelist) having taken her by the
hand.” Mark severally, first the life, then the
strength brought into her, the one by the
word, the other by his hand—‘ And he gave
her his hand, and lifted her up, and when he
had called the saints and widows, presented
her alive :” to some for comfort, because they
received back their sister, and because they
saw the miracle, and for kindly support
(xpocracia) to others. “ And it was known
throughout all Joppa; and many believed in
the Lord. And it came to pass, that he tar-
ried many days in Joppa with one Simon a tan-
ner.” (v. 42-43.) Mark the unassuming con-
duct, mark the moderation of Peter, how he
does not make his abode with this lady, or some
other person of distinction, but with a tanner:
by all his acts leading men to humility, neither
suffering the mean to be ashamed, nor the
great to be elated! ‘“ Many days;”* for


as one who took it calmly, but see what an |they needed his instruction, who had believed


accession came of it!
meaning that the Writer has informed us of
the woman’s name, but to show that the name
she bore (¢epévyuoc jv) matched her charac-
ter; as active and wakeful was she as an ante-
lope. For in many instances there is a Prov-
idence in the giving of names, as we have
often told you. ‘She was full,” it says, ‘“ of
good works:” not only of alms, but “ of good
works,” first, and then of this good work in
particular. ‘‘ Which,” it says, ‘“ Dorcas made
while she was with them.” Great humility!
Not as we do; but they were all together in
common, and in company with them she made
these things and worked. “But Peter put
them all forth, and kneeled down, and prayed ;


1 cimov (n7ov, B.) ev tafer mapépyov tovTo yrovy (hv, C.),
mponyoumevws 6€ ovK ETL, padyTpia yap Hv. A. B. C. Cat. But
Edd. wore Setfar omc ev. tT, A. and padytpia yap hv before
mpony. CEcum. ev tafer yap map. TovTo yTovy, was. yap Hv,
omitting mpony. d€ ovxere.—‘‘ If the place had not been near,
they would not have made the request: for it was asking him
to put himself out of his way, to do this over and above, and
not in the regular course.’’—This is a hint to the hearers that
they should show the like forbearance and discretion, in not
giving their Bishop unnecessary trouble.

2 ‘Opas eAenuoovvyns moan yivetac mpotpomy. Edd. from E,,
““Thus is here fulfilled the saying, ‘Alms delivereth from
death. And all the widows,’”’ etc. Below, for Eis thy oixiay
eioyet 0 Iletpos ws didocopwv: dpa dé roan 7H Emidoats yéyover:
the same have, ‘* Where she was laid out dead, they take Peter,
TAXA OlomEevoL mpos iAogodiavy ai’To TL xapigertar, perhaps
thinking to give him a subject for elevated thought. Seest
thou,”’ etc.—The meaning seems to be, ‘‘ Peter went to see the
dead body, expecting no miracle, but only as one who could
bear such sights, and would teach others to do so: but see
what a mighty additional boon came of it!”


It is not without a| through the miracles.—Let us look then again


at what has been said.

“ Assayed,” it says, “to join himself to the
disciples.” (Recapitulation, v. 26.) He did
not come up to them unabashed, but with a
subdued manner. “ Disciples” °® they were
all called at that time by reason of their great
virtue, for there was the likeness of the disci-
ples plainly to be seen. “But they were all
afraid of him.” See how they feared the
dangers, how the alarm was yet at its height
in them. ‘But Barnabas,” etc. (v. 27.)—it
seems to me that Barnabas was of old a friend
of his—‘“‘and_ related,” etc.: observe how
Paul says nothing of all this himself: nor
would he have brought it forward to the
others, had he not been compelled to do so.
“And he was with them, coming in and go-
ing out at Jerusalem, and speaking boldly in
the name of the Lord Jesus.” (v. 28, 29.)
This gave them all confidence. ‘“ But they


3 In the Mss. Kat xpatyoas, dnat, Ths xetpos. “Opa (E. Edd.
*Evravvda Seixvucc) kata mépos kK. 7. A. But the passage cited is
from Luke viii. 52, kat xpatygas THs xetpds aris, ehwvnge K. TA,
to which, and probably to the é€xBadAwy efw mavras there preced-
ing, St. Chrys. here referred.

4 Edd. from E. os «cai ca rovto expiwe ScedOerv, éreidn tis
avtov SidacKxaAlas éd€ovTo0 of muatevoavtes. ** Who also for this
reason judged it right to make this circuit, because those who
had believed needed his instruction.”

5 The modern text: ‘‘He calls by the name of ‘disciples’
even those who were not included in the company of the
twelve (Apostles), because they were all called disciples,”


| etc.


138


THE WORKS: OF (ST. CHRY SOs TORE


{[Homity XXI.


went about to slay him: which when the
brethren knew,” etc. (v. 30.) Do you observe
how both there (at Damascus), and here, the
rest take care for him, and provide for him the
means of departure, and that we nowhere find
him thus far receiving (direct supernatural)
aid from God? So the energy of his char-
acter is betokened. ‘To Czesarea, and sent
him forth to Tarsus:” so that, I suppose, he
did not continue his journey by land, but
sailed the rest of it. And this (departure) is
Providentially ordered, that he might preach
there also: and so likewise were the plots
against him ordered by God’s Providence,
and his coming to Jerusalem, that the story
about him might no longer be disbelieved.
For there he was “speaking boldly,” it says,
“in the name of the Lord Jesus; and he
spake and disputed against the Hellenists ;
and again, “he was with them coming in and
going out.—So! the Church throughout all
Judea and Galilee and Samaria had peace ”
—i. e. it increased: and peace with itself, that
peace which is peace indeed: for the war
from without would have done them no harm
—‘they being edified, and walking in the
fear of the Lord, and abounded in the con-
solation of the Holy Ghost.” And the spirit
consoled them both by the miracles and by
the works, and independently of these in the
person of each individual. ‘“* And it came to
pass, etc. And Peter said unto him, Eneas,”
etc. (v. 32-34.) 7 But before discourse, be-
fore exhortations, he says to the lame man
himself, ‘Jesus Christ maketh thee whole.”
This word he believed in any wise, and was
made whole. Observe how unassuming he is:
for he said not, ‘‘ In the Name,” but? rather
as a sign he narrates the miracle itself, and
speaks as its Evangelist. ‘‘And having
seen him,” it says, “all that dwelt in Lydda,


1 Here the modern text has: ‘“* And the Churches had peace,
being edified, and walking in the fear of the Lord:”’ i. e. they
increased, and (had peace), peace as it is in itself, the true
peace, elipnvny avtny Syrov mpds cauTHVv, THY GvTws elpyvynv.’’ (The
singular 7 ’ExxA. being altered to the plural, the reference in
Tpos €auTyv was not perceived.) ‘* With good reason. For the
war from without exceedingly afflicted them. ‘And were
filled with the consolation of the Holy Ghost.’”’ See p. 136,
notes:

2 Something must be supplied: e.g. ‘‘He did not wait for
Eneas to ask, or to show his faith,’’ as above, p. 301.—Edd.
from E. ‘*‘‘ And it came to pass—maketh thee whole.’ It is
not the word of one making a display, but of confidence that
the thing shall be. And it does very much seem to me, that
the sick man believed this word, and was made whole. That
Peter is unassuming, is clear from what follows. For he said
not, In the Name of Jesus, but rather as a miracle he narrates
it. ‘And they that dwelt at Lydda saw, and turned unto the
Lord.’ It was not for nothing that I said, that the miracles
were wrought in order to persuade and comfort. ‘But in
Joppa—and died.’ Do you mark the miracles everywhere tak-
ing place? It is not merely said, etc. Wherefore also they do
not call Peter until she was dead. ‘And having heard, (that
Peter was there) the disciples sent,’’ etc.

3°AXAXN’ we onmetov madAov avTo (avTdos B.) Sunyetrar Kal evay-
yeAigerar: ‘* he speaks not in the form of command or promise,
but of narration: he relates it, Evangelist-like, as a fact.”


and Saron, turned unto the Lord.—Now
there was at Joppa,” etc. (v. 35, 36.) Ob-
serve everywhere the signs taking place. But
let us so believe them, as tf we were now be-
holding them. It is not simply said, that
Tabitha died, but that she died, having been
in a state of weakness. And (yet) they did
not call Peter until she died; then “ they sent
and told him not to delay to come unto them.”
Observe, they send and call him by others.
And he comes: he did not think it a piece of
disrespect, to be summoned by two men:
for, it says, “they sent two men unto him.”
—Affliction, my beloved, is a great thing, and
rivets our souls together. Not a word of
wailing there, nor of mourning. See* how
thoroughly matters are cleansed! ‘ Having
washed her,” it savs, “they laid her in an
upper chamber: ” that is, they did all (that
was right) for the dead body. Then Peter
having come, “ knelt down, and prayed; and
turning him to the body, said, Tabitha, arise.”
(v. 40.) They did not perform all their mira-
cles with the same ease. But this was profit-
able for them : for truly God took thought not
only for the salvation of others, but for their
own. He that healed so many by his very
shadow, how is it that he now has todo so
much first? There are cases also in which
the faith of the applicants cooperated. This
is the first dead person that he raises. Ob-
serve how he, as it were, awakes her out of
sleep: first she opened her eyes: then upon
seeing (Peter) she sat up: then from his hand
she received strength. ‘ And it was known
throughout all Joppa, and many believed in
the Lord.” (v. 42.) Mark the gain, mark the
fruit, that it was not for display. Indeed,
this is why he puts them all out, imitating his
Master in this also.

5 For where tears are—or rather, where mir-
acles are, there tears ought not to be; not
where such a mystery is celebrating. Hear,
I beseech you : although somewhat of the like
kind does not take place now, yet in the case
of our dead likewise, a great mystery is cele-


4°Opa mas Stakabaiperat Ta mpayuata (omitted in E. D. F.
Edd.): i. e. how the Gospel has purged away all excess of
mourning, and al! noisy demonstrations of grief. St. Chrys.
frequently inveighs against the heathenish customs of mourn-
ing for the dead, which were still practised—such as the hiring
of heathen mourning-women: Hoy. zz Jlatt. Xxxi. p. 207. A.
‘‘T confess to you, I am ashamed when I see the troops of
women tearing their hair, gashing their flesh, as they move
through the market—and this under the very eyes of the
heathen.” Conc. in Laz. v. t. i. p. 765 D. where the Christian
mode of interment is described; viz. the procession of clergy
wlth psalms and hymns of praise, lighted tapers, etc. comp.
Hom. iv. tn Heb. (ii. 15.)

5 "Evia yap daxpva, waddov S& Evia Savmara, ov Set Saxpva
mapevar’ Evda Tovovtoy pvoTypioy TeAectac, It seems, he was
going to say, ‘‘ Where tears are, it is no fit time for miracles,”
but corrects himself, for put in that way the proposition was
not true. The innovator weakly substitutes, ‘‘ For where
tears are, such a mystery ought not to be performed: or rather,
where miracles are, there tears ought not to be.”’


HomiLty XXI.]


Cie AG is) OF THE. APOSTLES:


139


brating. Say,! if as we sit together, the Em-
peror were to send and invite some one of us
to the palace, would it be right, I ask, to
weep and mourn? Angels are present, com-
missioned from heaven and come from thence,
sent from the King Himself to call their
fellow servant, and say, dost thou weep?
Knowest thou not what a mystery it is that
is taking place, how awful, how dread, and
worthy indeed of hymns and _ lauds?
Wouldest thou learn, that thou mayest know,
that this is no time for tears? For it isa
very great mystery of the Wisdom of God.
As if leaving her dwelling, the soul goes forth,
speeding on her way to her own Lord, and
dost thou mourn? Why then, thou shouldst
do this on the birth of a child: for this in
fact is also a birth, and a better than that.
For here she goes forth to a very different
light, is loosed as from a_prison-house, comes
off as from a contest. “ Yes,” say you, “it is
all very well to say this,” in the case of those
of whose salvation we are assured.” Then,
what ails thee, O man, that even in the case
of such, thou dost not take it in this way?
Say, what canst thou have to condemn in the
little child? Why dost thou mourn for it?
What in the newly baptized? for he too is
brought into the same condition: why dost
thou mourn for him? For as the sun arises
clear and bright, so the soul, leaving the body
with a pure conscience, shines joyously. Not
such the spectacle of Emperor as he comes in
state to take possession of the city (éxvBaivovra
xéaewc), not such the hush of awe, as when the
soul having quitted the body is departing in
company with Angels. Think what the soul
must then be! in what amazement, what won-
der, what delight! Why mournest thou?
Answer me.—But it is only in the case of sin-
ners thou doest this? Would that it were so,
and I would not forbid your mournings, would
that this were the object! This lamentation
were Apostolic, this were after the pattern of
the Lord ; for even Jesus wept over Jerusalem.
I would that your mournings were discrimi-
nated by this rule. But when thou speakest
the words of one® that would call back (the


1 The rest of the Hom. is given in the Plorilegium or Ecloge,
in t. xii. ecl. xlv.—the only instance in which these Homilies
have been employed in that compilation. Its author used the
old text: it does not appear that any of his various readings
were derived from the modern text.

2 emi Tay evdoxiuwy: i.e. those who are certainly not repro-
bates (ov« adoxipwv). In the next sentence, 1D Edd. Kal Tt mpos
ge, avipwre; av yap ovdé emt THY evdox, ToUTY Tmorets. Ben. Et
guid hoc ad te, 0 homo? tu enim erga probos hoc non agis.
Erasm, tu enim neque apud probatiss? mos hoc agis. The
other Mss. and Ecl. rv DUM cece y OTL.

3”Orav 8& avaxadovmevos pyuata A€yns Kal ouvynterav Kat
ampoctaciav, so Mss. and Edd. but Ecl. avaxadovpeévov, which we
adopt. To the same purport, but more fully, Hom. xii. in 1
Cor. p. 392. (and Ecl. xlv.) ‘‘ If when some (friend) were taken
into the palace and crowned, thou shouldest bewail and
lament,I should not call thee the friend of him that iscrowned,


dead), and speakest of thy long intimacy and
his beneficence, it is but for this thou mourn-
est (not because he was a sinner), thou dost
but pretend to say it. Mourn, bewail the
sinner, and I too will give a loose to tears ; I,
more than thou, the greater the punishment
to which he is liable as such: I too will
lament, with such an object. But not thou
alone must lament him that is such; the whole
city must do the same, and all that meet you
on the way, as men bewail them that are led
to be put to death. For this is a death in-
deed, an evil death, the death of sinners.
But (with you) all is clean reversed. Such la-
mentation marks a lofty mind, and conveys
much instruction; the other marks a littleness
of soul. If we all lamented with this sort of
lamentation, we should amend the persons
themselves while yet living. For as, if it
rested with thee to apply medicines which
would prevent that bodily death, thou wouldest
use them, just so now, if ¢#zs death were the
death thou lamentest, thou wouldest prevent
its taking place, both in thyself and in him.
Whereas now our behavior is a perfect riddle ;
that having it in our power to hinder its com-
ing, we let it take place, and mourn over it
when it has come. Worthy indeed of lamen-
tations are they (when we consider), what
time as they shall stand before the judgment
seat of Christ, what words they shall then
hear, what they shall suffer! ‘To no purpose
have these men lived: nay, not to no pur-
pose, but to evil purpose! Of them too it
may be fitly said, “ It were good for them had
they never been born.” (Mark xiv. 21.) For
what profit is it, I ask, to have spent so much
time to the hurt of his own person? Had it
been spent only to no purpose, were not that,
I ask you, punishment enough! If one who
has been an hired servant twenty years were
to find that he has had all his labor in vain,
would he not weep and lament, and think him-
self the most miserable of men? Why, here
is a man who has lost all the labor of a
whole life: not one day has he lived for him-
self, but to luxury, to debauchery, to covetous-
ness, to sin, to the devil. Then, say, shall
we not bewail this man? shall we not try to
snatch him from his perils? For it is, yes, it
is possible, if we will, to mitigate his punish-
ment, if we make continual prayers for him,
if for him we give alms. However unworthy


but very much his hater and enemy. ‘But now, say you, I do
not bewail him, but myself.’ But neither is this the part of a
friend, that for thine own sake thou wouldest have him still in
the contest, etc. ‘But I know not where he is gone.’ How
knowest thou not, answer me? For whether he lived rightly
or otherwise, it is plain where he will go. ‘Why, this is the
very reason why I do bewail—because he departed a sinner.
This is mere pretence. If this were the reason of thy lament-
ing him that is gone, thou oughtest w hile he was alive to have
amended him, and formed his manners,”’ etc.


140


THE WORKS. OF ST: CHRYSOSTOM


[HomiLty XXI.


he may be, God will yield to our importunity.
For if! Paul showed mercy on one (who had
no claims on his mercy), and for the sake of
others spared one (whom he would not have
spared), much more is it right for us to do
this. By means of his substance, by means
of thine own, by what means thou wilt, aid
him: pour in oil, nay rather, water. Has he
no alms-deeds of his own to exhibit? Let
him have at least those of his kindred. Has
he none done by himself? At least let him
have those which are done for him, that his
wife may with confidence beg him off in that
day, having paid down the ransom for him.
The more sins he has to answer for, the
greater need has he of alms, not only for this
reason, but because the alms has not the same
virtue now, but far less: for it is not all one
to have done it himself, and to have another
do it for him; therefore, the virtue being less,
let us by quantity make it the greatest. Let
us not busy ourselves about monuments, not
about memorials. This is the greatest me-
morial: set widows to stand around him.
Tell them his name: bid them all make for
him their prayers, their supplications: this
will overcome God: though it have not been
done by the man himself, yet because of him
another is the author of the almsgiving. Even
this pertains to the mercy of God: ‘‘ widows
standing around and weeping” know how to
rescue, not indeed from the present death,
but from that which is to come. Many have
profited even by the alms done by others on
their behalf: for even if they have not got
perfect (deliverance), at least they have found
some comfort thence: If it be not so, how
are children saved? And yet there, the chil-
dren themselves contribute nothing, but their
parents do all: and often have women had


1 Ei yap IatAos Erepov nAémpre, eat Si dAAoUS GAAwY (Ecl. aAAov)
efeicato, TOAAG waddAov Has TovTO Set morecy. But E. Edd. Ei
6ca IlavAov étepous dtégwoe, kai Si aAAoUS GAAwY eldeTar, Tas
ovxt kat dt nuas TO avTo ToUTO épyagetar; “If (God) for Paul’s
sake saved others, and for some men’s sake spares other men,
how shall He not for our sakes do this same thing ?”’ In How.
xli. 72 1 Cor. p. 393. B. Chrys. uses for illustration Job’s sacri-
fice for his sons, and adds, ‘‘ For God is wont to grant favors
to others in behalf of others, érépots imép étépwv xapigerOar.
And this Paul showed, saying,’Iva év 7oAAG mpoowma, x. T. A.
2 Cor, i. 11.” But here the reference seems to be to 2 Cor. ii.
10, ‘* To whom ye forgive anything, I forgive also ; for if I
forgave anything, to whom I forgave it, ‘ for your sakes’ for-
gave I it in the person of Christ.’’—St. Chrysostom constantly
teaches, as here, that the souls of the departed are aided by
the a Ag alms. and Eucharistic oblations of the living,
Hom. xi. in 1 Cor. u. s. “‘ Even if he did depart a sinner,

: - + We ought to succor him, in such sort as may be (as av
o.ov Te 4), NOt by tears, but by prayers and supplications, and
alms and oblations. For not idly have these things been
devised, nor to no purpose do we make mention of the
departed in the Divine Mysteries, and for them draw near,
beseeching the Lamb Which lieth there, Which taketh away
the sins of the world, but in order that some consolation may
thence come tothem. Nor in vain does he that stands beside
the altar, while the dread Mysteries are celebrating, cry out,
“For all that sleep in Christ, and for them that make the
memorials for them.’’’ See also Hom. iti. ad Phil. p. 217, 218.
Comp. St. Cyrill. Hier. Catech. Mystag. v. § 9, St. Augustin,


Serm. 172.


their children given them, though the children
themselves contributed nothing. Many are
the ways God gives us to be saved, only let
us not be negligent.

How then if one be poor? say you. Again
I say, the greatness of the alms is not esti-
mated by the quantity given, but by the pur-
pose. Only give not less than thine ability,
and thou hast paid all. How then, say you,
if he be desolate and a stranger, and have
none to care for him? And why is it that
he has none, I ask you? In this very thing
thou sufferest thy desert, that thou hast none
to be thus thy friend, thus virtuous. This is
so ordered on purpose that, though we be not
ourselves virtuous, we may study to have
virtuous companions and friends—both wife,
and son, and friend—as reaping some good
even through them, a slight gain indeed, but
yet a gain. If thou make it thy chief object
not to marry a rich wife,? but to have a devout
wife, and a religious daughter, thou shalt gain
this consolation; if thou study to have thy
son not rich but devout, thou shalt also gain
this consolation. If thou make these thine
objects then wilt thyself be such as they.
This also is part of virtue, to choose such
friends, and such a wife and children. Not
in vain are the oblations made for the
departed, not in vain the prayers, not in vain
the almsdeeds: all those things hath the
Spirit ordered, * wishing us to be benefited
one by the other. See: he is benefited, thou
art benefited: because of him, thou hast
despised wealth, being set on to do some gen-
erous act: both thou art the means of sal-
vation to him, and he to thee the occasion of
thine almsgiving. Doubt not that he shall
get some good thereby. It is not for nothing
that the Deacon cries, “ For them that are
fallen asleep in Christ, and for them that
make the memorials for them.” It is not the
Deacon that utters this voice, but the Holy
Ghost: I speak of the Gift. What sayest
thou? ‘There is the Sacrifice in hand, and all
things laid out duly ordered: Angels are
there present, Archangels, the Son of God is
there: all stand: with such awe, and in the
general silence those stand by, crying aloud :


2 evVAGBH yuvaika Kal Ovyatpiov ayayécbar ceuvov. A. B. C.
In the Edd. xai @vy. ceuvov, is transposed after “yn mAovTovyTa
viov kataAumeiy GAA’ evAaBy- and so in the Ecl. which however
retains ay, between 6vy. and gexvov. In the old text, wife and
daughter are mentioned first, as the persons most apt to per-
form these offices of religion: in ayayéeow#ac there is a zeugma ;
‘**to take to wife, and to have wife and daughter, etc.”

3 Hom. iii. in Phil. ad fin. OvK €ixh TadTa évopodteTndsy UTO TOV —
amootoAwy x. 7. A. ‘* Not idly were these things enacted by the
Apostles, that in the dread mysteries there is mention made of
the departed ; they know that to them great is the gain which
accrues, great the benefit. For when the whole congregation
stands there, all lifting up their hands. the sacerdotal body
(wAjpwma iepatixov), and the dread sacrifice is laid out, how
shall we fail to prevail with God, in supplicating for these ?”


Homity XXII.] THE AGES OF


and thinkest thou that what is done, is done
in vain? ‘Then is not the rest also all in vain,
both the oblations made for the Church, and
_ those for the priests, and for the whole body?
God forbid! but all is done with faith. What
thinkest thou of the oblation made for the
martyrs, of the calling made in that hour,
martyrs though they be, yet even “for
_ martyrs?”? It is a great honor to be named
in the presence of the Lord, when that memo-
rial is celebrating, the dread Sacrifice, the
unutterable mysteries. For just as, so long
as the Emperor is seated, is the time for the
petitioner to effect what he wishes to effect,
_ but when he is risen, say what he will, it is all
in vain, so at that time, while the celebration
_ of the mysteries is going on, it is for all men
the greatest honor to be held worthy of men-
tion. For look: then is declared the dread
“mystery, that God gave Himself for the
world: along with that mystery he seasonably
_ puts Him in mind of them that have sinned.
_ For as when the celebration of Emperors’
victories is in progress, then, as many as had
- their part in the victory receive their meed of


_“ There was a certain man in Cesarea called Cornel- |
3 jus, a centurion of the band called the Italian
band, a devout man, and one that feared God
with all his house, which gave much alms to the
people, and prayed to God alway. He saw ina
vision evidently about the ninth hour of the day
an angel of God coming in to him, and saying
unto him, Cornelius. And when he looked on
him, he was afraid, and said, What is it, Lord?
And he said unto him, Thy prayers and thine
alms are come up for a memorial before God.”


THIS man is not a Jew, nor of those under
the Law, but he had already forestalled our
manner of life.* Observe, thus far, two per-


1 Ti olet TO Urép wapTipwy mporhéeperBar, TO KANOHVaL ev exeivy
7) ®pa Kav maptupes wor, Kav (kai A. UTép waptvpwv ; There is no
reason to suppose (as Neander, Der Hetlige Johannes Chrysos-
tomeus, t. ii. p. 162) that the words xav maprtupes x. 7. A. are

art of the Liturgy: the meaning is, Think what a great thing

itis to be mentioned in that Prayer of Oblation ; to be men-
tioned as the martyrs are mentioned, for of them also, martyrs
though they be, the same form of expression is used, trép
Haptvpwv.—In the Liturgy of St. Chrysostom the words are,
Ett mpoopepomev cor tHyv Aoyixny TavTnv AaTpelay Umép TaYV ev
mioree AVATAVOLEVWY TPOTATOPWY, TATEPWY, TATPLAPXaV, TpOPyTaY,
“aTogToAwy, KnpUKwy, evayyeAtcTo@Y, mapTupwyv K. T. A. See St.
“Augustin, Hom. on St John, p. 842, note a.

* The conversion of Cornelius marks an important step in
the progress of the gospel. Hitherto Christianity had been
confined to Jews, Hellenists, and that mixed people—the Samar-
itans (unless, as is improbable, the Ethiopian chamberlain
formed an exception). Now abeginning was made of receiv-
ing the Gentiles, and in connection with that apostle to whom
Christ had committed a certain leadership and privilege of


é


THE. APOSTLES:


141


praise, while at the same time as many as
are in bonds are set at liberty in honor of the
occasion ; but when the occasion is past, he
that did not obtain this favor then, no longer
gets any: so is it here likewise: this is the
time of celebration of a victory. For, saith
it, “so often as ye eat this bread, ye do show
forth the Lord’s death.”’ Then let us not
approach indifferently, nor imagine that these
things are done in any ordinary sort. But it
is in another sense 2 that we make mention of
martyrs, and this, for assurance that the Lord
is not dead: and this, for a sign that death
has received its death’s blow, that death
itself is dead. Knowing these things, let us
devise what consolations we can for the
departed, instead of tears, instead of laments,
instead of tombs, our alms, our prayers, our
oblations, that both they and we may attain
unto the promised blessings, by the grace and
loving-kindness of His only-begotten Son our
Lord Jesus Christ, with Whom to the Father
and the Holy Ghost together be glory, domin-
ion, honor, now and ever, world without end.
Amen.


PLO ey, XS AE.


ACTS 1-4:


sons, both of high rank, receiving the faith, the
eunuch at Gaza and this man; and the pains
taken on behalf of these men. But do not
imagine that this was because of their high
rank: God forbid! it was because of their
piety. For that the Scripture mentions their


opening the doors to the Kingdom (ch. Acts xv. 7). The nar-
rative is one of the important notices in the N. T. concerning
the gradual realization of Christ’s command to make disciples
of all nations, and shows, so far as it relates to Peter, with how
great difficulty the most enlightened of the early Christians
conceived of Christianity becoming free from the forms of
Judaism. Cornelius was doubtless a Roman who had become
dissatisfied with the idolatrous religion of his people and who
had been attracted by the influences of the Jewish religion to
the worship of the true God. There is no evidence, how-
ever, that he was a proselyte to the Jewish religion. He could
not have failed to hear of Jesus and his disciples. Probably
Philip, the deacon, was at this time residing in Czesarea and
Peter had been preaching and working miracles in the neigh-
boring towns. It is not unlikely that the vision which he had,
appealed to thoughts and convictions concerning the gospel
which had been growing stronger in hisown mind. To the
vision of Cornelius, that of Peter forms the complement.
They symbolize the great facts that while God in his provi-
dence was preparing his apostles for the larger truth of Chris-
tianity for the world, he was also preparing the Gentile world
for the reception of the gospel. It is noticeable that the three
centurions who appear in the N. T. are favorably mentioned.
(Matt. viii. 10; xxviii. 54, and this passage).—G. B. S.

2 i. e. not to intercede on their behalf, but for commemora-
tion of Christ’s victory over death, achieved in Himself and
in them. The Eucharist is, so to say, Christ’s emuvixca, in
which the Martyrs are eulogized as sharers of His triumph
(and this is our commemoration of truth), and the prisoners
are set at liberty (and in this sense we name our dead).


142


THE WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOS@OM.


[HomILy XXII.


dignified stations, is to show the greatness
of their piety; since it is more wonderful
when a person being in a position of wealth
and power is such as these were. What
makes the praise of the former is, his under-
taking so long a journey, and this when there
was no (festival) season to require it,’ and his
reading on his road, and while riding in his
chariot, and his beseeching Philip, and num-
berless other points: and the great praise of
the latter is, that he makes alms and prayers,
and is a just man, holding such a command.
The reason why the writer describes the man
so fully, is, that none may say that the Scrip-
ture history relates falsehoods: “ Cornelius,”
he says, ‘a centurion of the band called
the Italian band.” (v.1.) A “band,” ozeipa,
is what we now call a “numerous.”? “A
devout man,” he says, “and one that feared
God with all his house” (v. 2): that you
may not imagine that it is because of his high
station that these things are done.—When
Paul was to be brought over, there is no
angel, but the Lord Himself: and He does
not send him to some great one, but to a very
ordinary person :* but here, on the contrary,
He brings the chief Apostle (to these Gen-
tiles), not sends them to him: herein con-
descending to their weakness, and knowing
how such persons need to be treated. As
indeed on many occasions we find Christ
Himself hasting (to such), as being more
infirm, Or (it may be) because (Cornelius) was
not able himself to leave his home. But here
again is a high commendation of alms, just
as was there given by means of Tabitha. ‘“ A
devout man,” it says, ‘and one that feared
God with all his house.” Let us hear this,
whoever of us neglect them of our own house,
whereas this man was careful of his soldiers
also. ‘And that gave alms,” it says, “to all
the people.” Both his doctrines and his life
were right. “He saw in a vision evidently,
about the ninth hour of the day, an angel of


1 Kai 76, unde Karpov kadovdvTos. As above xix. p. 120, note 2,
Chrys. remarks, that there was no festival which required the
presence of the eunuch at Jerusalem. Probably he was led to
this by the circumstance, that the incident of the eunuch
occurs after the Martyrdom of St. Stephen and the Conversion
of St. Paul, i.e. according to the Church Calendar, between
the 26th of December and the 25th of January.

2“ Zretpa and coors in Polyb. differ. The Greeks call the
cohort Aoxos, it contained about five hundred men. Polyb. vi.
Kai (Lev (LEpOS EkagTOV ExdAEgE Kal Taya Kal oTELpaV Kal OnMELOY,
Casaubon: Ac singulas partes appellant ordinem, manipulun
signunt.’’ Downe ap. Sav.

8 aAAa mpds evteAn. The innovator (E. Edd.) having made
Chrys. say above, Hom. xx. § 1, that Ananias was aman of
note, here alters the text to: ‘‘ But the Lord Himself appears:
neither does He send him to some one of the Twelve, but to
Ananias.”” Below kai ovx avtovs méumer mpos avrov: meaning,
it seems, Cornelius and his house. The same hand substitutes
(for explanation of the plural, avta@v rq aodeveia), ‘as He did
Philip to the eunuch, condescending to their infirmity.’ And
in the following sentence ; ‘‘ Since Christ Himself is often seen
going to them that are ill, and in their own persons unable to
come to Him.”


,


God coming in to him, and saying unto him,
Cornelius.” (v. 3.) Why does he see the
angel? This also was in order to the full
assurance of Peter, or rather, not of him, but
of the others, the weaker ones. “At thé
ninth hour,” when he was released from his
cares and was at quiet, when he was engaged
in prayers and compunction. ‘“ And when he
looked on him, he was afraid.” (v. 4.)
Observe how what the angel speaks he does
not speak immediately, but first rouses and
elevates his mind. At the sight, there was
fear, but a fear in moderation, just so far as
served to fix his attention. Then also the
words relieved him of his fear. The fear
roused him: the praise mitigated what was
unpleasant in the fear. “ Thy prayers,” saith
he, ‘“‘and thine alms are come up for a memo-
rial before God. And now send men _ to
Joppa, and call for one Simon, whose sur-
name is Peter. (v. 5.) Lest they should
come to a different person, he designates the
man not only by his surname, but by the
place. ‘And the same,” saith he, “is lodg-
ing with one Simon a tanner, who hath his
house by the seaside.” (v. 6.) Do you mark
how the Apostles, for love of solitude and
quiet, affected the retired quarters of the
cities? ‘‘With one Simon a tanner:” how
then if it chanced that there was another?
Behold, there is another token, his dwelling
by the seaside. All three tokens could not
possibly coincide (elsewhere). He does not
tell him for what purpose, that he may not
take off the intense desire, but he leaves him
to an eager and longing expectation of what
he shall hear. ‘“ And* when the Angel
which spake unto Cornelius was departed, he
called two of his household servants, and a
devout soldier of them that waited on him
continually ; and when he had declared all
these things unto them, he sent them to
Joppa.” (v. 7,8.) Do you see, that it is not
without a purpose that the writer says this ?
(it shows) that those also “ who waited on him
continually” were such as he. ‘ And when
he had declared the whole matter unto
them:” observe the unassuming character of
the man: for he does not say, Call Peter to
me: but, in order also to induce him to
come, he declared the whole matter :—this
was so ordered by Providence ;—for he did
not choose to use the authority of his rank to
fetch Peter to him; therefore ‘“ he declared
the matter; ” such was the moderation of the
man: and yet no great notion was to be
formed of one lodging with a tanner. ‘ And


4 The clause ofros AaAyjoe: gor Ti ce Set movety is not recog-
nized by Chrys., nor by the leading authorities. See zz/ra, p-
145, note 8,


Womity XXII] Pins aGs OF THE. APOSTLES, 143
on the morrow, as they journeyed, and drew] world. The? man was uncircumcised: and


nigh to the city”? v. 9.—observe how the
Spirit connects the times: no sooner than
this, and no later, He causes this to take
place—‘ Peter about the sixth hour went up
upon the housetop to pray:”’ that is, pri-
vately and quietly, as in an upper chamber.
“And he became very hungry, and would
have eaten ; but while they made ready, there
fell upon him a trance.” (v. 10.) What
means this expression,! éxoraoic, “ trance?”
Rather, there was presented to him a kind of
spiritual view (fewpia): the soul, so to say,
was caused to be out of the body (ééor).
“And saw heaven opened, and, knit at the
four corners, a certain vessel descending unto
him, as it had been a great sheet, and let
down to the earth: wherein were all manner
of fourfooted beasts of the earth, and wild
beasts, and creeping things, and fowls of the
air. And there came a voice to him, Rise,
Peter; kill, and eat. But Peter said, Not so,
Lord ; for I have never eaten anything that
is common or unclean. And the voice spake
unto him again the second time, What God
hath cleansed, that call not thou common.
This was done thrice: and the vessel was
received up again into heaven.” (v. 11-16.)
What is this? It is a symbol of the whole


1 ti €ativ Exotagis. Because the word also, and more com-
monly, means the being beside one’s self, amazed, or stupefied
by excess of grief, Chrys. explains that it denotes the being rapt
out of the bodily consciousness: it was not that Peter was out
of his mind, but his soul out of the body. (St. Augustin, Ser.
266, § 6, “ orantis mens alienata est; sed ab infimis ad su-
perua; non ut deviaret, sed ut videret.”) Comp. Exp. in Psa.
115. t. V. p. 312, D. ‘In Gen. ii. 21. the éxaraots which fell
upon Adam denotes a kind of insensibility, for €kor. means 70
ef éavtod yevecOar: and in Acts x. ro it denotes kapov twa Kat TO
efw aicOyncews yever@ar: and everywhere éxoraots implies this.
It comes, either by the act of God: or because the excess of
calamity causes a kind of stupor, kapos. For calamity likewise
is wont to Occasion éxor. and xapos.’’ Didymus (or some
other author) in the Catena: ‘‘ They that have chosen to be
disciples of frantic women, I mean, they of Phrygia (the
Montanists), affirm that the Prophets, when possessed by the
Holy Ghost, were not in a condition to be strictly cognizant of
their own thoughts, being borne away from themselves at the
instant of prophesying. And they think to confirm their
error by this Sori pines which says, that Peter éfeorakévac.
But let these silly ones, these indeed frantic persons, know
that this is a word of many significations. It denotes the
amazement of wonder: and the being wrapt above sensible
objects, led on to spiritual things: and the being beside one’s
self (wapaxomtecv)—which is not be said either of Peter, or of
the Prophets. Nay Peter, in his trance, was strictly cogni-
zant, so as to report what he had seen and heard, and to be
sensible of what the things shown were symbolical. The
same is to be said of all the Prophets—that their consciousness
kept pace with the things presented to their view.’’ Comp.
on this subject, S. Ep7phan. adv. Heres. Montan. 2. 60a yap
Ol TpopHrar eipyKace META TUVETEWS TapAaKOAOUSOULTES EiteyyovTo.
Euseb. H. E. v. 17. relates that Miltiades wrote a treatise
Tepi Tov my Setv mpodyrnv év exatacer Aadewv. See also S.
Hetronym. Pref.in Esai. ‘* Negue vero ut Montanus cum
imsanis feminis somniat, propheta in ecstast locutt sunt, ut
nescirent quid loguerentur, et cum alios erudirent, tpst igno-
rarent guid dicerent.’ Id. Prem. in Nahum. Pref. in
Aéac. and, on the difference between the heathen pavris and
the divinely inspired Prophet, St. Chrysost. How. xxix. in 1
Cor. p. 259, C. Tovt0 yap padvrews idiov, To ékeatyKévar kK. T. A.
and E-xfos. in Psa. xliv. p. 161.-C.—The clause técoapoww
apxais dedeuévov, before axevos ti, (A. B. C.) agrees with the
Lat. ot S. Hilar. p. 750. “ exguatuor principiis ligatum vas
guoddam,” etc.


—for he had nothing in common with the
Jews—they would all accuse him as a trans-
gressor: “thou wentest in to men uncircum-
cised, and didst eat with them: (ch. xi. 3).”
this* was a thing altogether offensive to
them: observe then what is providentially
managed. He himself also says, “I have
never eaten:’’ not being himself afraid—far
be the thought from us—but it is so contrived
by the Spirit, in order that he may have it to
say in answer to those accusing him, that he
did object: for it was altogether necessary
for them to observe the Law. He was in the
act of being sent to the Gentiles: therefore
that these also may not accuse him, see how
many things are contrived (by the Providence


5
of God). For, that it may not seem to bea


mere fancy, “this was done thrice. I said,”
saith he, “ Not so, Lord, for I have never
eaten aught common or unclean.—And the
voice came unto him, What God hath
cleansed, that call not thou common.” (ch.


2 St. Chrysostom’s exposition, as we gather it from this and
the following Homily, seems to be in substance as follows:
St. Peter was not ignorant of nor averse to, the counsel of
God in respect of the free admission of the Gentiles. He did
not need instruction on this point for himself, and the vision
was not so much intended for his instruction or assurance, as
for reproof to the Jewish believers who were not yet enlight-
ened in this mystery. (Even the token which was given in the
descent of the Holy Ghost on Cornelius before baptism, was
for them, not for him.) He needed but a command to act
upon it without hesitation. But because this would certainly
be regarded asa flagrant offence by the weaker brethren, for
their sakes this symbolical lesson is given: and the circum-
stances are so contrived (oikovoyetrat) as to silence their objec-
tions. It is so ordered, that the matter of accusation is put by
them in this form, ‘“‘ Thou didst go in to men uncircumcised,
and didst eat with them.’’ Had they said, ‘‘ Thou didst baptize
such,’’ St. Peter could not have alleged that he did it reluc-
tantly: but to the charge of unclean eating he had his answer:
““T did object; I said, not so, Lord, for nothing common or
unclean,’ etc. This carried with it his exculpation from the
whole matter of offence: for they would apply it thus—
‘“ he baptized these Gentiles, but not without objecting to the
command; not until his reluctance was overruled,” though
in fact St. Peter had no such reluctance.

3 Todro mavu avtots mpooiortato (B. and Sav. marg. mapictarto)
Erasm. Et hoc illis valde frequens erat. Ben. Et illis
admodum cordi erat. But Hom. xxiv. 2. twa my mpoory
(mpogaty) avtots, Ben. remarks that mpooiorac@ac in the sense
“‘offendere’’ is frequent in St. Chrysostom. It properly
applies to food against which the stomach rises: “ to raise
the gorge, to be nauseous, disgusting, offensive.”’ See Field
Annotat, in Hom. ad Matt. p. 319. B.—Tovro, i. e. the going in
to men uncircumcised, and eating with them. Comp. Hoy»,
li. 7x Matt. p. 317. (Am. ed.) “* Such was the strict observance in
respect of meats, that, even after the Resurrection, Peter said,
‘Not so, Lord,’ etc. For though ‘he said this for the sake
of others, and so as to leave himself a justification against
those who should accuse him, and that he may show that he did
object,’ (oTt kai avtetrov), and for all this, the point was not
conceded to him, still it shows how much was made of this
matter.”

4 Here besides the clause, ‘“ this was done thrice,’’ something
is wanting: e. g. ‘‘ And observe how Peter relates the matter,
and justifies himself,’ viz. in xi. 8, ‘tI said,’’ saith he, ** Not so,
Lord, for nothing common or unclean hath ever entered my
mouth.” Here for elrov, B. has etrev, which is adopted by the
modern text, in which the whole passage is refashioned thus:
‘* Since then they would all accuse him as a transgressor, and
this was altogether offensive to them, of necessity it is man-
aged (oixov.) that he says, “I never ate:’’ not being himself
afraid. God forbid! but, as I said, being managed (oixovonovp-
evos) by the Spirit, that he may have a justification to those ac-
cusing him, namely, that he did object: for they made a great
point of keeping the Law. He was sent to the Gentiles:
therefore, that these also may not have to accuse him,as I said
before, these things are contrived, or also, that it may not
seem to be a fancy, ‘he said, Not so, Lord,’”’ etc.


144


THE! WORKS OF iST. CHRYSGSGGLE


|HomILy XXII.


yr.°S, with-x14.), It’ iséems* indeed ‘ta -be
spoken to him, but the whole is meant for the
Jews. For if the teacher is rebuked, much
more these.* The earth then, this is what the
linen sheet denotes, and the wild beasts in it,
are they of the Gentiles, and the command,
“Kill and eat,” denotes that he must go to
them also; and that this thing is thrice done,
denotes baptism. ‘‘ What God hath cleansed,”
saith it, call not thou common.” Great dar-
ing! Wherefore’ did he object? That
none may say that God was proving him, as
in the case of Abraham, this is why he says,
“ Not so, Lord,” etc. not gainsaying—just as
to Philip also He said, “ How many loaves
have ye?” Not to learn, but tempting, or
“proving him.” And yet it was the same


* Peter’s vision titly represents the divine lesson concerning
the destination of the gospel and the manner of its progress.
None of the apostles doubted that Christianity was for the
Gentiles: the great question was, whether it was to be
preached to them through the medium of Judaism. Should it
still be held within Jewish forms? Should circumcision and
observance of the Mosaic law be required? This was a great
practical question in the days of transition from Judaism to
Christianity. Later Paul became the champion of the idea
that it was to be cut loose from the Jewish system. Peter and
James came but slowly to this idea. The destruction of Jeru-
salem and the fall of the Jewish state brought the question to
a decisive settlement. Apart from this, however, the Pauline
type of teaching on this point constantly gained ground and
influence. The vision of Peter takes its place in the gradual
development of the idea that Christianity was free from
the law—an idea on which he seems after this to have helda
somewhat uncertain and vacillating position, so that Paul
**resisted him to the face’’ for his declining to eat with the
Gentiles at Antioch on account of the presence of certain dele-
gates from Jerusalem—a practice in which he had, before their
coming, engaged (Gal. ii. 11, 12). It is not strange that perplex-
ing questions arose concerning the relations of the new system
to the old at this time. The general line of procedure was
settled by the apostolic conference at Jerusalem (Acts xv., Gal.
i., ii.) and was substantially determined by the apostle Paul.
While as matter of fact, the Church has always followed the
lead of Paul in this matter, the most diverse views still prevail
among Christians as to the relation, theoretically considered,
of Christianity to Judaism and the Old Testament Scriptures.—

B.S


1 St. Chrys. seems here to be controverting a different expo-
sition. He will not allow that the vision was meant for in-
struction to St. Peter, as if he were in ignorance up to this
time of the counsel of God concerning the Gentiles. Let it
not be said, that like as God did tempt Abraham, so He was
putting Peter to the proof whether he would obey the call to
the Gentiles, as if Peter understood the vision in that sense.
Had he so understood the command, ‘‘ Kill and eat,’”’ he would
not have objected; for he could not be either ignorant or un-
willing. But he did not so understand it, and his objection
was solely to the matter of eating. And as he needed not the
lesson (it was intended for others): so neither did God need
to learn his willingness. When God tempts, or proves, it is
not to learn something that He did not know before; as, when
Christ said to Philip, ‘* Whence shall we buy bread that these
may eat? this He said tempting, or, proving him, for He Him-
self knew what He would do.’”’ He put that question to Philip
that he might the more admire the greatness of the miracle
which he was about to work. (see note 2.) But nothing of the
kind can be said here; the case is not parallel: the command
to baptize the Gentiles would not surprise Peter; he expected
no less from the beginning.—His objection, then, was to the
thing itself, the command, ‘kill and eat.’? And no wonder,
for the same Lord had in the Law strictly commanded to dis-
tinguish between clean and unclean, while there in the sheet
were animals of all sorts indiscriminately.

2 Hom. xiii. 7x Ev. Joann. § 2. ‘What meaneth, Tempting,
or, proving him? was He ignorant what would be said by him?
This cannot be said, . . . We may learn the meaning from the
Old Testament. For there also it is said, After these things
God did tempt Abraham, etc, He did not say this in order to
learn by the proof whether he would obey or not—how should
it be so? for He knoweth all things before they come into
existence ; but on both occasions it is spoken after the manner
of men. As, when it is said, He searcheth the hearts of men,
it indicates the search, not of ignorance, but of perfect knowl-


(Lord) that had discoursed above (in the
Law) concerning things clean and unclean.
But in that sheet were also “all the four-
footed beasts of the earth:” the clean with
the unclean. And® for all this, he knew not
what it meant. ‘‘ Now while Peter doubted
in himself what this vision which he had seen
should mean, behold, the men which were
sent from Cornelius had made enquiry for
Simon’s house, and stood before the gate,
and called, and asked whether Simon, which
was surnamed Peter, were lodged there.—
But while Peter,” it says, “doubted in him-
self” (v. 17, 18), the men come at the right
moment to solve his doubt: just as (the Lord)
suffered Joseph first to be perturbed in mind,
and then sends the Angel: for the soul with
ease accepts the solution, when it has first
been in perplexity. His perplexity neither
lasts long (when it did occur), nor (did it
occur) before this, but just at the moment
when they ‘“ asked whether he were lodging
there. While Peter thought on the vision,
the Spirit said unto him, Behold, three men
seek thee. Anse therefore, and get thee
down, and go with them, doubting nothing:
for I have sent them.” (supra, p. 142, and
145, note 7; v. 19, 20.) And this again is a
plea for Peter in answer to the disciples, that
he did doubt, and was instructed to doubt
nothing. ‘‘ For I,” “saith Mie)” “havesisens
them.” Great is the authority of the Spirit!
What God doth, this the Spirit is said to do.
Not so the Angel, but having first said, ‘* Thy
prayers and thine alms have ascended, for a
memorial before God,” to show that he is sent
from thence, then he adds, “ And now send
men,” etc.’: the “Spirit not. so;cbut | “women
have sent them. Then Peter went down. to
the men which were sent unto him from
Cornelius ; and said, Behold, I am he whom


edge; so when it is said, He tempted, tried, or proved, it
means no other than that He perfectiy knew.—Or, it may
mean, that He made the person more approved: as Abraham
there, so Philip by this question, leading him into the sure
knowledge of the sign:” i. e. bringing more home to his mind
the greatness of the miracle, by leading him in the first place
to estimate the utter inadequacy of the means.

3 Either this refers to the clause, ‘‘ This was done thrice,’
etc., which should be inserted; or, the connection may be—
This very circumstance of the clean and unclean being to-
gether in the sheet (as in the Ark), might have led him to an
apprehension of the thing symbolized, viz., that he was not
commanded to * kill and eat’’ the unclean with the clean (by
the same Lord who of old had commanded a distinction
of meats), but that the time was come to baptize all nations
without respect of persons. But, obvious as it may seem.
St. Peter was still ignorant what it meant: as the Writer
adds, And while Peter was at a loss to know what the vision
should mean, etc.—In E. (Edd.) the whole passage from “ that
this is thrice done, denotes baptism,’’ is refashioned thus:
‘““* Not so, Lord, for I have never eaten aught common or un-
clean.’ And: why, it may be asked, did he object? That
none may say that God was tempting him, as in the case of
Abraham, when he was ordered to offer up his son as a
sacrifice: as in the case of Philip, when he was asked by
Christ, How many loaves have ye? not that he may learn,
did He so ask, but proving him. And yet in the Law Moses
had distinctly enjoined concerning clean and unclean, both of
land and sea; and yet for all this he knew not.”


i
‘
;
;
i


Homity XXII.]


THEO ACTS: OF -THE, APOSTLES:


145


ye seek: what is the cause wherefore ye are
come? And they said, Cornelius the cen-
turion, a just man, and one that feareth God
and of good report among all the nation of
the Jews, was warned from God by-an holy
angel to send for thee into his house, and to
ean words, of ‘thee; (v.24, »22.) «They
speak his praises, so as to persuade him that
an Angel has in fact appeared unto him.
“Then called he them in,’”’? (4) that they may
suffer no harm, “ and lodged them:” thence-
forth he without scruple takes his meals with
them. “And on the morrow Peter went
away with them, and certain brethren from
Czsarea accompanied him, And the morrow
after, they entered into Caesarea.” (v. 23,
24.) The man was a person of note, and it
was in a City of note that he then was.


(2) But let us look over again what has
been said. ‘There was a certain man in
meesarea, etc... (Recapitulation, v. 1, 2.)
Observe with whom the beginning of the Gen-
tiles is made—with “a devout man,” and
one proved to be worthy by his works. For
if, though the case be so, they are still of-
fended, if this had not been the case, what
would not have been the consequence! But 2
mark the greatness of the assurance. (c) To
this end* all is done (in the way it is done),
and the affair takes its beginning from Judea.
(2) “He saw in a vision, evidently,” etc.
(v. 3). It was not in his sleep that the Angel
appeared to him, but while he was awake, in
the daytime, “about the ninth hour. He+
saw an Angel of God coming in. unto him, and
saying unto him, Cornelius. And when he
looked on him, he was afraid.” So occupied
was he with himself. Implying, that it was in
consequence of the Angel’s calling him by a
voice that he saw him; as, had he not called
him, he would not have seen him: so taken
up was he with the act in which he was en-


1 The letters a, 4, c, d, denote the order of the parts in the
old text. But C. has the formula of recapitulation, both in the
beginning of (a2), and again in (@), before the verse, ‘** And the
pagel said,” etc.: E. D. F. Edd. retain it only in the latter
place.

2 "AAN' Opa moon agdadeca, i, e. how it is made infallibly cer-
tain, that it was the purpose of God to admit the Gentiles
without circumcision. It might indeed be inserted in (4),
after cvvévacrarac : ‘‘he has no scruples—but mark the great-
ness of the assurance he has received.’’ In the modern text,
the connection is, ** He called them in, and lodged them. See
what security : (O€a roan aodadera) in order that they should
take no harm, he calls them in, and thenceforth without
scruple,” etc. i. e. ‘‘ how sure he feels that be is doing right in
receiving them: with what assuredness of mind he does this.”
But Sav. ‘‘See what security for them, in order that they
should take no harm.”’

3 Aca tovTo mavta yiverar, A. B. C. N. Cat. But Edd. Aco
Kal em avT@ mavTa Ouovd oikovoueitac. ‘* wherefore both in his
person at once all the circumstances are providentially ordered,
and ”’ etc.

4 Here after the clause, ovtws éavto mpocetxey (Meaning, as
afterwards explained, that he did not notice the Angel until
he spoke), A. B. C. have, Aé€yer 5¢ 0 ayyeAos x. T. A. Edd. ’AAA’
iwuev avwOev Ta cipyucva. Kai eimev 6 ayyedos kK. T. A.


Life)


gaged.” But the Angel says to him, “ Thy
prayers and thine alms are come up for a
memorial before God, and now send men to
Joppa, and call for one Simon, who is called
Peter.” (v.5.) So far, he signified that the
sending for him would be for good conse-
quences, but in what way good, he did not
intimate. °So, neither does Peter relate the
whole matter, but everywhere, the narratives
are in part only, for the purpose of making
the hearers apply their minds to what is said.
“Send and call for Simon :” in like manner
the Angel only calls Philip. ‘“ And’ as they
went on their journey, and drew nigh to the
city” (v.9): in order that Peter should not
be in perplexity too long. ‘“ Peter went up
upon the housetop,” etc. Observe, that not
even his hunger forced him to have recourse
to the: sheet... “Rise, Peter,”’-saith: the
Voice, “kill and eat.” (v. 13.) Probably
he was on his knees when he saw the vision.
—To me ® it seems that this also denotes the
Gospelh) (or, “the Preaching’): \Rhat tiie
thing taking place was of God (the circum-
stances made evident, namely), both that he
sees it (descending) from above, and that he


‘is in a trance; and, that the voice comes from


thence, and the thrice confessing that the
creatures there were unclean, and its coming
from thence, and being drawn back thither
(all this), is a mighty token of the cleanness
(imparted to them).—But why is this done?


5 The old text: ‘“‘ And thy prayers, saith he. So far,’’ etc.
Edd. ‘‘Andsend for Simon, who is called Peter. So far,
etes!


8 The text is defective here. He seems to be commenting
upon the variations of the different narratives: viz. the writer
himself v. 6. mentions only the command to send for Peter.
(p. 142, note 4.) The messengers v. 22 add, ‘‘ And to hear
words of thee.’”’ Cornelius, v. ‘““who, when he com—
eth, shall speak unto thee.”’ St. Peter 11, 14, ‘ who shall tell
thee words, whereby thou and all thy house shall be saved.”
‘*On the other hand,” he says, “‘ neither does Peter, though
he is more full on this point, relate all that the Angel said, but
gives only the substance.’’ See the comment on 11, 14.

7 The modern text, omitting this clause, and the comment,
inserts the rest of the verse, ‘‘ Peter went up,”’ etc.: and has
below, But that Peter may not be in perplexity too long, he
hears a voice saying, ‘‘ Rise, Peter, kill and eat.” But the
meaning is, The Spirit caused the vision to take place when
they were near the city, that Peter might not be too long in
doubt : as above, on the same clause, ‘Observe how the
Spirit connects the times,”’ etc. } i

8 *Ewot Soxec kai (om. A. B.) 7d (om. Cat.) xypvy~a tovTo
elvac (om, Cat.) "Ore Oetov fv TO yiwomevov TO TE avwev ideiv,
76 Te ev exotacer yeveobar. (Here dnAoi, Secxvuow, or the like,
must be supplied. GC&cumen. Acixvutac S€ OTe Beiov K. 7. A.
In the modern text the wording is slightly altered, but the
sense is the same. In the latter part, for oTt axa@apra fv exe,
CEcumen. has éxetva; the modern text substitutes Kat 70 tpis
TOUTO yevegOat, Kai TO OVpavoY avEewXOHVaL, Kai TO ExeiBev K.T. A.
and at the end, tov @etov elvac TO mpayua for xabapotnTos.—
Above, he had said that the sheet was a symbol of the world;
now he adds, that the command ‘“ Kill and eat’’ denotes the
Gospel, to be preached universally: that the descent of the
sheet from heaven, and the circumstance of Peter’s being in a
spiritual trance, shows that the thing was of God—not a
davragia. Again: that it is all done ¢#yzce, denotes baptism:
thrice the Voice says, Kill and eat: thrice Peter confesses that
the creatures are unclean: thrice it is declared that God hath
cleansed them: nay, thrice these unclean creatures are let
down from heaven, and drawn up thither again: a mighty
proot that they are now clean, and of the Kingdom of
Heaven.


292
37)


146 THE) WORKS Or


oi; CHERYSOS TORE


[HomiLy XXII.


For1 the sake of those thereafter, to whom he
is about to relate it. For to himself it had
been said, “‘ Go not into the way of the Gen-
tiles.” (Matt: x.5.) * * For if Paul’needed
both (to give) circumcision, and (to offer)
sacrifice, much more (was some assurance
needed) then, in the beginning of the Preach-
ing, while they were as yet weaker. (Acts xvi.
3; xxi. 16.)—Observe* too how he did not
at once receive them. For, it says, they
“called, and asked, whether Simon, which
was surnamed Peter, were lodging there.”
(v. 18.) As it was a mean looking house,
they asked below, they inquired * of the neigh-
bors. “And while Peter thought, the Spirit
said unto him, Arise, get thee down, and go,
nothing doubting, for I have sent them.”
(v. 19, 20.) And he does not say, For to this
end did the vision appear unto thee; but, “I
have sent them.. Then Peter went down”
(v. 21)—this is the way the Spirit must be
obeyed, without demanding reasons. For it


is sufficient for all assurance to be told by


Him, This do, this believe: nothing more (is
needed)—“ Then Peter went down, and said,
Behold, I am he whom ye seek:* what is the
cause wherefore ye are come?” He saw a


1 It was remarked above, that St. Chrysostom’s exposition
proceeds upon the assumption, that St. Peter did not need the
instruction for himself. Here the reporter has not fully
expressed his meaning: which should be to thiseffect. ‘* Since
it had been said at the outset to Peter and the other Apostles,
‘Go not into the way of the Gentiles,’ though after the
Resurrection they were commanded to ‘ baptize all nations,’
it is no marvel that the less enlightened brethren needed some
strong assurance on this behalf. And if at a later time, we
find Paul, to conciliate the Jewish believers, causing Timothy
to be circumcised and himself offering sacrifice, much more
Was some condescension to their infirmity needed now.’’—
Didymus in the Catena puts the question, ‘‘ How was it that
Peter needed a revelation in the matter of Cornelius, when the
Lord after his Resurrection had expressly ordered to ‘ baptize
all the nations ?’ or how came it that the Apostles in Jeru-
salem, having heard of the affair of Cornelius, disputed with
Peter ?’’ To which he answers: ‘* Peter did undoubtedly need
the revelation; for he knew not that the distinction of circum-
cision and uncircumcision was to cease: knew not for certain
that the Lord meant the Gentiles to be baptized apart from
the visible worship under the Law, unlil the Lord manifested
this mystery to him, convincing him both by the emblem of
the sheet, and by the faith and grace of the Holy Spirit given
to the Gentiles, that in Christ Jesus there is no distinction of
Jew and Greek: of which thing because the Apostles at Jeru-
salem were ignorant, therefore they contended with Peter,
until they also learnt the hidden riches of God’s mercy over
all mankind.” St. Cyril, Alex., also, c. Julian. (ibid.) explains,
that ‘“‘ Peter was fain to dwell in the Jewish customs, and, in
a manner, was loath to go on to the better, because he was
overawed by the types: therefore he is corrected by this vis-


on.

2 E. D. F. Edd. omit this clause, see note x: and A. B. for
ovdé . . . edeEara have ovdév . . . éde(Eaz0, which is evidently
corrupt. ‘* Neither did he at once receive these Gentiles: not
until the Spirit expressly commanded him.”

8 So Cat. and the Mss. except E., which has ov tovs yetrovas
jowTwv, and so CEcumen. But the meaning seems to be, that
not expecting to find so mean a house, and thinking they
might have come wrong, they asked below, in the street, i. e.
inquired of the neighbors.

4 Here Edd. from E. have, ‘‘ Wherefore did he not receive
them immediately, but asks this question? ’’ but D. F. insert it
as above,” Opa mas ov eibéws avtovs édéEato, with the addition,
ahda muvdaverac. In the next sentence: A. B. C. Cat. etdev
oTpaTwiTny, eldev avidpwmov: i. e. Sawa soldier, saw him. as he
would have seen any common man, without fear. For this, D.
F. have cide otpatiitas avipwimous. E. Edd. eiée otpatiwwtas
6vtas Tos éemotavtas.—Below, for cat éntyoas A. B. C. Cat.
which the other Mss. omit, we correct, ov é¢nrngav.


soldier, saw a man: °it was not that he was
afraid, on the contrary, having first confessed
that he was the person whom they sought,
then he asks for the cause (of their coming);
that it may not be supposed that the reason
of his asking the cause, was, that he wished
to hide himself: (he asks it) in order, that if
it be immediately urgent, he may also go
forth with them, but if not, may receive them
as guests. ‘ And”: ‘thew 'said! etc. into his
house.” (v. 22.) This he had ordered them.
Do not think he has done this out of con-
tempt: not as of contempt has he sent, but so
he was ordered. ‘And Cornelius was wait-
ing for them, and had called together his
kinsmen and near friends.” (v, 24.) It was
right that his kinsmen and friends should be
gathered to him. But being there present, *
they would have heard from him (what had
happened).

See how great the virtue of alms, both in
the former discourse, and here! There, it
delivered from death temporal; here, from
death eternal; and opened ‘the gates of
heaven. Such are the pains taken for the
bringing of Cornelius to the faith, that both
an angel is sent, and the Spirit works, and
the chief of the Apostles is fetched to him,
and such a vision is shown, and, in short,
nothing is left undone. How many centu-
rions were there not besides, and tribunes,
and kings, and none of them obtained what
this man did! Hear, all ye that are in mili-
tary commands, all ye that stand beside kings.
“A just man,” it says, “fearing God; devout
(v. 2, and 22); and what is more’ than all,
with all his house. Not as we (who): that
our servants may be afraid of us, do every-
thing, but not that they may be devout.
And® over the domestics too, so * *. Not


5In the old text, the last words of the citation, v. 22. €is Tov
oikoy avtov. the rest being lost,are joined on totva fevion: Cat.
eis Tov oikov av’tovs. Edd. from E. D. F. ‘‘ But why do they
say, ‘Sends for thee into his house?’ Because he had given
them this order. And perhaps also, by way of apology, they
as good as say, Do not find fault (uydev katayves:) not as of
contempt has he sent, etc.’? In A. B. C. Cat. un xatappovnogs,
for which Sav. marg. has ws ay elmovev, wy Katadp., is corrupt:
perhaps it should be pH vouions, oTt Kateppovnoe gE: OVX ws K.
TX


6 ’add’ (A. Kal) é€xelt mapovtos ai'Tod jKovogay av (A. TavtTa
akovev), We read, mapovtes, and conjecture the meaning to
be, But they being there present, would have heard from Cor-
nelius an account of all that had happened to him. Edd. from
E. D. F. "AAAws S€ Kai exec mapovtes madAov avTov HKovoaY av.
‘‘ And besides by being there present they would the more
hear him (Peter),’’ what he had to say.

7 The modern text: ‘‘and what is greater, that he was such
with all his house. So intent was he,and so set upon this, that
he not only well ordered his own affairs, but also over his
household (émi tHs oixeretas) he did the same. For not as we,
who,” etc.

8 A. B. nai émi tis oiKeteias 5€ oVTwWS. AAA’ ovTOS OVX OUTS,
GAA META THS Oiklas amagys. WoTeEp yap K. T. A. C.. Kalen T.
oik. 5€ ovKEeTL KaK@s, GAAG Sikaiws: worep yap k.7. A. Below, the
modern text has, ‘‘ he feared God with all his house, as being
the common father, not only of all who were with him, but
also of the soldiers under him.’’ In the next sentence, ’Opa 6
Ti dyotv cat avtos, the meaning seems to be, “* Observe what is
said of him by the soldier whom Cornelius sent: ‘ A just man,


HomiLy XXII.]


Pittewwle ton “THE APOSTEES.


147


so this man; but he was “one that feared
God with all his house” (v. 2), for he was
as the common father of those with him, and
of all the others (under his command.) But
observe what (the soldier) says himself. For,
fearing * * , he adds this also: “well re-
ported of by ‘all the nation.” For what if he
was uncircumcised? Nay, but those give
him a good report. Nothing like alms: great
is the virtue of this practice, when the alms
is poured forth from pure stores ; for it is like
a fountain discharging mud, when it issues
from unjust stores, but when from just gains,
it is as a limpid and pure stream in a paradise,
sweet to the sight, sweet to the touch, both
light and cool, when given in the noon-day
heat. Such is alms. Beside this fountain,
not poplars and pines, nor cypresses, but
other plants than these, and far better, of
goodly stature: friendship with God, praise
with men, glory to Godward, good-will from
all; blotting out of sins, great boldness, con-
tempt of wealth. This is the fountain by
which the plant of love is nourished :, for
nothing is so wont to nourish love, as the
being merciful: it makes its branches. to lift
themselves on high. ‘This fountain is better
than that in Paradise (Gen. ii. 10); a foun-
tain, not dividing into four heads, but reach-
ing unto Heaven itself: this gives birth to
that river “which springeth up into eternal
life”’ (John iv. 14): on this let Death light,
and like a spark it is extinguished by the


fountain: such, wherever it drops, are the
mighty blessings it causes. This quenches,
even as a spark, the river of fire: this so


strangles that worm, as naught else can dao.
(Mark ix. 44.) He that has this, shall not
gnash his teeth. Of the water of this, let
there be dropped upon the chains, and it
dissolves them: let it but touch the fire-
brands,’ it quenches all.—A fountain does
not give out streams for a while and anon run
dry,—else must it be no more a fountain,—
but ever gushes: so let our fountain give out
more copiously of the streams of mercy (in
alms). This cheers him that receives: this
is alms, to give out not only a copious, but a
perennial, stream. If thou wouldest that God
rain down His mercy upon thee as from foun-


and one that feareth God:’ and then—for fearing (lest Peter
should refuse to come to him, as being a Gentile) he adds this
—‘and well reported of by all the nation of the Jews.’ Edd.
from E. alone: ‘‘ But hear also what they say besides: for of
necessity that is added. ‘ Well reported of by all the nation,’
that none may say, What, if he was uncircumcised? Even
those, saith he, give him a good report. Why then, there is
nothing like alms; or rather great is the virtue of this thing,
when,” etc:

1 kay eis Tas Aaumadas (E. Edd., kap.tvous) aintac (€uméeon, E.
D. F. Edd.) In the next sentence, ee ™HYyH K. T. A. the pro-
noun must be omitted.—E. D. F., Ed ‘As therefore the
fountain vin Paradise (or, in a deeae oe, does not give out
streams,”’ etc.


tains, have thou also a fountain. And? yet
there is no comparison (between God’s foun-
tain and thine): for if thou open the mouths
of this fountain, such are the mouths of God’s
Fountain as to surpass every abyss. God
does but seek to get an opportunity on our
part, and pours forth from His storehouses
His blessings. When He expends, when He
lavishes, then is He rich, then is He affluent.
Large is the mouth of that fountain: pure
and limpid its water. If thou stop not up the
fountain here, neither wilt thou stop up that
fountain.—Let no unfruitful tree stand be-
side it, that it may not waste its spray. Hast
thou wealth? Plant not poplars there: for
such is luxury : it consumes much, and shows
nothing for it in itself, but spoils the fruit.
Plant not a pine-tree—such is wantonness in
apparel, beautiful only to the sight, and use-
ful for nothing—nor yet a fir-tree, nor any
other of such trees as consume indeed, but
are in no sort useful. Set it thick with young
shoots : plant all that is fruitful, in the hands
of the poor, all that thou wilt. Nothing
richer than this ground. Though small the
reach of the hand, yet the tree it plants starts
up to heaven and stands firm. This it is to
plant. For that which is planted on the earth
will perish, though not now, at any rate a
hundred years hence. Thou plantest many
trees, of which thou shalt not enjoy the fruit,
but ere thou canst enjoy it, death comes upon
thee. This tree will give thee its fruit then,
when thou art dead.—If thou plant, plant not
in the maw of gluttony, that the fruit end not
in the draught-house: but plant thou in the
pinched belly, that the fruit may start up to
heaven. Refresh the straightened soul of the
poor, lest thou pinch thine own roomy soul,—
See you not, that the plants which are over-
much watered at the root decay, but grow
when watered in moderation? Thus also
drench not thou thine own belly, that the root
of the tree decay not: water that which is
thirsty, that it may bear fruit. If thou water
in moderation, the sun will not wither them,
but if in excess, then it withers them: such is
the nature of the sun. In all things, excess is
bad; wherefore let us cut it off, that we also
may obtain the things we ask for.—Fountains,
it is said, rise on the most elevated spots.
Let us be elevated in soul, and our alms will
flow with a rapid stream: the elevated soul
cannot but be merciful, and the merciful can-
not but be elevated. For he that despises


2 Kaitovye ovdév igov. “Av yap av TaVvTNS x. T. AA—Edd., Ovdév
TaVvTHS \oov. “Av ov tavTys kK. T. A. *‘ Nothing like this foun-
tain. If then,” etc.—Below, “Otay avadiony, dtav dSarava,
Ke TaN in itself, may perhaps be better referred to the giver of
alms: ‘‘ when (one) expends, when one lavishes (alms),’’ etc.
but in that case the connection is obscure.


THE WORKS. OF


148


ST. CHRYSOSHGRE


[HomILy XXIII.


wealth, is higher than the root of evils.—
Fountains are oftenest found in_ solitary
places: let us withdraw our soul from the
crowd, and alms will gush out with us. Foun-
tains, the more they are cleaned, the more
copiously they flow: so with us, the more we
spend, the more all good grows.—He that has
a fountain, has nothing to fear: then neither
let us be afraid. For indeed this fountain is
serviceable to us for drink, for irrigation, for
building, for everything. Nothing better than
this draught : it is not possible. for this to
inebriate. Better to possess such a fountain,
than to have fountains running with gold.
Better than all gold-bearing soil is the soul


which bears this gold. For it advances us,
not into these earthly palaces, but into those
above. The gold becomes an ornament to
the Church of God. Of this gold is wrought
“the sword of the Spirit (Eph. vi. 17), the
sword by which the dragon is beheaded.
From this fountain come the precious stones
which are on the King’s head. Then let us
not neglect so great wealth, but contribute
our alms with largeness, that we may be
found worthy of the mercy of God, by the
grace and tender compassion of His only be-
gotten Son, with Whom to the Father and
Holy Ghost together be glory, dominion, honor,
now and ever, world without end. Amen.


HOMEY (Oe


NCIS PXen 235724"


“Then called he them in, and lodged them. And
on the morrow Peter went away with them, and
certain brethren from Joppa accompanied him.
And the morrow after they entered into Czesarea.
And Cornelius waited for them, and had called
together his kinsmen and near friends.”’


“He called them in, and lodged them.”
Good, that first he gives the men friendly
treatment, after the fatigue of their journey,
and makes them at home with him; “and on
the morrow,” sets out with them.” And
certain accompany him: this too as Provi-
dence ordered it, that they should be wit-
nesses afterwards when Peter would need to
justify himself.“ And Cornelius was waiting
for them, and had called together his kins-
men and near friends.” This is the part of a
friend, this the part of a devout man, that
where such blessings are concerned, he takes
care that his near friends shall be made _ par-
takers of all. Of course (his “ near” friends),
those in whom he had ever full confidence ;
fearing, with such an interest at stake, to
entrust the matter to others. In my opinion,
it was by Cornelius himself that both friends
and kinsmen had been brought to a better
mind. ‘And as Peter was coming in, Cor-
nelius met him, and fell down at his feet, and
worshipped him.” (v. 25.) This, both to
teach the others, and by way of giving thanks
to God, and showing his own humility:
thereby making it plain, that though he had
been commanded, yet in himself he had great
piety. What then did Peter? “But Peter
took him up, saying, Stand up; I myself also
am a man.” (v. 26.) Do you mark how,


before all else (the Apostles) teach them this
lesson, not to think great things of them?
“And as he talked with him, he went in, and
found many that were come together, And
he said unto them, Ye know how that it is an
unlawful thing for a man that is a Jew to keep
company, or come unto one of another
nation; but God hath showed me that I
should not call any man common or unclean.”
(v. 27, 28.) Observe, he straightway speaks of
the mercy of God, and points out to them that
it is a great grace that God has shown them.
Observe also how while he utters great things,
at the same time he speaks modestly. For he
does not say, We, being men who do not
deign to keep company with any (such), have
come to you: but what says he? “Ye know”
—God commanded this’—“ that it is against
law to keep company with, or come unto, one
of another nation.” Then he goes on to say,
“And to me God has shown”—this he says,
that none may account the thanks due to him
—“ that I should call no man ”’—that it may
not look like obsequiousness to him, “no
human being,” says he—‘‘common or un-
clean.”* (v., 29.). “ Wherefore “also “——that


1 So Mss. and Edd. but the clause & @cds TovTO éxeAevoe
might be better transferred, in the sense, “ It i is only in obedi-
ence to God’s command that yy cae to you.’’ Below, Eira
iva pydeis atte thy yap exn (A. C.D. F. Cat.) emayer
(om. C.) re yowv; (A. B. C. but Cat. te emayer Tt bya; has,
TavTa. gyatv’) Kai e€uoi kK. T. a. We read, Eira eTayel, Kac
ewor edecgev 0 Meds (iva pydeis avT® THY XapLy Ex TavTa Pyoiv)

pydeva k. T. A.

* By saying ‘tit is not lawful,’’ Peter does not refer to any
specific command in the Mosaic law forbidding intercourse
with Gentiles. The separateness of the Jewish people from
the heathen world had, indeed, its basis in the Levitical sys-
tem, especially in the regulations concerning ceremonial clean-
ness. Still the Jews had constant commercial relations with


HomILy XXIII]


they may not think the affair a breach of the
law on his part, nor (Cornelius) suppose that
because he was in a station of command,
therfore he had complied, but that they may
ascribe all to God,—‘‘ wherefore also I came
without gainsaying as soon as I was sent
for:” (though) not only to keep company,
but even to come unto (him) was not permit-
ted. “I ask therefore, for what intent ye
have sent for me.” Already Peter had heard
the whole matter from the soldiers also, but
he wishes them first to confess, and to make
them amenable to the Faith. What then does
Cornelius? He does not say, Why, did not
the soldiers tell thee? but observe again, how
humbly he speaks. For he says, “ From the
fourth day I was fasting until this hour; and
at the ninth hour I prayed in my house, and,
behold, a man stood before me in bright
clothing, and said, Cornelius, thy prayer is
heard, and thine alms are come up for a
memorial before God. And at the ninth
hour,” he says, “‘I was praying.” (Vv. 30, 31.)
It seems to me, that this man had also fixed
for himself set times of a life under stricter
rule, and on certain days.’ For this is why


Pie aco OR? PITe ‘A POS Mite.


149


he says, “From the fourth day.” * See how
great a thing prayer is! When he advanced
in piety, then the Angel appears to him.
“From the fourth day:” i. e. of the week;
not ‘four days ago.” For, “on the morrow
Peter went away with them, and on the mor-
row after they entered into Czsarea:” this
is one day: and the day on which the persons
sent came (to Joppa) one day: and on the
third (the Angel) appeared: so that there are
two days after that on which (Cornelius) had
been praying. ‘And, behold, a man stood
before me in bright clothing : he does not
say, an Angel, so unassuming is he: “and
said, Cornelius, thy prayer is heard, and thine
alms are had in remembrance in the sight of
God. Send therefore to Joppa, and call
hither Simon, whose surname is Peter: he is
lodged in the house of one Simon a tanner by
the seaside: who, when he cometh, shall
speak unto thee. Immediately therefore I
sent to thee; and thou hast well done that
thou art come. Now therefore are we all
here present before God, to hear all things
that are commanded thee of God.” (v. 31-
33-) (6) See” what faith, what piety! He


other nations. Peter here refers, no doubt, to the customary
and traditional exclusiveness of his nation which had become
a social as well as a religious trait, and which had been
extended far beyond the purport of the Mosaic requirements,
which had for their end the preservation of the truth and
purity of the religion of the nation. This exclusive and
jealous spirit is frequently reflected in the N. T. and contempo-
raneous literature. The Jewish Christians accuse Peter (Acts
xi. 3) of eating with the uncircumcised. On another occasion,
the “prejudices of his: kinsmen and friends intimidated him and
constrained him to break off his custom of associating with
the Gentile Christians at meals (Gal. ii. 11 sq.). ‘** Moses,”’ says
Josephus, ** does not allow those who come to us without liv-
ing according to our laws to be admitted into communion with
us’’ (Contra Afpjon. ii. 29). Tacitus accuses the Jews of har-
boring “ the bitterest animosity against all other nations”’

(Ast. v. 5) and Juvenal says that they will not point out the
way except to those of their own religion, and that they will

* conduct those only to the fountain inquired after who are cir-
cumcised ”’ (Sa¢. xiv. 103). How great was the lesson then,
which Peter had been taught in the vision! It is not strange
that it was only gradually learned and practised.—G. B. S.

1 Kat év tTiotv nméepats: so all the Mss. with Cat. (év now He.)
and C&cum. If the text be not corrupt, Chrys. must be
understood to interpret avd tetaptys nu. of the * Furth day of
the week:” i. e. Cornelius had anticipated, among other
pious observances, this practice also, viz. of the Wednesday
fast. Otherwise, there is no intelligible connection for the
following words, Ava yap rodTo elmev, “Aro TETAPTNS NMEpas.
This, he says, was an advance in piety: and then it was that
the Angel appeared tohim. Then he proceeds to argue, that
that it is not ‘‘ four days ago,”’ for the time does not amount
to that number of days: the day on which Peter arrived was
not the fourth, but between that and the day on which Cor-
nelius prayed, there are but two entire days. It seems that
this must be St. Chrysostom’s meaning, though it is obscured
by mistakes of the scribes. B. C. aut pia nuepa: kal ny
AABov las Kai TH Tpit ebarn: ws evar Sevtépav ped nv mpoonv-
gato. (A. omits the passage.) E. D. F. Edd. av7y wia qpmeépa:
Kal nv amndABov ot meppbevtes, iat Kat Hv HAPov, mia: Kal TH
TeTaApTH ehavy* ws elvar Sevtépav wel Hv mpoonvéaro, Cat. and
(Kc. agree with E. D. F. in supplying the clause omitted in B.
C., to which however they add mapa Kopynaiov ; they have
also TeTapty éhavn, but for the last clause they read, acei
TpiTnv wpav ne’ Hv mpoonvéato. But the sense intended by
Chrys. should be: ‘This, the day (on which they left
Joppa), is one day (before the day on which Pornelius is
speaking): and the day on which the messengers from Cor-
nelius came, one day; (therefore the second day before that
on which Cornelius is speaking :) and on the third day
(previous) the Angel appeared: so that, exclusively of the day
on which Cornelius is speaking, and that on which Cornelius
prayed, there are two days.’’ This sense will be satistied by


reading, avTn ela nMEpa: kal nv HAGov oi meupbevtes Tapa Kop-
vnAlov, wiat Kal TH TPiTH Ehavyn: wate eivar dvo0 Huepas med Hv
mpoonvéato. The scribes, mistaking both the drift and the
method of the calculation, supposed av7n nu. to mean *‘ the
day of Peter’s arrival:’ but the day before that was the day
on which they came away (amnAvov) from Joppa, and on the
previous day the messengers arrived (7Avov), and on the day
before that, which is therefore the fourth, the Angel appeared:
hence they ‘insert the words Kai nv amjAvov ... pla, in order
to make out the calculation, i. e. to verify the day of the
Vision as the fourth day before that on which Cornelius is
speaking. So Cat. dc.and E. D. F. But B. C. retain the
original ocuace and only mistake the abbreviated form wore
elvac B’ ne., 1. €. dv0 mmepas, as if it meant ‘the second day,’
Sevtépay a epaies which reading, though unintelligible, was
retained by the later Editors. But what Chrys. means to
say, is, that, not reckoning the day of the vision and
the day of the meeting, there are two -whole days:
therefore the day of the vision was not ‘“the fourth
day hence;” consequently, that it means “the fourth day
of the week.” This hasty and ill considered interpreta—
tion of the expression amd tetaptys nMépas, Was suggested by
the circumstance that the ruie was to fast on the des statio-
num, TeTpas and mpooaBfBaror, to ‘the ninth hour:”’ so that
the practical scope of the interpretation may be of this kind:
““See how this man, Gentile as he was, had forestalled our
rule of discipline: he fasted on the fourth day of the week,
and to the ninth hour of the day: and see how God was
pleased to approve of his piety, by sending the Angel to him
on that day, and at that hour. But you who know the rule,
and why itis prescribed, do not obey it,’ etc.—On the Dies
Stationum, see Tertull. de Jezun. 1. where in defence of the
Montanists, who extended the fast beyond the ninth hour,
(or 3 p.m.) he says: Arguunt nos guod stationes plerumque
in vesperam producamus. tb. 10. gue stationes nostras ut
indignas, guasdam vero et in serum constitutas, novitatis
nomine incusant, hoc guoque munus et ex arbitrio obeundum
esse dicentes, et non ultra nonam detinendum, suo sctlicet
more: i, e. the Catholics maintained, that the fast on these
days ought not to be compulsory, nor to be prolonged beyond
the ninth hour. Epiphan. /x/os. Fid. §. 22. 8 odov mer Tov
€Tous 1 vynoTEeia udatrerat ev TH avr} ayia KaboAtky exkAnaia,
pnt 6€ tetpadc kat mpogaBBatw ews pas evvarys.

* It is wholly improbable that amo tetpatys nuepas refers to
the fourth day of the week, as Chrys. supposes. The meaning
is that, four days ago (reckoning from the time when he was
spe aking) he was praying (“observing the ninth hour of
prayer’’) until the time of day at which he was now saying
these words to Peter. There is still less ground for Chrys-
ostom’s interpretation if with Lechler, Tischendorf, and West-
cott and Hort vnorevwv be omitted from the text. ZGTBES!

2 The letters a, 4, c, d, mark the order of these portions in
B.C. At the end of (a) the clause, ‘‘We are present,” etc. is


150


THE WORKS OF ST. CHRYS@SH# Om:


[HomILy XXIII.


knew that it was no word of man that Peter
spake, when he said, “God hath shown me.”
Then says the man, “We are present to hear
all things that are commanded thee of the
Lord. (a) Therefore it was that Peter asked,
“ For what intent have ye sent for me?” on
purpose that he might so speak these very
words, (¢) “Then Peter opened his mouth,
and said, Of a truth I perceive that God is no
respector of persons: but in every nation he
that feareth Him, and worketh righteousness,
is acceptable to him.” (v. 34, 35.) That is,
be he uncircumcised or circumcised. (¢) This
also Paul declaring, saith, ‘‘ For there is no
respect of persons with God.” * (Rom. ii. 11.)
(e) What then? (it may be asked) is the man
yonder in Persia acceptable to Him? If he be
worthy, in this regard he is acceptable, that it
should be granted him to be brought unto
faith (ra KkaTak&iotqvat THC TIOTEWC)s The Eunuch
from Ethiopia He overlooked not. ‘What
shall one say then of the religious men who
have been overlooked?” It is not the case,
that any (such) ever was overlooked. But
what he says is to this effect, that God rejects
no man.t ‘In every nation, he that feareth
God and worketh righteousness:” (by right-
eousness) he means, all virtue. Mark, how
he subdues all elation of mind in him. That
(the Jews) may not seem to be in the condi-
tion of persons cast off (he adds), “The word


repeated. In A the order is, a, d, the rest being omitted:
in the modern text, a, d,c,4- and the text, ‘‘ Now therefore
are we all present,”’ etc. between (c) and (4).—With the inter-
pretation of Sexros comp. Severianus of Gabala in the Catena on
X. 4, OUK elev év TavTi €Over 6 TOL@Y SikaLdovYNY GwSeTaL, aAAG
Sextos eat, ToVTETTLY, a&tos yiveTat Tov dexXOnvar. And St. Chrys.
Hom. vili. in 1 Cor. C. Sextos avt@ éott TovTETTL, KaAEL
Kal emiomatat avTov mpos THY adyPecav. Paul is cited as an
instance: persecutor as he was, “ yet, because he led a blame-
less life, and did not these things of human passion, he was
both accepted and far outwent all. But if some one should
say, ‘ How is it that such an one, the Greek, kind as he is and
good and humane, continues in error?’ I answer, that he has
a fault of a different kind, vainglory or sluggishness of mind,
or not being in earnest about his salvation, but thinking that all
the circumstances of his life are mere chance-medley and hap-
hazard. But by ‘him that worketh righteousness,’ Peter
means, him that is blameless in all things (comp. zz/ra p. 151.)
Bye ashame ‘ How is it then,’ you will say, ‘that impure persons
have been accounted worthy to have the Gospel preached to
them (katné.oOnoav Tod knpvymatos)?’ Because they were will-
ing and desirous. For some, even which are in error, He
draws, when they become cleansed from their vices; and
others coming of their own aecord, He repulses not: many
also have inherited their piety from their ancestors.”

* The word mpocwrodAnumtms—‘respector of persons ’’—
(personarum acceptor, Vulg.) is a term founded upon the
phrase, AauBavery mpoowmov, an imitation of the Hebrew
335 Nw , to accept the person, the presence; to have a favor-
able or partial regard to the outward appearance,—as opposed
to 0°35 Jwn, to turn away the face (of the petitioner) i. e. to
deny him favor or acceptance (1 Kgs. ii. 16, 17, 20; 2 Chron. vi.
42; cf. Gen. xxxii. 21; 1 Kgs. v. i.)—G. B.S.

_ + The pertinent comments of Dr. Gloag may here be fitly
introduced (v. 35): ‘‘ Peter is here speaking of the admissi-
bility of the Gentiles into the Church of Christ; and he here
asserts that there is no natural obstacle in the way of any one
who fears God and works righteousness; that there is now no
barrier such as circumcision, no external hindrance, but that
all are equally acceptable to God. As Meyer well puts it,
Sextos avo €ariv indicates the capability in relation to God to
become a Christian, but not the capability to be saved without
Christ ; or, as Bengel observes, xon indifferentissimus relig-
tonum, sed indifferentia nationum hic asseritur.”’ (Gloag,
Com. in loco).—G. 5 k


1


which He sent unto the children of Israel,
preaching peace by Jesus Christ: He is Lord
of all (v. 36): this he says also for the sake
of those present (of the Jews), that He may
persuade them also: this is why he forces
Cornelius to. Speak... He saitn thea.
Lord of all.’ But observe at the very outset,
“The word,” says he, “which He sent unto
the children of Israel;” he gives them the
preéminence. Then he adduces (these Gen-
tiles) themselves as witnesses: “ye know,”
says he, “the matter which came to pass
throughout all Judea, beginning at Galilee—
then he confirms it from this also—“ after the
baptism which John preached (v. 37)—(‘even
Jesus of Nazareth, how God anointed Him
with the Holy Ghost and with power.” (v. 38.)
He does not mean, Ye know Jesus, for they
did not know Him, but he speaks of the
things done by Him: ‘Who went about
doing good, and healing all that were op-
pressed of the devil: by this? he shows that
many cases of lost senses or paralyzed limbs
are the devil’s work, and a wrench given to
the body by him: as also Christ said. ‘“ For
God was with Him.” Again, lowly terms.
“And we are witnesses of all things which He
did, both in the country of the Jews, and in
Jerusalem” (v. 39): both “we,” saith he, and
ye. Then the Passion, and the reason why —
they do not believe: ‘‘ Whom also they slew,
and hanged on a tree. Him God raised up
the third day, and showed Him openly; not
to all the people, but unto witnesses chosen
before of God, even to us, who did eat and
drink with Him after He rose from the dead.
(v. 40, 41.) This is a proof of the Resurrec-
tion. ‘And he commanded us to preach unto
the people, and to testify that it is He which
was ordained of God to be the Judge of quick
and dead.” (v. 42.) This is great. Then he
adduces the testimony from the Prophets:
“To Him give all the prophets witness, that
through His name, whosoever believeth in
Him shall receive remission of sins. (v. 43.)

+ There is no sufficient reason for the statement of Chrys.
that those to whom Peter spoke did not know Jesus. It is
meant that they were acquainted with the chief facts of his
life. Grammatically Incovv (38) must be construed as the
object (resumed in another form) of vets oidate (37). Resi-
dents in Czesarea must have heard of Jesus’ teaching and mir-
acles, during his lifetime on earth. Moreover, the apostles
had taught in the neighboring cities and wrought miracles,


and probably Philip had been for some little time residing and
laboring in Czsarea itself (Acts viii. 40).—G. B. S.

1 Evteddev Setxvuae moAAas mypwoets SuaBoAtkas Kai Stactpodyy
(B., dtaetpopas) cwpatos (Cat., cwuatwv) vm’ éxeivov yevouevas.
The term mypwors here includes loss of sight, speech, hearing,
palsied or withered limbs. ‘‘ He shows that these are diabol-
ical, and that they are a violent wrenching, or distortion, of
the body from its proper condition, caused by him.” The
sense requires either édcaotpodas or yevouernyv. The next sen-
tence, womep kat 0 Xptotos EAeyev, omitted by Edd., though, ex-
cept E., all the Mss. and Cat. have it, may refer to such ex-
pressions as that in Luke xiii. 16. Or, it may be in its proper
place after the following clause, ‘‘ For God was with Him:”’
again, a lowly expression: just as Christ spake: “for My
Father is with Me.”’


HomiLy XVIII.]


This is a proof of that which was about to be:
this is the reason why he here cites the
Prophets.

But let us look over again what relates
to Cornelius. (Recapitulation.) He sent, it
it says, to Joppa to fetch Peter. “He was
waiting for him,” etc; see how fully he be-
lieved that Peter would certainly come: (é)
“and! fell down at his feet, and worshipped
him.” (v. 24, 25.) (@) Mark how on every
side it is shown how worthy he is! (So)
the Eunuch there desired Philip to come up
and sit in the chariot (ch. viii. 31), although
not knowing who he was, upon no_ other
introduction (érayyeAiac) than that given by
the Prophet. But here Cornelius fell at his


feet. (¢) “Stand up, I myself also am a
man.’ (v. 26.) Observe how free from
adulation his speech is on all occasions,


and how full of humility.

with him, he came __ in.”
Conversing about what?
these words: “I myself also am a man.”
{e) Do you mark (Peter’s) unassuming
temper? He himself also shows that his
coming is God’s doing: ‘Ye know that it
is unlawful for a man that is a Jew,” etc.
(v. 28.) And why did he not speak of the
linen sheet ? Observe Peter’s freedom from
all vainglory: but, that he is sent of God,
this indeed he mentions; of the manner in
which he was sent, he speaks not at present;
when the need has arisen, seeing he had
said, “Ye know that it is unlawful for a
man that is a Jew to keep company with,
or to come unto, one of another nation,” he
simply adds, “ but to me God hath shown,”
etc. There is nothing of vainglory here.
pallaye,7> “hes says, know.” ;.Hiey makes
their knowledge stand surety for him. But
Cornelius says, “We are present before
God to hear all things that are commanded
thee of the Lord” (v. 33): not, Before man,
but, “Before God.” This is the way one
ought to attend to God’s servants. Do you
see his awakened mind? do you see how
worthy he was of all these things? ‘“ And
Peter,” it says, “opened his mouth, and
said, Of a truth I perceive that God is no
Kespecter of- persons.” (v. 34.) This. he
said also by way of justifying himself with
the Jews then present. For, being at the
point to commit the Word to these (Gentiles),
he first puts this by way of apology. What
then? Was He ‘‘a respecter of persons”
beforetime? God forbid! For beforetime
likewise it was just the same: “‘ Every one,”


“And conversing


(@) (v. 27.)


I suppose saying


1 The letters denote the order of the parts in the Mss. and
dd.


ie, Aes OFTHE APOSTLES: 151


as he saith, “that feareth Him, and worketh
righteousness, would be acceptable to Him.”
As when Paul saith, “ For when the Gentiles
which have not the Law, do by nature the
things of the Law.” (Rom. ii. 14.) “That
feareth God and worketh righteousness :”
he assumes? both doctrine and manner of
life :., is ‘accepted: with, dime for, 18). He
did not overlook the Magi, nor the Ethiopian,
nor the thief, nor the harlot, much more them
that work righteousness, and are willing, shall
He in anywise not overlook. ‘“ What say
you then to this, that there are likely per-
sons (érvevxeic), men of mild disposition, and
yet they will not believe?”’ (Above, p. 149,
note *.) Lo, you have yourself named the
cause: they will not. But besides the likely
person he here speaks of is not this sort of
man, but the man “that worketh righteous-
ness:” that is, the man who in all points is
virtuous and irreproachable, when he has
the fear of God as he ought to have it. But
whether a person be such, God only knows.
See how this man was acceptable: see how,
as soon as he heard, he was persuaded.
“Yes, and now too,” say you, “every one
would be persuaded, be who he may.” But
the signs that are now, are much greater
than those, and more wonderful.—Then Peter
commences his teaching, and reserves for
the Jews the privilege of their birth. “The *
word,” he says, “which He sent unto the
children of Israel, preaching peace (v. 36),
not bringing judgment. He is sent to the
Jews also: yet for all this He did not Spare
them. ‘Preaching peace through Jesus
Christ. .Hé-is.Lord -of all’. First) He’ dis-
courses of His being Lord and in exceeding
elevated terms, seeing he had to deal with a
soul more than commonly elevated, and that
took all in with ardor. Then he proves how
He was Lord of all, from the things which
He achieved ‘throughout all Judea. For ye
know,” saith he, “the matter which came to
pass throughout all Judea:”’ and, what is the
wonderful part of it, ‘“‘ beginning at Galilee:
after the baptism which John preached.” (v.
37.) First he speaks of His success, and then
again he says concerning Him, “ Jesus of Naz-
areth.” Why, what a stumbling-block, this


2 nai Soyma TLOnor (E. Edd. eioayer) cai moAtrecav. i.e. “it is
assumed, or the case is put, that the person has the right doc-
trine, of the One True God (that feareth God), and that he
is of a right conversation (that worketh righteousness.) ”’

3 In the Mss. and Edd. the order is confused. In the old
text: ‘‘The word—Lord of all. First he discourses—with
ardor. Yet for all this He did not spare them. Then he
proves how He is Lord of all. Which He sent, preaching
good tidings, not bringing judgment. [3.] He is sent from
God to the Jews. Then He shows this withal from the things
which He achieved,” etc. So, with verbal alterations, the
modern text, except that it omits the clause, od uny ovdé ovTws
éedeioaro.


152


THE WORKS OF ST. CHERYSOSi Gil


[HomiLy XXIII.


birthplace! ‘ How1 God anointed Him with
the Holy Ghost and with power. (v. 38.)
Then again the proof—how does that appear ?
—from the good that He did. ‘ Who went
about doing good, and healing all that were op-
pressed of the devil:” and the greatness of
the power shown when He overcomes the
devil; and the cause, ‘‘ Because God was with
Him.” Therefore also the Jews spake thus:
“We know that Thou art a teacher come from
God: for none can do these miracles except
God* be! with him.” (John’ in. 2.) “Then,
when he has shown that He was sent from
God, he next speaks of this, that He was
slain: that thou mayest not imagine” aught
absurd. Seest thou how far they are from
hiding the Cross out of view, nay, that to-
gether with the other circumstances they put
also the manner? “Whom also,” it says,
“they slew by hanging on a tree. And
gave Him,” it is added, “to be made mani-
fest not to all the people, but to witnesses
before ordained of God, even unto us:”
and yet it was (Christ) Himself that elected
them ; but this also he refers to God. “To
the before-ordained,” he says, “‘even to us,
who did eat and. drink with Him after that
Me wasirisen trom’ the dead. (v-'39, 41.)
See whence he fetches his assurance of the
resurrection. What is the reason that being
risen he did no sign, but only ate and drank ?
Because the Resurrection itself was a great
sign, and of this nothing was so much? a sign
as the eating and drinking. “To testify,”
saith he—in a manner calculated to alarm—
that they may not have it in their power
to fall back upon the excuse of ignorance :
and he does not say, “that He is the Son of
God,” but, what would most alarm them,
“that it is He which is ordained of God,
to be the Judge of quick and dead.” (v.
42.) “To him give all the Prophets wit
ness,” etc. (v. 43.) When by the terror he
has agitated them, then he brings in the
pardon, not spoken from himself but from
the Prophets. And what is terrifying is
from him, what is mild from the Proph-
ets.

All ye that have received this forgiveness,
all ye to whom it has been vouchsafed to
attain unto faith, learn, I beseech you, the
greatness of the Gift, and study not to be in-


1 Here also the order in the Mss. is confused.
proof. How God—with power.
who went about—of the devil. Then from the good that He
did, and the greatness,” etc. The modern text has the same
order, and the alterations do not affect the sense.

2 Perhaps it should be davtacdy, * that he (Cornelius) may
not imagine,”’ etc., therefore he mentions first the Divine Mis-
sion, then the Crucifixion.

3 ravtns 5€ over OvTW ONKMELOV MELCoV FV, WS TO dayerV KaL TLELY.
Cat. rightly omits meiov jv. E. Edd. ovtws eis amodecéty pecgor,
ws,


“ Again
Whence does this appear ?


solent to your Benefactor. For we obtained
forgiveness, not that we should become worse,
but to make us far better and more excellent.
Let none say that God is the cause of
our evil doings, in that He did not punish,
nor take vengeance. If (as it is said) a ruler
having taken a murderer, lets him go, say, is
he (not)* judged to be the cause of the mur-
ders afterwards committed? See then, how
we expose God to the tongues of the wicked.
For what do they not say, what leave un-
uttered? “(God) Himself,” say they, “ al-
lowed them; for he ought to have punished
them as they deserved, not to honor: them, nor
crown them, nor admit them to the foremost
privileges, but to punish and take vengeance
upon them: but he that, instead of this, hon-
ors them, has made them to be such as they
are.” Do not, I beseech and implore you, do
not let any man utter such speech as far as we
are concerned, JBetter to be buried ten thou-
sand times over, than that God through us.
should be so spoken of! The Jews, we read,
said to (Christ) Himself, “Thou that de-
stroyest the Temple, and in three days build-
est it up, come down from the Cross” (Matt.
xxvil, 4o): and again, “If Thou be the Son of
God:” but the reproaches here are more
grievous than those, that® through us He
should be called a teacher of wickedness!
Let us cause the very opposite to be said, by
having our conversation worthy of Him that
calleth us, and (worthily) approaching to the
baptism of adoption. For great indeed is the
might of baptism (dericuaroc): it makes them
quite other men than they were, that partake
of the gift; it does not let the men be men


4 The original reporter seems to have misifnderstood what
was said. If eiwé wor be retained, we must read ovxt avros.
The sense is, ‘‘ Take heed lest any lay the blame of your evil
doings upon God. For you know what would be said of a
magistrate who should let a murderer go unpunished; that he
would be held responsible for all the murders that may be
afterwards done by that man, or in consequence of his impu-
nity. Dread lest through your misconduct God be thus blas—
phemed.”’ But—as if Chrysostom’s meaning had been, Since
God’s purpose in forgiving us our sins was, that we should
lead more virtuous and holy lives, therefore let none presume
to say that God, by forgiving us, is the cause of the evil
doings of which we are afterwards guilty ’’—the modern text
(E. D. F. Edd.) goes on thus: ‘‘ For say, if a magistrate, etc.
is he judged to be the cause of the murders thereafter com-
mitted? By no means. And how is it that we ourselves,
while, by the things we dare to do, we expose God to be
insulted by godless tongues, do not fear and shudder? For
what,” etc. h

5E. D. F. Edd. ‘' Therefore, that it may not be possible
for Him through us to be called, etc., and lest by the very fact
of His being thus blasphemed ; we ourselves become liable to
the punishment thereof (‘ For through you,’ it is written, ‘My
Name is blasphemed among the Gentiles,’) let us cause the
very opposite to be said, by having our conversation worthy
of Him that calleth us, and (worthily) approaching to the bap-
tism of adoption. For great indeed,” etc. In (Ge it is:
““ teacher of wickedness. et us cause the very opposite to be
said. For great indeed.” etc. B. ‘teacher of wickedness.
For great indeed,’ etc. But the genuineness of the
latter clauses, a&iws tod KaAovvTos ToALTEVOMEVOL Kal TO THS
vio8ecias mpocrdvtes Bantiopatt, Which are also needed by the
following context, is attested by A. which retains them; for
this Ms. abridges much, but never borrows from the modern
text.


HomiLy XXIII]


(and nothing more).
rov "EAAqva), to believe that great is the might
of the Spirit, that it has new-moulded, that it
has fashioned thee anew. Why waitest thou for
the last gasp, like a runaway slave, like a
malefactor, as though it were not thy duty to
live unto God? Why dost thou stand affected
to Him, as if thou hadst in Him a ruthless,
cruel Master? What can be more heartless
(wuypérepov), What more miserable, than those
who make that the time to receive baptism ?
God made thee a friend, and vouchsafed thee
all His good things, that thou mayest act the
part of a friend. Suppose you had done some
man the greatest of wrongs, had insulted him,
and brought upon him disgraces without end,
suppose you had fallen into the hands of the
person wronged, and he, in return for all this,
had honored you, made you partaker of all
that he had, and in the assembly of his
friends, of those in whose presence he was in
sulted, had crowned you, and declared that
he would hold you as his own begotten son,
and then straightway had died: say, would
you not have bewailed him? would you not
have deemed his death a calamity ? would you
not have said, Would that he were alive, that
I might have it in my power to make the
fit return, that I might requite him, that I
might show myself not base to my benefactor ?
So then, where it is but man, this is how you
would act; and where it is God, are you
‘eager to be gone, that you may not requite
your benefactor for so great gifts? Nay
rather, choose the time for coming to Him so
that you shall have it in your power to requite
Him like for like. True,’ say you, but I can-
not keep (the gift). Has God commanded im-
possibilities? Hence it is that all is clean re-
versed, hence that, all the world over, every
thing is marred—because nobody makes it his
mark to live after God. Thus those who are
yet Catechumens, because they make this
their object, (how they may defer baptism to
the last,) give themselves no concern about
leading an upright life: and those who have
been baptized (wriofevrec), Whether it be be-
cause they received it as children, or whether
it be that having received it in sickness, and
afterwards recovered (dveveyxévrec), they had no
1 Here all the Mss. have Ti devyets ; Ti Tpéuers; Te SeSorkas ;
(Edd. omit the two latter clauses,) which, being out of place
here, and required below, we have transposed to the begin-
ning of the set of questions My yap ov eve x. Tt. A.—Below, he
laments that the Catechumens, while delaying their baptism,
if possible, to their dying hour, think themselves no way con-
cerned to jead a virtuous life: of the baptism he distinguishes
three classes: 1. those who received the sacrament in infancy;
2. those who were baptized in sickness and fear of death, but
afterwards recovered: both which sorts, he Says, are alike
careless (the former because baptized in unconscious infancy),
the latter because they did not think to survive, and had no
hearty desire to live to the glory of God ; 3. those baptized


in mature age, and in health; and these also, if at the time
their affections were kindled, soon let the flame go out.


iit ACTS/OR- FHE “APOSTLES.


Make thou the Gentile |


| but) to lead a quiet life in godliness and honesty.
| reads ¢n@c.


153


hearty desire-to live on (to the glory of God),
so it is, that neither do these make an earnest
business of it: nay, even such as received it in
health, have little enough to show of any good
impression, and warmly affected for the time,
these also presently let the fire go out. Why
do you flee? why do you tremble ? what is it
you are afraid of? You do not mean to say
that you are not permitted to follow your busi-~
ness? I do not part you from your wife!
No, it is from fornication that I bar you. I
do not debar you from the enjoyment of your
wealth? No, but from covetousness and
rapacity. I do not oblige you to empty out
all your coffers? No, but to give some smal}
matter according to your means to them that
lack, your superfluities to their need, and not
even this unrewarded. We do not urge you
to fast? We do but forbid you to besot
yourselves with drunkenness and gormandiz-
ing. The things we would retrench are but
the very things which bring you disgrace;
things which even here, on this side of hell-
fire, you yourselves confess to be things to be
shunned and hated. We do not forbid you to
be glad and to rejoice? Nay, only rejoice
not with a disgraceful and unbecoming merri-
ment. What is it you dread, why are you
afraid, why do you tremble? Where mar-
riage is, where enjoyment of wealth, where food
in moderation, what matter of sin is there in
these things? And yet, they that are without
enjoin the opposites to these, and are obeyed,
For they demand not according to thy means,
but they say, Thou must give thus much: and
if thou allege poverty, they will’ make no ac-
count of that. Not so Christ: Give, saith
He, of what thou hast, and I inscribe thee in
the first rank. Again those say, If thou wilt
distinguish thyself, forsake father, mother,
kindred, friends, and keep close attendance
on the Palace, laboring, toiling, slaving, dis-
tracted, suffering miseries without number,
Not so Christ; but keep thou, saith He, at
home with thy wife, with thy children, and as
for thy daily occupations reform and regulate
them on the plan of leading a peaceable life,
free from cares and from perils. True, say
you, but the other promises wealth. Aye, but
Christ a kingdom, and more, He promises
wealth also with it. For, “ Seek ye,” saith


2 otd:v mpoomoijgovtat, meaning perhaps, “‘they will pre-
tend to make no account of that: they will say that chat makes
no difference.’ Edd. from E. only, ové€ ottws adioravtat,
‘“they do not desist for all_that.’ "Below: nai avta tava
StarAarrexat pvOucce: i. e. Christ does not require you to
abandon your calling in life, but these same occupations and
duties of your station He bids you to mould and bring into
entire conformity with His commandments:—rtov ampaypova
Biov ony Kat axivévvoyv ; something is wanting, the sense being,

‘ making it your object (not to obtain distinction, w oe a
avile


154


He, “the kingdom of Heaven, and all these
things shall be added unto you” (Matt. vi. 33) :
throwing in,’ by way of additional boon, what
the other holds out as the main thing: and the
Psalmist says, he has “never seen the right-
eous forsaken, nor his seed begging their
bread.” (Ps. xxxvii. 25.) Let us set about
practising virtue, let us make a beginning; let
us only lay hold on it, and you shall see
what the good will be. For surely in these
(worldly) objects you do not succeed so with-
out labor, that you should be so faint-hearted
for these (higher) objects—that? you should
say, Those are to be had without labor, these
only with toil. Nay,—what need to tell you
what is the true state of the case ?—those are
had only with greater labor. Let us not re-
coil from the Divine Mysteries, I beseech
you. Look not at this, that one who was bap-
tized before thee, has turned out ill, and has
fallen from his hope: since among soldiers
also we see some not doing their duty by the
service, while we see others distinguishing
themselves, and we do not look only at the
idle ones, but we emulate these, the men who
are successful. But besides, consider how
many, after their baptism, have of men be-
come angels! Fear the uncertainty of the
future. ‘Asa thief in the night,’ so death
comes: and not merely as a thief, but while
we sleep it sets upon us, and carries us off
while we are idling. To this end has God
made the future uncertain, that we may spend
our time in the practice of virtue, because of


the uncertainty of expectation. But He is
merciful, say you. How long shall we hear
this senseless, ridiculous talk? J affirm not


only that God is merciful, but that nothing
can be more merciful than He, and that He
orders all things concerning us for our good.
How many all their life do you see afflicted
with the worst form of leprosy! (é ééoavr.
Sudyovrac, ““Elephantiasis,’’) how many blind from
their earliest youth even to old age! others
who have lost their eyesight, others in pov-
erty, others in bonds, others again in the
mines, others entombed (karaywobévrac) together,
others (slaughtered) in wars! These things
say you, do not look like mercy. Say, could
He not have prevented these things had He
wished, yet He permits them? True, say you.


_) Kai emt mpocOyxns wéper, & mponyouuevws éxeivos: Kai ovK
eldev, dyat, Sixacov x. 7. The modern text (E. D. F. Edd.)
inverts the meaning: Kat éxetvos wév ovdé ev mpooOyKns méper,
otros b€ kai mponyounevws. ‘* And the former does not even by
way of additional boon (hold out this), the latter (Christ) as the
main thing.”’ Adding, ‘‘ I have been young, saith (the Psalm-
ist), for indeed I am become old: and I never saw,” etc.

apB oD hay edds. si Vess say you, ‘those (are to be had)
without labor, these with labor.* “Away with (such talk): it is
not, no it is not so, but if one must say the truth, those (objects)
are more yoked with toils, and are achieved with greater toil ;
but these, if we choose, easily.”


THE WORKS OF ‘ST. CHEYS057@Re


{Homity XXIII.


Say, those who are blind from their infancy,
why are they so? Iwill not tell you, until
you promise me to receive baptism, and, being
baptized, to live aright. It is not right to give
you the- solution of these questions. The
preaching is not meant just for amusement.
For even if I solve this, on the back of this
follows another question: of such questions
there is a bottomless deep. Therefore* do
not get into a habit of looking to have them
solved for you : else we shall never stop ques-
tioning. For look, if I solve this, I do but
lead the way to question upon question, num-
berless as the snowflakes. So that this is
what we learn, rather to raise questions, not to
solve the questions that are raised. For even
if we do solve them, we have not solved them
altogether, but (only) as far as man’s reason-
ing goes. The proper solution of such ques-
tions is faith: the knowing that God does all
things justly and mercifully and for the best :
that to comprehend the reason of them is im-
possible. ‘This is the one solution, and an-
other better than this exists not. For say,
what is the use of having a question solved?
This, that one needs no longer to make a
question of the thing which is solved. And if
thou get thyself to believe this, that all things
are ordered by the Providence of God, Who,
for reasons known to Himself, permits some
things and actively works others, thou art rid
of the need of questioning, and hast gotten
the gain of the solution. But let us come
back to our subject. Do you not see such
numbers of men_ suffering chastisements ?
God (say you) permits these things to be.
Make the right use of the health of the body,
in order to the health of the soul. But you
will say, What is the use to me of labors and
toil, when it is in my power to get quit of all
(my sins) without labor? In the first place,
this is not certain. It may happen, that a
person not only does not get quit of his sins
without labor, but that he departs hence with
all his sins upon him. However, even if this
were certain, still your argument is not to be
tolerated. He has drawn thee to the con-
tests: the golden arms lie there. When you
ought to take them, and to handle them, you
wish to be ingloriously saved, and to do no
good work! Say, if war broke out, and the
Emperor were here, and you saw some charg-
ing into the midst of the phalanxes of the
enemy, hewing them down, dealing wounds by
thousands, others thrusting (with the sword’s
B. C. Sav. But the modern text has uovoy for mpos TovTo, and
adds aAAa kat mpos ro wy Cntecv: ‘therefore accustom your-
selves not only to seek the solution (of the questions), but also
not to raise the questions.”’—Below : wate tovTo pavOavouer (so


A.D. F. Sav. the rest, wav@avwuev) waddov Cntetv, ovxit (Edd.
H) Ta CntynPevra Avery.


HomILy XXIV.]


point), others bounding (now here, now there),
others dashing on horseback, and _ these
praised by the Emperor, admired, applauded,
crowned: others on the contrary thinking
themselves well off if they take no harm, and
keeping in the hindmost ranks, and sitting
idly there; then after the close of the war, the
former sort summoned, honored with the
greatest gifts, their names proclaimed by the
heralds: while of the latter, not even the
name becomes known, and their reward of
the good obtained is only that they are safe :
which sort would you wish to belong to?
Why, if you were made of stone, if you were
more stupid even than senseless and lifeless
things, would you not ten thousand times


_ “While Peter yet spake these words, the Holy Ghost
fell on all them which heard the word. And they
of the circumcision which believed were aston-
ished, as many as came with Peter, because that on
the Gentiles also was poured out the gift of the
Holy Ghost. For they heard them speak with
tongues, and magnify God.”


OpsERVE God’s providential management.
He does not suffer the speech to be finished,
nor the baptism to take place upon a com-
_mand of Peter, but, when He has made it evi-

dent how admirable their state of mind is, and
a beginning is made of the work of teaching,
_ and they have believed that assuredly baptism
_is the remission of sins, then forthwith comes
the Spirit upon them. Now this is done by
_ God’s so disposing it as to provide for Peter a
_ mighty ground of justification.* And it is not
“simply that the Spirit came upon them, but,
“they spake with tongues:” which was the
thing that astonished those who had come to-


.
.
;


-


* This is the only instance in the Acts in which the Holy
Spirit is saii to be given anterior to baptism (cf. xix. 5, 6)
_ which was generally accompanied by the laying on of hands
by the apostles. A special reason is observable here which
greatly diminishes the force of Baur’s objections to the his-
_ toricity of the narrative drawn from this exceptional order of
events, viz: the marked receptivity of Cornelius and his com-
pany. Perhaps it was intended by divine providence to
Signalize this bringing in of the first fruits of the Gentiles by
showing how little the gifts of grace are conditioned upon
outward rites. Some critics suppose that this gift of the
Spirit before baptism was granted to impress Peter with the
idea of the admissibility of the Gentiles, but this seems
unnecessary, as he had been taught this lesson already by the
Vision and had distinctly avowed his conviction (v. 35).
_ Chrysostom’s exposition is in the line of the latter interpreta-
tion; he forcibly calls this gift of the Spirit an amoAoyia
Beyadn for Peter. The principle which Bengel lays down in
his comments—/iberum gratia habet ordinem—together with
the special significance of the occasion is a sufficient explana.
tion of the apparently exceptional manner of the bestowment
of the Spirit here.—G. B. S.


DRE. ACTS: OF THE APOSTLES,


155


rather belong to the former? Yea, I beseech
and implore you. For if need were to fall
fighting, ought you not eagerly to choose this?
See you not how it is with them that have
fallen in the wars, how illustrious they are,
how glorious? And yet they die a death,
after which there is no getting honor from the
emperor. But in that other war, there is
nothing of the kind, but thou shalt in any
wise be presented with thy scars. Which
scars, even without persecutions, may it be
granted all us to have to exhibit, through
Jesus Christ our Lord, with Whom to the
Father and the Holy Ghost together be glory,
dominion, honor, now and ever, and world
without end. Amen.


J UO Ns bis ele. O-6 Be


NC TSE ee 4a AG:


gether. They altogether disliked the matter,
wherefore it is that the whole is of God; and
as for Peter, it may almost be said, that he is
present only to be taught’ (with them) the
lesson, that they must take the Gentiles in
hand, and that they themselves are the per-
sons by whom this must be done. For where-
as after all these great events, still both in
Caesarea and in Jerusalem a questioning is
made about it, how would it have been if these
(tokens) had not gone step by step with the
progress of the affair? Therefore it is that
this is carried to a sort of excess.” -Peter
seizes his advantage, and see the plea he
makes of it. ‘Can any man forbid water,
that these should not be baptized, which have
received the Holy Ghost as well as we?”
(v. 47.) Mark the issue to which he brings it;
how he has been travailing to bring this forth.
So (entirely) was he of this mind! “Can any
one, he asks, “forbid water?” It is the lan-
guage, we may almost say, of one triumph-
antly pressing his advantage (éreuPaivovroc)


1 kai 6 Ilétpos oxeddv amdas mapeote madevomevos, Erasm.
Sere simpliciter adest ut discat. Not meaning that St.
Peter needed to be taught (see above p. 146, note 1), but that
—such is the oixovouia for his exculpation—it is made to ap-

ear as if he needed the lesson and was now taught it, and had

is misapprehensions rectified in common with them. Ben.,
entirely mistaking the meaning, has guasi fortutto adest
docens.

2 Kat dca rtovro ped’ wvrepBodns yiverac. Erasm. J/dcirco
hec cum excellentia quadam fiebant. Ben. Jdeo hec modo
singular? fiunt. But the meaning is, ‘‘ There is a lavish array
of Divine interpositions. The mission of the Angel to Cor-
nelius, Peter’s vision, the command given by the Spirit, above
all, the gift of the Holy Ghost and the speaking with tongues
before the baptism. This last was in itself an unanswerable
declaration of the will of God, and sufficed for the Apostle’s
justification. The others are €x mepiovotas, arguments ex
abundanti.”’


156


against such as would forbid, such as should
say that this ought not to be. The whole
thing, he says, is complete, the most essential
part of the business, the baptism with which
we were baptized. ‘And he commanded
them to be baptized in the name of Jesus
Christ.” (v. 48.) After he has cleared him-
self, then, and not before, he commands
them to be baptized: teaching them by the
facts themselves. Such was the dislike
the Jews had to it! Therefore it is that
he first clears himself, although the very
facts cry aloud, and then gives the command.
“ Then prayed they him ”’—well might they do
so— to tarry certain days:” and with a good
courage thenceforth he does tarry.

“ And the Apostles and brethren that were
in Judea heard that the Gentiles had also
received the word of God. And when Peter
was come up to Jerusalem, they that were of
the circumcision contended with him, saying,
Thou wentest in to men uncircumcised, and
didst -eat with them.” (chi xi. r=3))ayAiver
such great things, ‘they of the circumcision
contended:”’ not the Apostles; God forbid !
It means, they took no small offence.* And
see what they allege. ‘They do not say, Why
didst thou preach? but, Why didst thou eat
with them? But.Peter, not stopping to notice
this frigid objection—for frigid indeed it is—
takes his stand (icrarw) on that great argu-
ment, If they had the Spirit Itself given them,
how could one refuse to give them the bap-
tism? But how came it that in the case of
the Samaritans this did not happen, but, on
the contrary, neither before their baptism nor
after it was there any controversy, and there
they did not take it amiss, nay, as soon as
they heard of it, sent the Apostles for this
very purpose? (ch. viii. 14.) True, but
neither in the present case is this the thing
they complain of; for they knew that it was
of Divine Grace: what they say is, Why didst
thou eat with them? Besides, the difference?
is not so great for Samaritans as it is for Gen-
tiles. Moreover, it is so managed (as part of
the Divine plan) that he is accused in this


* Some critics (as Meyer, Olshausen) have affirmed the oppo-


site of what Chrys. states,in regard to the oc é« mepttou7s.
He excludes the apostles from this category; they would include
them. The oc €x mepitouyjs, however, seem to have been a
special class of Christians in the mind of the writer. In
expressing the fact that the Church learned of the reception
of the Gentiles, the ‘‘ apostles and brethren”’ are named, but
when the narrative advances to the thought of the contention
against Peter on account of it, a new term is chosen; the
writer could not allow the same subject to stand for the verb
dvexptvovto, but chooses another term—ou é€x zepitou7ns. The
two subjects, then, can hardly be identical. The phrase more
probably denotes judaizing Christians, i. e. those who gave
special prominence to the Law and the necessity of circum-
cision (So Lechler, Gloag, Alford).—G. B. S.

1"AAAws 68 ov TogodTov To Stahopoy Tamapertav Kai eOvav.
Edd. (from E. alone,) for ov tooovtoy have woAvd Kali ametpor,
“great and infinite the difference between Samaritans and
Gentiles.”


THE WORKS OF ST. CHEYSOS Tait


[Homity XXIV.


way: on purpose that they may learn: for
Peter, without some cause given, would not
have related the vision. But observe his free-
dom from all elation and vainglory. For it
says, ‘“‘ But Peter rehearsed the matter from
the beginning, and expounded it by order unto
them, saying, I was in the city of Joppa, pray-
ing:’’ he does not say why, nor on what occa-
sion: “and in a trance I saw a vision, a
certain vessel descend, as it had been a great
sheet, let down from heaven by four corners;
and it came even to me (v. 4, 5): upon the
which when I had fastened mine eyes, I consid-
ered, and saw fourfooted beasts of the earth,
and wild beasts, and creeping things, and fowls
of the air. And I heard a voice saying unto
me, Arise, Peter; slay and eat.” (yoG2q 0)
much as to say, This of itself was enough to
have persuaded me—my having seen the linen
sheet: but moreover a Voice was added.
“ But I said, Not so, Lord: for nothing com-
mon or unclean hath at any time entered into
my mouth.” (v.8.) Do you mark? “I did
my part,” says he: “*I “said; ithapl game
never eaten aught common or unclean:”
with reference to this that they said, “ Thou
wentest in, and didst eat with them.’’ But
this he does not say to Cornelius: for there
was no need to mention it to him. ‘“ But the
voice answered me again from heaven, What
God hath cleansed, that call not thou com-
mon. And this was done three times: and all
were drawn up again into heaven.” (v.49, 10.)
The essential points were those” (that ensued
at Czsarea); but by these he prepares the
way for them. Observe how he justifies him-
self (by reasons), and forbears to use his
authority as teacher. For the more mildly he
expresses himself, the more tractable he makes
them. ‘ At no time,” says he, “has aught
common or unclean entered into my mouth.—
And, behold—this too was part of his defence
—three men stood at the house in which I
was, sent to me from Cesarea. And the
Spirit bade me go with them, nothing doubt-
ing.” .(v. 11,12.) Do yourymark that a7
to the Spirit the enacting of laws belongs!
‘“And these also accompanied me ’—nothing
can be more lowly, when he alleges the breth-
ren for witnesses !—‘‘ these six men, and we
entered into the man’s house: and he showed
us how he had seen an angel in his house,
which stood and said unto him, Send men to
Joppa, and call for Simon, whose surname is
Peter; who shall tell thee words, whereby thoy


2 A. B.C. (after v. 11. which we have removed), Exetva
avaykata Wy (read Ta av.) aAAa Sta ToVTwWY a’Ta KaTagKEVacel,
By éxeiva he means, what we have heard above, what hap-
pened at Czesarea. The modern text (Edd.): ‘‘ What points
were essential, he relates, but of the rest he is silent: or rather
by these he confirms them also, kai a’ta xatacKevacet.”’


HomILy XXIV.] THE ACTS, OF


and all thy house shall be saved.” (v. 13, 14.)
And he does not mention the words spoken
by the Angel to Cornelius, “* Thy prayers and
thine alms are come up for a memorial before
God, that he may not disgust them; but what
sayshe? ‘“ He shall tell thee words, whereby
thou and all thy house shail be saved:” with
good reason this is added. Also he says
nothing of the man’s fitness (érveéc). ‘ The
Spirit,” he might say, ‘‘ having sent (me), God
having commanded, on the one part having
summoned (me) through the Angel, on the
other urging (me) on, and solving my doubt
about the things, what was todo?” He says
none of these things, however: but makes his
strong point of what happened last, which even
in itself was an incontrovertible argument.
gexnd as I began to speak,’ etc. (v.. 15.)
Then why did not this happen alone? Of
superabundance (é« zepiwvoiac) this is wrought
by God, that it might be shown that the be-
ginning too was not from the Apostle. But
had he set out of his own motion, without any
of these things having taken place, they would
have been very much hurt: so? that from the
beginning he disposes their minds in his favor
_* * : saying to them, ‘‘ Who have received
the Holy Ghost even as we.”” And not con-
tent with this, he reminds them also of the
words of the Lord: “ Then remembered I the
word of the Lord, how that he said, John in-
deed baptized with water; but ye shall be
baptized with the Holy Ghost.” (v. 16.) He
means, that no new thing has happened, but
just what the Lord foretold. ‘“ But? there
was no need to baptize?” (Comp. p. 158.)
But the baptism was completed already. And
he does not say, I ordered them to be bap-
tized: but what says he? ‘“ Forasmuch then
_ as God gave them the like gift as He did unto
us, who believed on the Lord Jesus Christ;
) what was I, that I could withstand God?”
_(v. 17.) He shows that he had himself done
nothing: for the very thing which we have
obtained, he says, that same did those men


1 roUTO elkOTws mpooKerta. i. e. though this was not men-
tioned before (see ahove, p, 145. note ®) with good reason it
is added here: viz. for Peter’s justification. Edd. from E.
“that he may not disgust them: but what had nothing great
in it, ‘He shall speak,’ efe. Do you mark how for this reason
I mentioned before, he hastenson?’’ But the saying, ‘* He
shall speak,’’ etc. was great, even greater than that which he
omits: but this was not necessary, the other (Chrys. means)
Sts strong point for Peter’s defence, and therefore is
added.

2 avwOev ata Thy Siavoiay oixerot, viz. by letting them see
how all along it was not his doing. Then before Aéywv mpos
_ avrovs, something is wanting: e. g. ‘‘ Which done, he urges
most effectively, ‘Who have received,’ ”’ etc.

3 E. D. F. Edd. ‘“ But there was no aeed to baptize, it ma
be said, for the baptism was complete, when the Spirit fell
uponthem.’ Therefore he does not say, I first ordered them
to be baptized, but what? ‘Can any man forbid water that
these should not be baptized?’ By this showing that he did
nothing himself. What therefore we have obtained, those
received.”’


THE APOSTLES. 7


15
receive. That he may more effectually stop
their mouths, therefore he says, “The like
gift.” Do you perceive how he does not
allow them to have less: when they believed,
says he, the same gift did God give unto them,
as He did to us who believed on the Lord,
and Himself cleanses them. And he does
not say, To you, but ¢o us. Why do you feel
aggrieved, when we * call them partakers
(with ws?) ‘ When they heard these things,
they held their peace, and glorified God, say-
ing, Then hath God also to the Gentiles
granted repentance unto life.” (v. 18.) Do
you mark that it all came of Peter’s discourse,
by his admirably skilful way of relating the
facts? They glorified God that He had given
repentance to themselves (xai airoic) also: they
were humbled by these words. Hence was
the door of faith opened thenceforth to the
Gentiles. But, if you please, let us look over
again what has been said.

“While Peter yet spake,” etc. (Recapit-
ulation.) He does not say that Peter was
astonished, but, “‘ They of the circumcision :”
since he knew what was in preparation. And
yet they ought to have marvelled at this, how
they themselves had believed. When they
heard that they had believed, they were not
astonished, but when God gave them the
Spirit. Then® “answered Peter and said,”
etc. (v. 47.) And therefore it is that he
says, “God hath shown that I should not call
common or unclean any human being.” (v.
28.) He knew this from the first, and plans
his discourse beforehand (with a view to it).
Gentiles? What Gentiles henceforth? They
were no longer Gentiles, the Truth being
come. It is nothing wonderful, he says, if
before the act of baptism they received the
Spirit: in our own case this same happened.
Peter shows that not as the rest either were
they baptized, but in a much better way.
This is the reason why the thing takes place
in this manner, that they may have nothing to
say, but even in this way may account them
equal with themselves. ‘And they besought
him,” it says, “to tarry certain days.” (v. 48.)
‘‘And the Apostles and brethren, etc. And
they of the circumcision contended with him.”
(ch. xi. 1. 2.) Do you remark how they were


4 Oray Hmets avTOUs KoLYwvoUs A€ywuev; ‘“ when we put them
ona level with us the Apostles and first disciples, in regard
that they received the Spirit in the same manner as we
received, and as the rest of you did not?”

5 tore o Il. torepov ektotratac’ Kat dia tovtTo dynoiv. “ But
when God gave them the Spirit, then Peter afterwards 1s
astonished,’’ etc. This is evidently corrupt. Tove o II.seems
to be part of the text v. 46. tore amexpi@n o Il. For torepov
efioratac we may perhaps restore, cat mpos tovto 6 II. varepor
toratat. ‘*On this Peter afterwards insists (as above, p. 156),
and with a view to this he says (before), ‘God hath shown

}me,’’’ etc. The innovator substitutes: ‘* When Peter ex-
pounded to them his trance, saying, ‘God hath shown me,’”’

‘etc. So Edd.


158


THE WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOGM:


[HomiLy XXIV.


not kindly disposed towards him? Saying
Thou wentest in to men uncircumcised, and
didst eat with them.” (v. 3.) Do you note
what zeal they had for the Law? Not Peter’s
authority abashed them, not the signs which
had taken place, not the success achieved,
what a thing it was, the Gentiles having
“received the word;”’ but they contended
about those petty things. For if none of
those (signs) had taken place, was not the
success (itself) enough?! But not so does
Peter frame his defence: for he was wise, or
rather it was not his wisdom, but the Spirit
that spake the words. And by the matter of
his defence, he shows that in no one point was
he the author, but in every point God, and
upon Him he casts the whole. ‘The
trance,” he says—“it was He that caused
me to fall into it, for ‘I was in Joppa,” etc.:
the vessel—it was He that showed it; I
objected: again, He spake, and even then I
did not hear: the Spirit commanded me to
go, and even then though I went, I did not
run: I told that God had sent me, and after
these things, even then I did not baptize, but
again God did the whole. God _ baptized
them, not I.” And he does not say, Was it
not right then to add the water? but, imply-
ing that nothing was lacking, ‘‘ What was I,
that I should withstand God?” What a
defence is here! For he does not say, Then
knowing these things, hold your peace; but
what? He stands their attack, and to their
impeachment he pleads—“‘ What was I, to be
able to hinder God?” It was not possible
for me to hinder—a forcible plea indeed, and
such as might well put them to shame.
Whence being at last afraid, “ they held their
peace and glorified God.”

In like manner ought we also to glorify
God for the good things which befall our
neighbors, only? not in the way that the


1 Et yap pndev rovtwy jv, ovK Apket TO KatopOwua; Of the
Edd. only Savile puts this, as it ought to be, interrogatively:
Ben. renders, ox sat fuisset prestium.

2 wovov wn KaGamep ot Ao.iTOL TaV veodwTidTwY emnpeacovTat,
oTav adAous Op@at dwticGevtTas, Kal EVOUS amLovTas. Aokacew Sec
Tov @eov, kav mavtes gwOwa.v: Kat av é€ay OBeAns K. T. A. Above


Hom. i. p. 20, it is said, ‘‘ the sick man”’ having received bap- |


tism in the prospect of death, ‘‘if he recovers, is as vexed’
because of his baptism ‘‘ as if some great harm had happened
to him.’’ And so it might have been said here, “ not (to feel)
as some of the newly-baptized (are apt to do, who) are annoyed
(or aggrieved, émnpeagovtar), when they see others”’ etc.: i. e.
who, seeing such cases, think themselves ill used that they
were not allowed to defer their baptism to the last moment,
but were torced upon the alternative either of leading a strict
life, or of forfeiting the grace of baptism. But the assertion
oi Aorrot TMV Veod. is too sweeping, and the word émnpeagovTac
is scarcely suitable to this sense: it should rather have been
de.vormafovow or avakiorafovc.v. The meaning, not fully ex-
pressed, is: ‘‘only not, like as the rest of the newly-baptized
are insulted, taunted or jeered (by some), when they see
others,”’ etc.: i. e. it is right to glorify God, only not to imagine
that God is glorified by those who, exulting in the safety of
their friends who received baptism at the point of death, taunt
the rest of the newly baptized, saying, ‘‘ See, these men are
safe: they are baptized to some purpose: while you have
received the gift, only to be in danger of losing it.’’-—He adds,


rest of the newly-baptized are insulted, when
they see others receiving baptism, and
immediately departing this life. It is right to
glorify God, even though all be saved: and
as for thee, if thou be willing, thou hast
received a greater gift (than they): I do not
mean in respect of the baptism, for the gift
there is the same for him as for thee, but in
regard that thou hast received a set time for
winning distinction. The other put on the
robe, and was not suffered to exhibit himself
therewith in the procession, whereas to thee,
God hath given full opportunity to use thine
arms for the right purpose, thereby to make
proof of them. The other goes his way, hay-
ing only the reward of his faith: thou
standest in the course, both able to obtain an
abundant recompense for thy works, and to
show thyself as much more glorious than he,
as the sun is than the smallest star, as the
general, nay rather as the Emperor himself,
than the lowest soldier. ‘Then blame thyself,
or rather not blame, but correct: for it is not
enough to blame thyself; it is in thy power
to contend afresh. Hast thou been thrown?
hast thou taken grievous hurt? Stand up,
recover thyself: thou art still in the course, the
meeting (#éavpov) is not yet broken up. Do
you not see how many that have been thrown
in the wrestling have afterwards resumed the
combat? Only do not willingly come by thy
fall. Dost thou count hima happy man for
departing this life? Much rather count thy-
self happy. Was he released of his sins?
But thou, if thou wilt, shalt not only wash
away thy sins, but shalt also have achieve-
ments (of good works), which in his case is
not possible. It is in our power to recover
ourselves. Great are the medicinal virtues
(¢apuaxa) of repentance: let none despair of
himself. That man truly deserves to be
despaired of, who despairs of himself; that
man has no more salvation, nor any hopes.
It is not the having fallen into a depth of
evils, it is the lying there when fallen, that is
dreadful, it is not the having come into such
a condition, it is the making light of it that is
impious. The very thing that ought to make
thee earnest, say, is it this that makes thee
reckless? Having received so many wounds,
hast thou fallen back ? Of the soul, there


“Tt is right to glorify God, though all be saved””—though
that were the case with all except yourself, that they passed
at once from baptism to that world, with the gift unimpaired,
and no more in danger to be lost. ‘‘ And as for you, if you
will, you have received a greater gift,’’ than they: etc.—For
emnpeagovtar, A. has emnpeagovorv. and this is adopted by the
innovator, who alters the passage thus (E. Edd.): ‘‘to glorify
God, aad’ ovx érnpeacgery (adopted by F. D.) ca@amep ot roAdoi
Tov veodwr. emnpeafovo.v, when they see,etc. It is right to
glorify God, cat ort pévery ov avyxwpet: “Dote kal od eav BEANS
«x. 7. A, (Erasm. et zon insultare: Ben. non autem insultazre
zllis.)


HomiLty XXIV.] ik AGS OF


can be no incurable wound; for the body,
there are many such, but none for the soul :
and yet for those we cease not in our
endeavors to cure them, while for these we
are supine. Seest thou not the thief (on the
cross), in how short a time he achieved (his
salvation)? Seest thou not the Martyrs, in
how short a time they accomplished the
whole work? ‘“ But martyrdom is not to be
had nowadays.” True, but there are con-
tests to be had, as I have often told you, if we
had the mind. ‘For they that wish,” says
the Apostle, ‘to live godly in Christ Jesus,
shall suffer persecution.” (2 Tim. ili. 12.)
They that live godly are always undergoing
persecution, if not from men, at any rate
from evil spirits, which is a more grievous
persecution. Yes, and it is in consequence,
first and foremost, of ease and comfort, that
those who are not vigilant undergo this. Or,
thinkest thou it is a trifling persecution to be
living at ease? This is more grievous than
all, this is worse than persecution. For, like
a running flux, ease makes the soul languid
(yavvoi): and as summer and winter, so perse-
cution and ease. But to show you that this is
the worse persecution, listen: it induces
sleep in the soul, an excessive yawning and
drowsiness, it stirs up the passions on every
side, it arms pride, it arms pleasure, it arms
anger, envy, vainglory, jealousy. But in time
of persecution none of these is able to make
a disturbance; but fear, entering in, and
plying the lash vigorously,-as one does to a
barking dog, will not let any of these passions
so much as attempt to give tongue. Who
shall be able in time of persecution to indulge
in vainglory? Who to live in pleasure?
Not one: but there is much trembling and
fear, making a great calm, composing the
harbor into stillness, filling the soul with awe.
I have heard from our fathers (for in our own
time God grant it may not happen, since we
are bidden not to ask for temptation), that in
the persecution of old time one might see men
that were indeed Christian. None of them
cared for money, none for wife, none for
children, nor home, nor country: the one
great concern with all was to save their lives
(or, souls). There were they hiding, some in
tombs and sepulchres, some in deserts: yes
tender and dainty women too, fighting all
the while with constant hunger. Then think
whether any longing for sumptuous and
dainty living at all came into the mind of
a woman, while in hiding beside a coffin
(capa Adpvaxc), and waiting for her maid-servant
to bring her meal, and trembling lest she
should be taken, and lying in her terror as in
a furnace : was she even aware that there ever


THE APOSPLES:


159


was such a thing as dainty living, that such
things as dress and ornaments exist at all
(ore Koopo¢ bAwe éoriv) ? Seest thou that now is
the persecution, with our passions, like wild
beasts, setting upon us on every side? Now
is the trying persecution, both in this regard,
and especially if it is not even thought to be
persecution at all. For this (persecution) has
also this evil in it, that being war, it is
thought to be peace, so that we do not even
arm ourselves against it, so that we do not
even rise: no one fears, no one trembles,
But if ye do not believe me, ask the heathen,
the persecutors, at what time was the conduct
of the Christians more strict, at what time
were they all more proved? Few indeed had
they then become in number, but rich in
virtue. For say, what profit is it, that there
should be hay in plenty, when there might be
precious stones? ‘The amount consists not in
the sum of numbers, but in the proved worth,
Elias was one: yet the whole world was not
worth so much as he. And yet the world
consists of myriads: but they are no myriads,
when they do not even come up io that one.
““Better* is one that doeth the will of God,
than ten thousand who are transgressors :”
for the ten thousands have not yet reached
to the one. “Desire not a multitude of
unprofitable children.” (Ecclus. xvi. 1.)
Such bring more blasphemy against God,
than if they were not Christians. What need
have I of a multitude? It is (only) more
food for the fire. This one might see even in
the body, that better is moderate food with
health, than a (fatted) calf with damage.
This is more food than the other: this is food,
but that is disease. This too one may see in
war: that better are ten expert and brave
men, than ten thousand of no experience.
These latter, besides that they do no work,
hinder also those that do work. The same
too one may see to be the casein a ship, viz.
that better are two experienced mariners,
than ever so great a number of unskilful
ones: for these will sink the ship. These
things I say, not as looking with an evil eye
upon your numbers, but wishing that all of
you should be approved men, and not trust
in your numbers. Many more in number
are they who go down into hell: but greater
than it is the Kingdom, however few it
contain. As the sand of the sea was the


1 xpelaowv els mommy TO O€Anua Kvupiov, 7 wvprot mapavopmor,
St. Chrys. repeatedly cites this, and almost in the same words,
as a text of Scripture, and the Edd. refer it to Ecclus. xvi. 23,
but there it is, xpetoowv yap els 7 xiAvoc (With no various read-
ing), and here the following words, ot (B. €t) yap wuptor mpas
tov (70, B. F. €va ovdérw €b8acav, seem to be meant as part of
the citation. For these E. Edd. substitute, Tovro xai tis codas
aiviTTopevos oVTw Tmws pyot. Savile adopts both, but reads
ov yap muptot.


160 TEE WORKS: OF


ST. CHERYSOSTORE [Homity XXIV.


multitude of the people (Israel) yet one man
saved them. Moses was but one, and yet he
availed more ‘than they all: Joshua was one
and he was enabled to do more than the
six hundred thousand. Let us not make
this our study merely, that (the people) may
be many, but rather, that they may be excel-
lent; when this shall have been effected,
then will that other follow also. No one
wishes at the outset to make a spacious house,
but he first makes it strong and sure, then
spacious: no one lays the foundations so
that he may be laughed at. Let us first
aim at this, and then at the other. Where
this is, that also will be easy: but where
this is not, the other, though it be, is to no
profit. For if there be those who are able
to shine in the Church, there will soon be
also numbers: but where these are not, the
numbers will never be good for anything.
How many, suppose you, may there be in
our city who ase likely to be saved (roig owfoué-
voc)? It is disagreeable, what I am going to
say, butI will say it nevertheless. Among
all these myriads, there are not to be found
one hundred likely to be saved: nay, even asto
these, I question it.. For think, what wicked-
ness there is in the POUR, what supineness
in the aged! None! makes it his duty to
look after his own boy, none is moved by
anything to be seen in his elder, to be
emulous of imitating such an one. The
patterns are defaced, and therefore it is that
neither do the young become admirable in
conduct. Tell not me, “We are a goodly
multitude:” this is the speech of men who
talk without thought or feeling (wuypar.) In
the concerns of men indeed, this might be
said with some show of reason: but where
God is concerned, (to say this with regard
to Him) as having need of us,* can never
be allowed. Nay, let me tell you, even in the
former case, this is a senseless speech
(yuypsv). Listen. A person that has a great
number of domestics, if they be a corrupt
set what a wretched time will he have of it!
For him who has none, the hardship, it
seems, amounts to this, that he is not waited
on: but where a person has bad servants,
the evil is, that he is ruining himself withal,
and the damage is greater (the more there
are of them.) For it is far worse than having
to be one’s own servant, to have to fight with
others, and take up a (continual) warfare.
These things I say, that none may admire the


1 Ovdeis thy emipedrccav Exet TOD matdds TOD EavTOU: ovdeis EXEL
SnAov mpds mpeaBUTny iSwv piunoacbar. i. e. ‘* The young are
neglected by their own parents and masters, and elsewhere
they see no good ex ample of the old to move them to v irtue.’

2°Emi 5& rod cov TOU Seouevov nua@v, ove ett. So A. B.C.
The modern text, Tov ov6.


Church because of its numbers, but that we
may study to make the multitude proof-worthy ;
that each may be earnest for his own share of
the duty—not for his friends only, nor his
kindred as I am always saying, nor for his
neighbors, but that he may attract the
strangers also. For example, Prayer is going
on; there they lie (on bended knees), all the


young, stupidly unconcerned (yvypor), (yes,)
and old too:é filthy nuisances rather than
young men; giggling, laughing outright,


talking—for I have heard even this going
on—and jeering one another as they lie along
on their knees: and there stand you, young
man or elder: rebuke them, if you see them
(behaving thus): if any will not refrain, chide
him more severely : call the deacon, threaten,
do what is in your power to do: and if he
dare do anything to you, assuredly you shall
have all to help you. For who is so irrational,
as, when he sees you chiding for such conduct,
and them chidden not to take your part?
Depart, having received your reward from
the Prayer.—In a master’s house, we count
those his best-disposed servants, who cannot
bear to see any part of his furniture in
disorder. Answer me; if at home you should
see the silver plate lie tossed out of doors,
though it is not your business, you will pick
it up and bring it into the house: if

see a garment flung out. of its place, though
you have not the care of it, though you
be at enmity with him whose business it is,
yet, out of good-will to the master, will you
not put it right? So in the present case.
These are part of the furniture: if you see
them lying about in disorder, put them to


rights: apply to me, I do not refuse the
trouble : inform me, make the offender known
to me: it is not possible for me to see all:


excuse me (in this). See, what wickedness
overspreads the whole world! Said I with-
out reason that we are (no better than) so
much hay (disorderly as) a troubled sea ?
I am not talking of those (young people),
that they behave thus; (what I complain of,
is) that such a sleepy indifference possesses
those who come in here, that they do not
even correct this misbehavior. Again I see
others stand talking while Prayer is going on;
while the more consistent* of them (do this)


3 mavres véor Yuxpoi Kat yepovres. The last word must be
corrupt, for he is speaking only of the young: perhaps it
should be yeworres with some genitive, e. g. “full of folly,’
or ‘‘evil thoughts.”” Then, Kadapuara MaAAov 7 véot, More fit
to be swept away from the floor as filthy litter than to be
regarded as young men. But xa@apua, in the sense derived
from the heathen ritual, has no equivalent in our language:
it means, what remains of the sacrifice used for lustration or
atonement, which as having taken into itself the uncleanness
or the guilt which was to be removed, was regarded with the
utmost abhorrence.

4 ot Sé emvetkéorepor avTav.
adhuc meeliores sctlicet.


Erasm.,
Ben. alzos


Et guidam ex tlits,
modestiores scilicet.


HomILy XXIV.]


SE PACTS OR THE APOSTLES. 101


not only during the Prayer, but even when
the Priest is giving the Benediction. O,
horror! When shall there be salvation?
when shall it be possible for us to propitiate
God ?—Soldiers* go to their diversion, and
you shall see them, all keeping time in the
dance, and nothing done negligently, but,
just as in embroidery and painting, from the
well-ordered arrangement in each individual
part of the composition, there results at
once an exceeding harmony and good keep-
ing, so it is here: we have one shield, one
head, all of us (in common): and if but some
casual point be deranged by negligence,
the whole is deranged and is spoilt, and the
good order of the many is defeated by
the disorder of the one part. And, fearful
indeed to think of, here you come, not to
a diversion, not to act in a dance, and yet
you stand disorderly. Know you not that
you are standing in company with angels?
with them you chant, with them sing hymns,
and do you stand laughing? Is it not
wonderful that a thunderbolt is not launched
not only at those (who behave thus), but
at us? For such behavior might well be
visited with the thunderbolt. The Emperor
is present, is reviewing the army: and do


But the irony is not of this kind, and the word here has its
proper sense: ‘‘men whose conduct is more of a piece, the
more consistent of them.’’ Some stand and talk during the
pas yet kneel and are silent far the Benediction: but
hese make no such inconsistent pretence: they do not commit
this absurdity at least.—Comp. Howz. i. 7. Oztant, § 4, t. vi. p.
ror. ‘‘A grievous disease prevails in the Church: when we
have purposed to hold converse with God, and are in the act
of sending up the doxology to Him, we interrupt our business,
and each takes his neighbor aside to talk with him about his
domestic concerns, about the goings on in the agora, the
ublic, the theatre, the army: how this was well managed,
hat neglected: what is the strong point, and what the weak
point in this or that business: in short, about all sorts of
ublic and private matters they talk here with one another.
s this pardonable? When a man speaks with the earthly
sovereign, he speaks only on the subjects the sovereign
chooses to speak and put questions about, and if against the
will of the sovereign he should presume to start any other
subject, he would bring upon himself the severest punish-
ment. And you, who are speaking with the King of. kings,
to Whom the angels minister with dread reverence, do you
leave your converse with Him to talk about mire, and dust,
and spiders—for that is what earthly things are? But you say,
the public affairs are in such a bad way, and there is much to
talk of and much to be anxious about. And whose fault is
that? They say, The blunders of our rulers are the cause.
No, not the blunders of our rulers, but our sins: the punish-
ment of our faults. It is these have ruined all, have brought
upon us all our sufferings, wars, and defeats. Therefore if we
had an Abraham, a Moses, a David, a Solomon, for our ruler,
yea, the most righteous of men, it would signify nothing as
far as the cause of all our evils is concerned ... And if we
have one of the most iniquitous of men, a blundering ill-
managing person for our ruler, it is our own folly and wicked-
ness that has brought this upon us, it is the punishment of
our sins. Therefore let each when he comes here think of his
own sins, and not complain of others.’’ How. ix. 7a 1 Tim. he
eens of the women talking in Church.

1 The illustration is taken from some kind of shield dance,
which formed one of the amusements of the camp, skilfully
executed by a large body of soldiers. The innovator, (E. D
F. Edd.) not understanding the allusion, substitutes: ‘‘ If you
go toa diversion, you will see all keeping time in the dance,
and nothing done negligently. As therefore in a well-har-
monized and curiously wrought lyre, one well sounding
symphony results from the orderly arrangement severally of
the component parts, so here there ought to result from all
one symphonious harmony. For we are become one Church,
we count as members, ‘ fitly joined together’ of one Head,
we all make one Body: if any carnal point be done negligently,
the whole, etc. Thus the good order,” etc.


It


you, even with His eyes upon you, stand
laughing, and endure to see another laugh-


ing? How long are we to go on chiding,
how long complaining? Ought not such


to be treated as very pests and nuisances;
as abandoned, worthless reprobates, fraught
with innumerable mischiefs, to be driven
away from the Church? When will these
forebear laughing, who laugh in the hour of
the dread Mystery (év dpa gpixne) ? when refrain
from their trifling, who talk at the instant
of the Benediction? Have they no sense
of shame before those who are present ?
have they no fear of God? Are our own
idle thoughts not enough for us, is it not
enough that in our prayers we rove hither
and thither, but laughter also must needs
intrude, and bursts of merriment? Is it a
theatrical amusement, what is done here?
Aye, but, methinks, it is the theatres that
do this: to the theatres we owe it that the
most of you so refuse to be curbed by us,
and to be reformed. What we build up here,
is thrown down there: and not only so, but
the hearers themselves cannot help being
filled with other filthinesses besides: so that
the case is just the same as if one should
want to clean out a place with a fountain
above it discharging mire ; for however much
you may clean out, more runs in. So it is
here. For when we clean people out, as
they come here from the theatres with their
filthiness, thither they go again, and take
in a larger stock of filthiness, as if they lived
for the purpose of only giving us trouble, and
then come back to us, laden with ordure,
in their manners, in their movements, in
their words, in their laughter, in their idle-
ness. Then once more we begin shovelling
it out afresh, as if we had to do this only


on purpose that, having sent them away
clean, we may again see them clogging
themselves with filth. Therefore I solemnly
protest to you, the sound members, that this
will be to you judgment and condemnation,
and I give you over to God from this time
forth, if any having seen a person behaving
disorderly, if any having seen any person
talking, especially in that part (of the Service),
shall not inform against him, not bring him
round (to a better behavior). To do this is
better than prayer. Leave thy prayer and
rebuke him, that thou mayst both do him
good, and thyself get profit, and so we may
be enabled all to be saved and to attain unto
the Kingdom of Heaven, through the grace
and loving-kindness of our Lord Jesus Christ,


with Whom to the Father and the Holy
Ghost together be glory, dominion, honor,
now and ever, and world wirhout end. Amen.


162


THE WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM


[HoMILy XXV.


BMOMILY An


ACTS


“Now they which were scattered abroad upon the
persecution that rose about Stephen travelled as
far as Phenice, and Cyprus, and Antioch, preach-
ing the word to none but unto the Jews only.”


THE persecution turned out to be no slight
benefit, as “to them that love God all things
work together for good.” (Rom. viii. 28.)
If they had made it their express study how
best to establish the Church, they would have
done no other thing than this—they dispersed
the teachers.* Mark in what quarters the
preaching was extended. “They travelled,”
it says, “‘as far as Phenice and Cyprus and
Antioch; to none however did they preach
the word but to Jews only.” Dost thou
mark with what wise purposes of Providence
so much was done in the case of Cornelius?
This serves both to justify Christ, and to
impeach the Jews. When Stephen was slain,
when Paul was twice in danger, when the
Apostles were scourged, then the Gentiles
received the word, then the Samaritans.
Which Paul also declares: “To you it was
necessary that the Word of God should first
be spoken; but since ye thrust it from you,
and judge yourselves unworthy, lo, we turn
unto the Gentiles.’ (ch. xiii. 46.) Accord-
ingly they went about, preaching to Gentiles
also, “But some of them were men of Cy-
prus and Cyrene, who, when they were come
to Antioch, spake unto the Greeks, preaching


* The narrative beginning with xi. 19, may be considered as |


a resumption of viii. 4,sq. where the preaching of Philip in
Samaria is referred to the persecution at Jerusalem as its
occasion. The dispersion of the disciples now becomes the
means of a great extension of the Gospel and the founding of
the first Gentile Church (at Antioch in Syria). This is the
third great movement in the spread of early Christianity.
The order is: (1) The preaching of Philip in Samaria, (2) The
conversion of Cornelius and his company—the first Gentile
additions to the church. (3) This mission which resulted in
the founding of the church at Antioch. But at this time
Divine Providence was preparing an agent who was destined
soon to enter upon his great life work as the Christian mission-
ary to the Gentile world, to prove the chief means of spreading
the gospel throughout the Roman world—this was the former
persecutor Saul, now transformed into the great apostle to the
Gentiles. The conversion of Cornelius must have occurred
about eight years after the ascension of Jesus. During this
time the church had continued Jewish. But in this very
period the conditions were preparing for the extension of
Christianity to the Gentile world. Stephen had caught
glimpses of the largeness of God’s truth and purposes. Peter
had learned that God is no respecter of persons. The mother
church at Jerusalem now finds that God’s grace has outrun all
their former conception of its scope; consecrated and able
men like Barnabas and Paul are rising up to labor in the line
of the more comprehensive conception of Christianity’s
method and purpose which is now dawning upon the con-
sciousness of the church.—G. B. S. j


XI. 19.


the Lord Jesus:” (v. 20.) for it is likely both
that they could now speak Greek, and that
there were such men in Antioch.t ‘ And the
hand of the Lord,” it says, “was with them,”
that is, they wrought miracles; ‘‘and a great
number believed, and turned unto the Lord.”
(v. 21.) Do you mark why now also there was
need of miracles (namely) that they might be-
lieve? “ Then tidings of these things came unto
the ears of the church which was in Jerusalem:
and they sent forth Barnabas, that he should
go as far as Antioch.” (v. 22.) What may
be the reason that, when such a city received
the word, they did not come themselves?
Because of the Jews. But they send Barna-
bas. However, it is no small part of the
providential management even so that Paul
comes to be there. It is both natural, and it
is wisely ordered, that they are averse to him,
and (so) that Voice of the Gospel, that Trum-
pet of heaven, is not shut up in Jerusalem.
Do you mark how on all occasions, Christ
turns their ill dispositions to needful account
and for the benefit of the Church? Of their
hatred to the man, He availed Himself for
the building up of the Church. But observe
this holy man—Barnabas, I mean—how he
looked not to his own interests, but hasted to
Tarsus. ‘‘ Who, when he came, and had seen
the grace of God, was glad, and exhorted them
all, that with purpose of heart, they would
cleave unto the Lord. For he was a good
man, and full of the Holy Ghost, and of faith:
and much people was added unto the Lord.”
(v. 23, 24.) He was a very kind man, and
single-hearted, and considerate (cvyyrwuovixdc).
“Then departed Barnabas to Tarsus, for to
seek Saul.” (v. 25.) Jade came to thecath-
letic wrestler, the general (fit to lead armies),


+ While the textual evidence for the reading “EAAnvotas
(v. 20.) predominates over that for the reading “EAAnvas (A. C.),
yet the latter is the reading adopted by Meyer, Tischendorf,
and most critics (not’so, W. and H.) on grounds of internal evi-
dence, such as: (1) That they should preach to Hellenists—men
of Jewish nationality residing out of Judea—would be nothing
noteworthy, since they had long been received into the Chris-
tiancommunity. (2) Thecontrast between vv. 19 and 20 would
be greatly weakened, if not lost, on the supposition that Hel-
lenistic Jews were meant. If this view is correct, they now
preached to the Greeks, the uncircumcised heathen, and the
Antioch Church was founded and its reception into Christian
fellowship approved by the mother church at Jerusalem.
Antioch now became an important centre of Christian work, —
second only to Jerusalem. Here Paul labored a year, and from


| Antioch he went forth to his three great missionary journeys.


BS:


HomiLty XXV.]


the champion of single combat, the lion—I
am at a loss for words, say what I will—the
hunting-dog, killer of lions, bull of strength,
lamp of brightness, mouth sufficing for a
world. ‘“ And when he had found him, he
brought him to Antioch.” (v. 26.) Verily
this is the reason why it was there they were
appointed to be called Christians, because
Paul there spent so long time! “And it
came to pass, that a whole year they
assembled themselves with the Church,
and taught much people. And the disciples
were first called Christians at Antioch.”* No
small matter of praise to that city! This is
enough to make it a match for all, that for so
long a time it had the benefit of that mouth,
it first, and before all others: wherefore also
it was there in the first place that men were
accounted worthy of that name. Do you ob-
serve the benefit resulting (to that city) from
Paul, to what a height that name, lke a
standard (ocjuciov), exalted it? Where three
thousand, where five thousand, believed,
where so great a multitude, nothing of the
sort took place, but they were called “they?
of the way:”’ here they were called Christians.
“And in these days came prophets from
Jerusalem unto Antioch.” (v. 27.) It was
need that the fruit of alms should also be
planted there. And see how of necessity
(avayxaiwe) (it comes about that) none of the
men of note becomes their teacher. They
got for their teachers, men of Cyprus, and
Cyrene, and Paul—though he indeed sur-
passed (the Apostles) themselves—since Paul
also had for teachers Ananias and Barnabas.
But? here of necessity (this was the case).
“And there stood up one of them named


* The name Christians was probably given by the Gentiles.
The word appears but twice, besides here, in the N. T. (Acts
xxvi. 8; 1 Pet. iv. 16), and in both cases it is implied that the
name was a name applied to the disciples of Jesus by others.
The Jews could hardly have originated the name since Christ
was to them but the Greek equivalent for their sacred name
Messiah, and from that word they would not have formed a
name for the hated sect. The Jews called them rather Naza-
renes (Acts xxiv. 5). The Romans seem to have misunder-
stood the origin of the name, as Tacitus says: A uctor nominis
ejus (Christiant) Christus, as 1f Christus was an appellative
instead of a title.—G. B.S.

1 add’ ot THS 0500 povoy HKovov, so Cat. CEcum. which we
adopt. A. B.C. add’ or, the modern text aad’ ére.

2 avayxaiws d€ evtav8a, as above mws avayxaiws. But in the
Mss. part of the text v. 28. being transposed, it reads “ But
here of necessity he says there will be a great dearth,” etc.—
Below, Ei 6 avtots jv, mavtws dec Kai bvTa mavcacbar. Ti
noiknoav “EAAnves, wa kai airol Tay Kax@v peTexwow; evdoxt-
Myoat yap avTovs waAdAov Expy, OTL TO avTwY émolouV, K. T. A.
*AAN et dca Ta Kaka, bynotv, x. tT. A. So the old text in Mss. and
Cat. The meaning is obscure, but on the whole it seems most
probable that all this is an interlocution of an objector. ‘‘If
as you Say, it was because of the Jews, assuredly it ought, even
when it was there, to have ceased (and not gone on to the rest
‘of the world). What harm had the Gentiles done, that they
should share in the punishment? Why, they ought rather to
have been distinguished by special marks of the Divine favor,
because they were doing their part (in executing God’s judg-
ments upon the Jews), were slaying, punishing, etc. Observe,
too, the time when this visitation first came—precisely when
the Gen*«les were added to the Church. Whereas if, as you
Say, 1t was because of the evils the Jews inflicted upon the
believers, these (the believers, Jews and Gentiles) ought to


re Bn Oe deat eo hee te ale


eee ae Tas a


opts


Pas cne ro OF THE” APOSTLES.


163


Agabus, and signified by the spirit that there
would be great dearth throughout the world,
which also came to pass in the days of Clau-
dius “Cesar.” /((v'28.) By the Spirit,” it
says: for, that they may not imagine that
this was the reason why the famine came,
(namely) because Christianity was come in,
because the demons were departed, the Holy
Ghost foretells it: this, however, was nothing
wonderful, for in fact Christ predicted it.
Not this was the reason, else this must have
been the case from the beginning: but it was
because of the evils done to the Apostles—
and God had borne long with them ; but, when
they pressed upon them, a great famine ensues,
betokening to the Jews the coming woes. “If
it was because of them, in any wise it ought
to have stopped (there), when it did exist.
What harm had the Gentiles done, that they
should have their share in the evils? They
ought rather to have been marked as ap-
proved (eidoxiugjoat), because they were doing
their part, were slaying, punishing, taking ven-
geance, persecuting on every side. And mark
also at what time the famine comes: precisely
when the Gentiles were thenceforth added to
the Church. But if, as you say, it was be-
cause of the evils (done by the Jews), these
ought to have been exempted.’ How so?
Christ, forestalling this objection, said, ‘‘ Ye
shall have tribulation.” (John xvi. 33.) (It
is) just as if you should say, They ought not
to have been scourged either. ‘‘ Then the
disciples, every man according to his ability,
determined to send relief unto the brethren
which dwelt in Judea.” (v. 29.) Mark how
the famine becomes to them the means of
salvation, an occasion of alms-giving, a har-
binger of many blessing. And (so it might
have been) to you, one may say, if you were
so minded, but ye would not. But it is pre-
dicted, that they might be prepared before-
hand for almsgiving. ‘“ Unto the brethren
which dwelt in Judza;” for they were endur-
ing great hardships, but before this, they were
not suffering from famine. ‘‘ Which also they
did, and sent it to the elders by the hands of
Barnabas and Saul.” (v. 30.) Do you mark


have been exempted,” etc. The modern text has: ‘‘ But even
if (aAA’ et Kat) it were because of them, yet because of the rest
(Sta tovs adAovs) it ought, even when it was, to have ceased.
For what harm had the Gentiles done, that even they, having
done no harm, should have their share of the evils? But if
not because of the Jews verily they ought rather to have been
even marked objects of favor,’’ etc. Perhaps this was in-
tended to mean: *‘ Suppose it was inflicted by the demons, the
Gods of the heathen, because of the Christians, why were the
Gentiles included? And as for the Jews. if it was not, as I
say, sent by God because of their wickedness, but as the
heathen sav, was a token of the anger of their Gods because of
the new religion, why assuredly the Jews ought to have been
marked objects of favor because they were doing all they
could to exterminate the faith.’’ But if so, it does not appear
how the next sentence, was understood, ** And observe at what
time,”’ etc.


164


THE WORKS OF ;ST. CHRYS@Sf Gr


[HoMILyY XXV.


them, that no sooner do they believe than
they bring forth fruit, not only for their own,
but for those afar off? And Barnabas is sent
and Saul, to minister (the same.) Of this
occasion (’Evraifa) he says (to the Galatians),
“And James, Cephas, and John gave to
me and Barnabas the right hands of fellow-
ship, only” (they would) “that we should
remember the poor.” (Gal. il. 9.) James
was yet living.

“Now they which were scattered abroad
upon the persecution,” etc. (Recapitulation.)
Do you mark how even in the tribulation
instead of falling to lamentations and tears,
as we do, they give themselves up to a great
and good work? “Travelled as far as
Phenice, and Cyprus, and Antioch,” and
there with more security preached the word.
“And some of them, which were men of
Cyprus and Cyrene,” etc. (v. 20.) And they
did not say, “(What), we, Cyrenians and
Cyprians, to attack this splendid and great
city!” but trusting in the grace of God, they
applied themselves to the work of teaching,
nor did these (Gentiles) themselves think
scorn to learn anything of them. Mark how
by small means all is brought about: mark
the preaching how it spreads: mark those in
Jerusalem, having like care for all, holding
the whole world as one house. ‘“ They heard
that Samaria had received the word, and”
(ch. vill. 14) to Samaria they send the Apos-
tles: they heard what had befallen at
Antioch, and to Antioch they send Barna-
bas: they also send again, and (these) proph-
ets. For the distance was great, and it
was not meet the Apostles at present should
separate from thence, that they might not be
thought to be fugitives, and to have fled from
their own people. But then, almost precisely,
is the time of their parting from Jerusalem,
when the state (of the Jews) was shown to be
past remedy, when the war was close at hand,
and they must needs perish: when the sen-


*"Ere laxwBos Gn. So, except E., all our Mss.—Ben. finds it
strange that this clause is added insome Mss. ‘‘ For what is it
to the matter in hand, that James was yet living? And which
James? For James the brother of John is mentioned presently
afterwards, as slain with the sword: and James the brother of
the Lord, Bishop of Jerusalem, is repeatedly mentioned as liv-
ing, in the subsequent history. Then for what purpose should
it be noticed here that he was alive? And yet why the copy-
ists should add this clause, is not easy to see.’’ The copyists
are notin fault. St. Chrys. (not fully reported) is identifying
this visit to Jerusalem with the visit mentioned in Gal. ii.
The mention there made (v. 9) of James, whom at the moment
he takes to be James the brother of John (especially as he is
named with Cephas and John), leads him to remark, ‘* James
was yet alive:’’ i. e. when Paul and Barnabas went up with
the alms, and when this conference ensued. (Acts xi.) Asim-
ilar inadvertency with respect to St. Philip has been noted
above, p. 115, note 1—E. substitutes togwovrov wheAer Oo Atwos.
and connects the following sentence with this by reading Kat
Opa avrovs, where the rest have ‘Opas avrovs, as if the OAs
here spoken of was the famine: which however had not yet be-
gun. Hence Ben. £¢ wide tllos ex fame, etc. In like man-
ner the innovator has mistaken the connection below. See note
1, p. 165. In fact. the Recapitulation begins here.


tence was made absolute. For, until Paul
went to Rome, the Apostles were there (at
Jerusalem). But they depart, not because
afraid of the war—how should it be so ?—
seeing those they went to, were those that
should bring the war: and moreover the war
breaks out only after the Apostles were dead.
For of them (the Apostles) says, ‘The wrath
is come upon them unto the end.” (x Thess.
ii. 16.) The more insignificant the persons, the
more illustrious the grace, working great
results by small means.—“* And 2 he exhorted
them to cleave unto the Lord, for he was a
good man.” (v. 23, 24.) By “good man,” I take
it, he means one that is kind, (ypyordv) sin-
cere, exceedingly desirous of the salvation of
his neighbors—‘ for he was a good man, and
full of the Holy Ghost and of faith. To* cleave
unto the Lord with purpose of heart” (this
is said): with encomium and praise. ‘“ And
much people was added unto the Lord:”
for like rich land this city received the word,
and brought forth much fruit. “Then departed
Barnabas to Tarsus,” etc. (v. 25.) But why
did he take him off from Tarsus and_ bring
him here? Not without good reason; for
here were both good hopes, and a greater
city, and a great body of people. See how
grace works all, not* Paul: by small means the.
affair was taking its commencement. When
it is become difficult the Apostles take it up.
Why did they not before this seen Barnabas?
Because they had enough to do (joyéAyvr0)
with Jerusalem. Again they justified them-
selves’ to the Jews, that the Gentiles were
recelving (xpoceddu3ave) the word, even with-
out enjoying so great attention. There is
about to be a questioning : therefore the affair
of Cornelius forestalled it. Then indeed they
say, “‘ That we to the Gentiles, and they to the
Circumcision.” (Gal. 11.9.) Observe, hence-
forth the very stress of the famine introduces
the fellowship on the part of the Gentiles,
namely, from the alms. For they receive the
offerings sent from them.


2ere Edd. from E. insert the formula of recapitulation,
add’ idwmev x. T. A.

3 Edd, from E.: ‘‘ Wherefore also with purpose of heart he
exhorted all: that is, with encomium and praise:”’ as if 77
mpobecer THs Kapdias belonged to TapeKaret, in the sense, ‘‘ with
heartfelt earnestness he exhorted.’

4 ov TlavAov: dca pixp@v apyny To Tpayma eAauBave. C. omits
IlavAov: Sta, D. om. ov IlavAov. Edd. from E., “ not Paul:
and how by the small means, the affair took its beginning, but
when it became conspicuous, then they sent Barnabas, And
why did they not send him before this? They took much fore-
thought for their own people, and did not wish the Jews to
accuse them because they received the Gentiles: and yet be-
cause of their inevitably mixing with them, since there was
some questioning about to arise, the matters relating to Corne-
lius forestalled (this). Then indeed they say,”’ etc.

5 The meaning seems to be, that they let the preaching to
the Gentiles take its course at first; and were enabled to say
to the Jews, ‘‘ See, the Gentiles receive the word without
encouragement from us: kat ov TogavTns amoAavovTa emime-


, ’


Aeias.’


f
|
:
:
‘


ogee =


HomiLy XXV.]}


“ Now! they which were scattered abroad,”
etc. (v. 19) and not as we who pass our time in
lamentations and tears, in our calamities ; but
with more fearlessness they passed their time,
as having got to a distance from those hinder-
ing them, and as being among men not afraid
of the Jews: which also helped. And _ they
came to Cyprus, where they had the sea
between them, and greater freedom from
anxiety: so” they made no account of the
fear of men, but (still) they gave the prece-
dence to the regard of the Law: “ they spake
to Jews only. But there were in Antioch cer-
tain men of Cyprus and Cyrene:” these, of
all others, least cared for the Jews: ‘‘ who
spake unto the Greeks, preaching the Lord
Jesus.” (v. 20.) Probably it was because of
their not knowing Hebrew, that they called
them Greeks. And “when” Barnabas, it
says, “came and had seen the grace of God,”
—not the diligence of men—‘“he exhorted
them to cleave unto the Lord” (v. 23): and
by this he converted more. ‘“‘ And much peo-
ple was added unto the Lord.” Why do they
not write to Paul, but send Barnabas? They
They did not yet know the virtue of the man :
but it is providentially ordered that Barnabas
should come. As there was a multitude, and
none to hinder, well might the faith grow, and
above all because they had no ttrials to
undergo. Paul also preaches, and is no
longer compelled to flee. And it is well
ordered, that not they speak of the famine,
but the prophets. The men of Antioch also
did not take it amiss that they sent not the
Apostles, but were content with their teachers:
so fervent were they all for the word. They
did not wait for the famine to come, but
before this they sent: ‘ according as each had
the ability.”” And observe, among the Apos-
tles, others are put in charge with this trust,
but here Paul and Barnabas. For this was
no small order (ocixovouia) of Providence. Be-
sides, it was the beginning, and it was not
fit they should be offended.

“As each had the ability, they sent.”
now, none does this, although there


But
is)al


1 The matter contained in this second recapitulation looks as
if it were derived from a different, and in part fuller, report.
‘The innovator as above (note !, p. 164) connects it with the pre-
ceding: ‘they receive the offerings sent from them; who
also, not as we,”’ etc.

2 Kai ovK €AdAouy Tov Aoyor ei ra) ‘Tovdacots movots*
ev Tov avOpaTwv oBov ovdév nyouvto:
TpoETimwy, *lovdalots provots €AaAouv. For TPOETiMwY, AS 1B.
Toovetiwouv, The passage is corrupt, but the sense is suffi-
ciently plain, and is thus expressed by E. Edd. ‘* Which thing
itself helped not a little. But they came also to Cyprus, where
was great fearlessness (adeés), and greater freedom from anx-
iety. ‘But to none,’ it says, ‘did they speak the word save to
Jews only.’ Not because of the fear of men, of which they
made no account, did they this thing:’’ but keepin the law,
and still bearing them, KQl QUTOUS ETL d.aBaoragovtes. ’_Below:
v. 23, Edd. from E, “* Perhaps by praising the multitude and
receiving them, by this he converted more: as above, peta
€ykwuiou Kal €macvou,


ovTws Tov
tov 6€ Tov vououv


THE/-AGTS OF “THE APOSTLES.


165


famine more grievous than that. For the
cases are not alike, for (all) to bear the calam-
ity in common, and, while all (the rest)
abound, for the poorer to be famishing. And
the expression shows that the givers also were
poor, for, it says, ‘as each of them had the
means.” A twofold famine, even as the
abundance is twofold: a severe famine, a
famine not of hearing the word of the Lord, but
of being nourished by alms.’ Then, both the
poor in Judea enjoyed the benefit, and so did
those in Antioch who gave their money; yea,
these more than those: but now, both we and
the poor are famishing: they being in lack of
necessary sustenance, and we in luxurious
living,* lacking the mercy of God. But this
is a food, than which nothing can be more
necessary. This is not a food, from which
one has to undergo the evils of repletion:
not a food, of which the most part ends in
the draught. (agedpava.) Nothing more beau-
teous, nothing more healthful, than a soul
nurtured by this food: it is set high above all
disease, all pestilence, all indigestion and
distemper: none shall be able to overcome it,
(é4ewv) but just as, if one’s body were made
of adamant, no iron, nor anything else, would
have power to hurt it, even so when the soul
is firmly compact by almsgiving, nothing at all
shall be able to overcome it. For say, what
shall spoil this? Shall poverty? It cannot
be, for it is laid up in the royal treasuries.
But shall robber and housebreaker? Nay,
those are walls which none shall be able to
break through. But shall the worm? Nay,
this treasure is set far above the reach of this
mischief also. But shall envy and the evil
eye? Nay, neither by these can it be over-
come. But shall false accusations and plot-
tings of evil? No, neither shall this be, for
safe as in an asylum is this treasure. But it
were a shame should I make it appear as if
the advantages which belong to almsgiving
were only these (the absence “of these evils),
and not (the presence of) their opposites.
For in truth it is not merely that it is secure
from ill-will; it also gets abundant blessing
from those whom it benefits. For as the
cruel and unmerciful not only have for
enemies those whom they have injured, but
those also who are not themselves hurt, partake
the grief and join in the accusation: so those
that have done great good have not only those
who are benefited, but those also who are not


3 He means, There is no lack of wealth, no lack of hearing
the word of God: this is the a@@ovia dumAp. Vet many poor
around us are famishing, and the rich who might aid them,
starve their own souls, by their neglect of almsgiving: Se7Aovs
Auos.

4 nuets b€ Ev omatadn Tov EA€ous GvTES TOU Beod.
(€v omatadn OovTes), TOV eA€ovs TOU Meow, sc.
mod. text substitutes omavec for cmataAn.


Read nets de
amopourtes. The


166


THE WORKS OF ‘ST. CHRYSOsi 002


[HomILy XXV.


themselves affected, to speak their praises.
Again (that), it is secure from the attacks of
the evil-disposed, and robbers, and house-
breakers—what, is this all the good, or is it
this—that besides the not suffering diminu-
tion, it grows also and increases into multi-
tude? What more shameful than Nebuchad-
nezzar, what more foul, what more iniquitous?
The man was impious ; after tokens and signs
without number he refused to come to his
senses (avsveyxetv), but cast the servants of God
into a furnace: and (yet) after these doings,
he worshipped. What then said the Prophet?
‘“‘ Wherefore,” saith he, “‘O king let my coun-
sel be acceptable unto thee, ransom (Aitpwcar)
thy sins by alms, and thine iniquities by
mercies to the poor: peradventure there shall
be pardon for thy transgressions.” (Dan. iii.
27.) In so speaking, he said it not doubting,
nay, with entire confidence, but wishing to
put him in greater fear, and to make a
stronger necessity of doing these things. For
if he had spoken it as a thing unquestionable,
the king would have been more supine: just
as it is with us, we then most urge some per-
son (whom we wish to persuade), when! they
say to us, “ Exhort such an one,” and do not
add, “ he will be sure to hear,” but only, “ per-
adventure he will hear:” for by leaving it
doubtful, the fear is made greater, and urges
him the more. This is the reason why the
Prophet did not make the thing certain to
him. What sayest thou? For so great
impieties shall there be pardon? Yes.
There is no sin, which alms cannot cleanse,
none, which alms cannot quench: all sin is
beneath this: it is a medicine adapted for
every wound. What worse than a publican?
The very matter (irdéfeow) (of his occupation)
is altogether one of injustice: and yet
Zaccheus washed away all these (sins).
Mark how even Christ shows this, by the care
taken to have a purse, and to bear the con-
tributions put into it. And Paul also says,
“ Only that we remember the poor” (Gal. ii.
ro): and everywhere the Scripture has much
discourse concerning this matter. ‘The ran-
som,” it saith, “of a man’s soul is his own
wealth” (Prov. 13, 8): and with reason: for,
saith (Christ), “if thou wouldest be perfect,
sell what thou hast, and give to the poor, and
come, follow Me.” (Matt. xix. 21.) This
may well be part of perfection. But alms


} kaBamep Kai nets TOTE padtoTa avovmey TLVas, OTaY Aéywou
nuilv ... Kal pn éemayaywouev, A. B. C. We read mwa, and
éxayaywouv. ‘* When people bid us exhort some person, add-
ing, Peradventure he will hear, not, He will certainly hear,
we are then most urgent in our endeavor to persuade him.”’
The mod. text orayv Aéywuer. i. e. ‘‘ When we would induce
some persons to exhort some one, we the more effectually urge
them to do so, when we say, Peradventure he will hear,” etc.
The sense would be improved by reading nuas . . wtovar tives,
“persons then most urge us, when they say,”’ etc.


may be done not only by money, but by acts.
For example: one may kindly stand (xpuorjvav)
by a person (to succor and defend him), one
may reach to him a helping hand: the ser-
vice rendered (xpocracia) by acts has often
done more good even than money. Let us
set to work all the different kinds of alms-
giving. Can you do alms by money? Be
not slack. Can you by good offices? Say
not, Because I have no money, this is nothing.
This is a very great point: look upon it as
if you had given gold. Can you do it by kind
attentions (Gepareiac)? Do this also. For
instance, if you bea physician, (give) your
skill: for this also is a great matter. Can
you by counsel? This (service) is much
greater than all: this (alms) is better than all,
or itis also more, by how much the gain it
has is greater. For in so doing you put away
not starvation, but a grievous death. (ch. iii.
6; vi, 4.) With such alms the Apostles above
measure abounded: therefore it was that the
distribution of money they put into the hands
of those after them, themselves exhibiting the
(mercy) shown by words. Or is it, think you,
a small alms, to a lost, castaway soul, a soul
in uttermost jeopardy, possessed by a burning
fever (xvpécewc), to be able to rid it of its
disease ? For example, do you see one pos-
sessed by love of money? Pity the man. Is
he in danger of suffocation? Quench his fire.
“What if he will not be persuaded?” Do
your part, and be not remiss. Have you seen
him in bonds ?—for wealth is indeed bonds.
(Matt. xxv. 35 ff.) Go to him, visit him, con-
sole him, try to release him of his bonds. If
he refuse, he shall bear the blame himself.
Have you seen him naked, and a stranger?
—for he is indeed naked, and a stranger to
heaven, Bring him to your own inn, clothe
him with the garment of virtue, give him the
city which is in heaven. ‘‘ What if I myself be
naked?” say you. Clothe also yourself first :
if you know that you are naked, assuredly
you know that you need to be clothed ; if you
know what sort of nakedness this is. What
numbers of women now wear silken apparel
but are indeed naked of the garments of
virtue! Let their husbands clothe these
women. “ But they will not admit those gar-
ments; they choose to have these.” Then
do this also first: induce them to have a long-
ing for those garments: show them that they
are naked: speak to them of judgment to


2 et ravtys (mod. text adds povov) THs yumvornTos Emiatacat TOV
Tporov: which might also be taken with the following sentence,
If you know what sort of nakedness this is (why then, only
think) what numbers of women, etc. A. has zocat otv. The
mod. text adds, duvvyon yv@var padiws Kai Thy avTns KatacToAny.
*\If you know the sort of nakedness this is, you will easily be
able to know the (manner of) clothing it.”


*


Sai


a.


tae,


{.


i


Sr)


HomiLy XXV.]


iE ACs ,OP> THE APOSTEES:


167


come: answer me,’ what is the clothing we
shall need there? But if ye will bear with
me, I also will show you this nakedness. He
that is naked, when it is cold, shrinks and
shudders, and stands there cowering, and with
his arms folded: but in summer heat, not so.
If then I shall prove to you that your rich
men, and rich women, the more they put on,
the more naked they are, do not take it amiss.


How then, I ask you, when we raise the sub-|


ject of hell-fire, and of the torments there?
Do not these shrink and shudder more than
those naked ones? Do they not bitterly
groan and condemn themselves? What? when
they come to this or that man, and say to him,
Pray for me, do they not speak the same
words as those (naked wretches)? Now
indeed, after all that we can say, the naked-


ness is not yet apparent: but it will be plain |


enough there. How, and in what way?
When these silken garments and _ precious
stones shall have perished, and it shall be
only by the garments of virtue and of vice
that all men are shown, when the _ poor
shall be clad with exceeding glory, but the
rich, naked and in disgraceful sort, shall be
haled away to their punishments. What
more naked (Edd. ‘ more dainty’’) than that
rich man who arrayed himself in purple?
What poorer than Lazarus?


them was in abundance? Say, if one should
deck his house with abundance of tapestry
hangings, and himself sit naked within, what
were the benefit? So it is in the case of
these women. Truly, the house of the soul,
the body I mean, they hang round with
plenty of garments: but the mistress of the
house sits naked within. Lend me the eyes
of the soul, and I will show you the soul’s


1E Edd.'* Say, We need other (garments) there, not these.”
—Below, tepovs Se, ovx ere: i. e. cold, not heat, makes the
naked body shudder: not cold, but hell-fire, the naked soul.


Then which of |
them uttered the words of beggars? which of


|


nakedness. . For what is the garment of the
soul? Virtue, of course. And what its naked-
ness? Vige. -For just asy°if one were. fo
strip any decent person, that person would
be ashamed, and would shrink and cower
out of sight; just so the soul, if we wish
to see it, the soul which has not these
garments, blushes for shame. How many
women, think you, at this moment feel
ashamed, and would fain sink to the very
depth, as if seeking some sort of curtain, or
screen, that they may not hear these words?
But those who have no evil conscience, are
exhilarated, rejoice, find delight, and gayly
deck themselves (éyxaAAwrifovrac) with the
things said. Hear concerning that blessed
Thekla,* how, that she might see Paul, she
gave even her gold: and thou wilt not give
even a farthing that thou mayest see ‘Christ :
thou admirest what she did, but dost not
emulate her. Hearest thou not that “ Blessed
are the merciful, for they shall obtain
mercy?” (Matt. v. 7.) What is the gain of
your costly garments? how long shall we
continue agape for this attire? Let us put
on the glory of Christ: let us array ourselves
with that beauty, that both here we may be
praised, and there attain unto the eternal good
things, by the grace and mercy of our Lord
Jesus Christ, with Whom, to the Father and
the Holy Ghost together, be glory, dominion,
honor, now and ever, world without end.
Amen.


2 In the ‘‘ Acts of Paul and Thekla,’’ Grab. Spicileg. Patr. t.
i. p. 95. reprinted with a translation by Jeremiah Jones, Ox
the Canon of the N. T., vol. ii. p. 353 ft. the incident is thus
related (ch. ii.): ‘‘ When the proconsul heard this, he ordered
Paul to be bound, and to be put in prison But Thekla
in the night taking off her earrings, gave them to the turnkey,
and he opened for her the doors, and let her in: and having
given to the keeper of the prison a silver mirror, she was
admitted unto Paul, and having sat at his feet, heard from
him the mighty works of God.” The earliest notice of this
work occurs in Tertull. de Baft. c. 17: Thekla is mentioned,
or her history referred to, by other ancient writers, as St. Greg.
Naz., Sulpic. Severus, St. Augustin; see Jones u. s. p. 387 ff.
A Homily in her praise ascribed to St. Chrysostom, t. 11. p. 749,
is justly placed by Savile among the ayv@iBadAoueva,


168


THE WORKS ‘OF ST) CHEYSs0stere


[HomILy XXVI.


HOMILY “xo a


ANCES iene:


“‘ Now at that time Herod the King stretched forth his |


hands to vex certain of the Church. And
he killed James the brother of John with the
sword. And because he saw it pleased the
Jews, he proceeded further to take Peter also.
Then were the days of unleavened bread. ”’


“ Ar that time,” of course meaning the time


immediately following: for? this is the custom
of Scripture. And he well says that Herod


“the king” (did this): this was not he of;


Christ’s time. Lo, a different sort of trial—
things are blended, how rest and_ trouble
alternate in the whole texture of the history
—not now the Jews, nor the Sanhedrim, but
the king. Greater the power, the warfare
more severe, the more it was done to obtain
favor with the Jews. ‘ And,” it says, “he
slew James the brother of John with the


sword: ” (taking him) at random and without |


selection. But, should any raise a question,
why God permitted this, we shall say, that it


was for the sake of these (Jews) themselves: |
them, that even)


thereby, first, convincing
when slain (the Apostles) prevail, just as it
was in the case of Stephen: secondly, giving
them opportunity, after satiating their rage,
to recover from their madness ; thirdly, show-
ing them that it was by His permission this
was done. ‘And when he saw,” it says,
“that it pleased the Jews, he proceeded
further to seize Peter also. .O excessive
wickedness! On whose behalf was it, that
he gratified them by doing murders thus with-
out plan or reason? “And it was the da
of unleavened bread.” Again, the idle pre-
ciseness of the Jews: to kill indeed they


1 The modern text (E. D. F. Edd.) ‘‘ But here it is said in
this sense, elsewhere in a different sense. For when Matthew
says, ‘In those days cometh John preaching,’ he speaks it not
as meaning the days immediately following, but ‘those’ in
which the things he relates were about to take place. For it
is the custom of Scripture to use this mode of speech, and at
one time to expound in their sequence the things successively
taking place, at another to relate as in immediate succession
the things about to take place afterwards. And he well says
that Herod the king did this, for this was not he of Christ’s
time: ”’ as if Chrys. meant, He does right to call him king, for
this was not the tetrarch of the Gospel history. But this is
merely a parenthetic remark: the point to which the xad@s
Aeyec refers is this—that the persecution is now raised bya
king, not by the Jews: ‘‘he does well to designate Herod as
the king, thereby showing that the trial here was of a different
kind, more severe, as the power wielded against them was
greater.”


|


'shined in the prison,


| this.


forbade not, but ? at such a time they did such
things! ‘‘ Whom having arrested, he put in
ward, having delivered him to four quater-
nions of soldiers.” (v. 4.) This was done
both of rage,:‘and “of Wear He slew, +n
says, ‘James the brother of John with the
sword.” Do you mark their courage? Tor,
that none may say that without danger or tear
of danger they brave death, as being sure of
God’s delivering them, therefore he permits


ete Ree some to be put to death, and chief men too
and mark what I said in the beginning, how | P : if


Stephen and James, thereby convincing their
slayers themselves, that not even these things
make them fall away, and hinder them.
“Peter therefore was kept in prison: but
prayer was made without ceasing of the
Church unto God for him.” (v. 5.) For the
contest was now for life and death: both the
slaving of the one made them feartul, and the
casting of the other into prison. ‘“ And when
Herod would have brought him forth, the
same night Peter was sleeping between two
soldiers, bound with two chains; and the
keepers before the door kept the prison.
And, behold, the angel of the Lord came
upon him, and a light shined in the prison:
and he smote Peter on the side, and raised
him up, saying, Arise up quickly. And _ his.
chains fell off from his hands.” (v. 6,7.) In
that night He delivered him. ‘“ And a light
” that? he might not
deem it fancy: and none saw the light, but he
only. For if, notwithstanding this was done,
he thought it a fancy, because of its unex-


Y pectedness ; if this had not been, much more


would he have thought this: so* prepared
was he for death. For his having waited
there many days and not being saved caused
Why then, say you, did He not suffer
him to fall into the hands of Herod,*® and
then deliver him? Because that would have
brought people into astonishment, whereas


2 €v 5€ Katpw ToLovTw Tovadta éxpattov. So Mss. and Edd.
But the Catena has éy 6€ xaipo® Tovovz7w mpatte.y ovK 7Oedov.
‘*They had no objection to killing, but they had rather not
do it at such a time.”

3 This seems more suitable to the clause, ‘‘And his chains fell
off from his hands: but see below in the recapitulation, p. 170.

4 i. e. so unexpected was it, so entirely had he made up his
md that he was to be put to death, that he thought it alla

ream.

§ i. e. on the morrow, to be led out to execution, and then


‘ and there deliver him.


LP SS re ee


yy]


aaa


Tsotes


HomiLy XXVI.] her AG Lo! OF


THE APOSTLES. 169


this was credible:1 and they would not even
have been thought human beings. But in the
case of Stephen, what did He not do? Did
He not show them his face as it had been the
face of an angel? But what in short did He
leave undone here also? “And the angel
said to him, Gird thyself, and bind on thy
sandals.” (v. 8.) Here again it shows, that
it was not done of craft: for one that is in
haste and wishes to break out (of prison), is
not so particular as to take his sandals, and
end dumself, “And He did so’ And he
said unto him, Put on thy cloak, and follow
And he went out, and followed him;
and wist not that it was true which was
done by the Angel; but thought he saw a
vision. When they were past the first and
the second ward, they came unto the iron gate
that leadeth unto the city; which opened to
them of its own accord.” (v. 9, 10.) Be-
hold, a second miracle. ‘And they went
out, and passed on through one street; and
forthwith the angel departed from him. And
when Peter was come to himself, he said,
Now I know of a surety, that the Lord hath
sent His Angel, and hath delivered me out of
the hand of Herod, and from all the expecta-
tion of the people of the Jews.” (v. ro, 11.)
When the angel departed, then Peter under-
stood: ‘“ Now I perceive,” says he, not then.
But why is this so, and why is Peter not sensi-
ble of the things taking place, although he
had already experienced a like deliverance,
when all were released? (ch. v. 18.) (The
Lord) would have the pleasure come to him
all at once, and that he should first be at
liberty, and then be sensible of what had
happened. The circumstance also of the
chains having fallen off from his hands, is a
strong argument of his not having fled. ”
“ And when he had considered the thing, he
came to the house of Mary the mother of
John, whose surname was Mark; where many
were gathered together praying.” (v. 12.)
Observe how Peter does not immediately
withdraw, but first brings the good tidings to
his friends. ‘And as Peter knocked at the
door of the gate, a damsel came to hearken,
named Rhoda. And when she knew Peter’s
voice, she opened not the gate for gladness,”


-—Mark even the servant-girls, how full of


1 rovro S€ morov éyevero. That would have astonished:
this was calculated to obtain belief. E. D. F. Edd. rovro é¢
Umép avta@v eyévero. ‘* But this was done for their sakes for they
would not have been counted human beings, if he had done
all after the manner of God, ei Geompeta@s mavta Eroiet.”’

2 In the old text this sentence and the next are transposed.
The mod. text has restored the true order, but for nédovnv has
amaddaynv, “his deliverance to come to him all at once.”’—
The connection may be thus supplied, ‘‘ When he came to him-
self, he found himself there at large, and with his hands no
longer chained. And this circumstance again is a strong evi-
dence that he had not fled.”


piety they are,—‘‘ but ran in, and told how
Peter stood before the gate.” (v. 13-15.) But
they, though it was so, shook their heads
(incredulously): ‘And they said unto her,
Thou art mad. But she constantly affirmed
that it was even so. And they said, It is
his angel. ‘“ But Peter continued knocking:
and when they had opened the door, and saw
him, they were astonished. But he, beckon-
ing unto them with the hand to hold their
peace, declared unto them how the Lord had
brought him out of the prison. And he said,
Go show these things unto James, and to the
brethren. And he departed, and went into
another place.” (v.16, 17.) But let us re-
view the order of the narrative.


(Recapitulation.) “ At that time,” it says,
‘* Herod the king stretched forth his hands to
afflict certain of the Church.” (v.1.) Likea
wild beast, he attacked all indiscriminately
and without consideration. This is what
Christ said: “My cup indeed ye shall drink,
and with the baptism wherewith I am baptized,
shall ye be baptized.” (Mark x. 39.) (0)
“And® he killed James the brother of John.”
(v. 2.) For there was also another James,
the brother of the Lord: therefore to distin-
guish him, he says, “The brother of John.” *
Do you mark that the sum of affairs rested in
these three, especially Peter and James? (a)
And how was it he did not kill Peter imme-
diately? It mentions the reason: “it was the
day of unleavened bread:” and he wished
rather to make a display (érouzeica) with the
killing of him. ‘And when he saw it pleased
the Jews.” (v. 3.) For their own part, they
now in consequence of Gamaliel’s advice,
abstained from bloodshedding: and _ besides,
did not even invent accusations; but by
means of others they compassed the same
results. (c) This (counsel of Gamaliel’s)
above all was their condemnation: for the
preaching was shown to be no longer a thing


3 The order in Mss. and Edd. is a, 4, c. Avty, in the begin~
ning of (c) evidently refers to THs maparvecews THS Tap. in (a).

* James the brother of John was the son of Zebedee, com-
monly called the ‘“‘elder ’’ James. He was the first of the
apostles to suffer martyrdom. The other James, called “ the
Lord’s brother’’ (Gal. i, 19.) mentioned in v. 17 (cf. Acts xv.
13; Xxi. 18) was the Bishop of Jerusalem, a man of much im~
portance and influence in the apostolic church, whom Pau}
reckons among the ‘pillars’? (Gal. ii. 9). Chrys. gives no
opinion here concerning him. Three views have prevailed in
the church: (1) that he was the same as the apostle, James
the son of Alphzeus and is called the “‘ brother” of Jesus in
the loose sense of that word in which it is taken as equivalent
to ‘“‘relative.’’ (2) That he was the son of Joseph by a former
marriage. (3) That he was the son of Joseph and Mary—the
real brother of Jesus and is called an apostle in Gal. i, 19, in
the more comprehensive sense which that word acquired ac-
cording to which it was applied also to Paul and Barnabas
(Acts xiv. 14). This view seems to me the correct one. There
were also other brothers (Matt.xii. 46 ; xui. 55, 56) Joses, Simon
and Judas, and sisters who are not personally named. Chrys.
seems to have held view (2) in his earlier writings, but to have
adopted view (1), following Jerome. (Cf. Lightfoot on Gala-

| tians, pp. 289, 290).—G. B. S.


[HomILy XXVI.


170 THE ‘WORKS “OF *ST. (CHRYS@si1 Oye
of men. “He proceeded further to kill Peter|chains.” (comp. 1 Pet. v. 7.) Mark, how
also.” (ch. v. 8.) In very deed was that|strict the ward! “And says, Arise.” (v. 7.)


fulfilled, ‘‘ We are accounted as sheep for the
slaughter.” (Psa;) xliv.)13.)) i ’beeme,” it
says, “it was a pleasing thing to the Jews.”

(Rom. viii. 36.) A pleasing thing, bloodshed,
and unrighteous bloodshed, wickedness, im-
piety!! He ministered to their senseless
({arézoic) lusts: for, whereas he ought to have
done the contrary, to check their rage, he
made them more eager, as if he were an exe-
cutioner, and not a physician to their diseased
minds, (And this) though he had number-
less warnings in the case of both his grand-
father and his father Herod, how the former
in consequence of his putting the children to
death suffered the greatest calamities, and the
latter by slaying John raised up against him-
self a grievous war. But? as they thought
* * He feared lest Peter, in consequence of
the slaying of James, should withdraw ; and
wishing to have him in safe keeping, he put
him in prison: ‘and delivered him to four
quaternions of soldiers” (v. 4): the stricter
the custody, the more wondrous the display.
*‘ Peter therefore was kept in prison.” (v.
5.) But this was all the better for Peter, who
was thereby made more approved, and
evinced his own manly courage. And it says,
“‘there was earnest prayer making.” It was
the prayer of (filial) affection: it was for a
father they asked, a father mild. “ There
was,” it says, “earnest prayer.” Hear how
they were affected to their teachers. No
factions, no perturbation:* but they betook
them to prayer, to that alliance which is in-
deed invincible, to this they betook them for
refuge. They did not say, ‘What? I, poor
insignificant creature that I am, to pray for
him!” for, as they acted of love, they did not
give these things a thought. And observe,
it was during the feast, ‘that (their enemies)
brought these trials upon them, that their
worth might be the more approved. ‘ And
when’ EHerod,”"ete,. (v. 6,).. See Peter sleep-
ing, and not in distress or fear! That same
night, after which he was to be brought forth,


he slept, having cast all upon God.
*“Between two soldiers, bound with two
1 A. B.C. xakia, ageBera. Cat , dovos adtxos kakias ; aoeBera


jais x.7. A. Mod. text substitutes for these two words, IloAAn
H avo.a Tov ‘Hpwdov.

2 Kaus 6€ wovro A. B.C. Either this is out of its place, or
the sentence is incomplete. The mod. text substitutes, ““ And
when he had apprehended him, he put him in prison.

3 ovK éotaciagay, ovK €BopuBnOncav: alluding perhaps to the
factious and turbulent proceedings, which in his time often
ensued when a Bishop was removed or at the point of death.
But possibly éorac.is corrupt. —Below, Tovto S€ hv umep
Iletpov, etc. the meaning seems to be, * That Herod was per-
mitted to do this, and that Peter was ‘delivered into his hands,
mot withdrawing upon the death of James, was all the better
for Peter: it gave fresh proof of his worth, it showed how
Evnraeeous he was in himself, independently of supernatural
ai


The guards were asleep with him, and there-
fore perceived nothing of what was happening.
“And a light shined.” What was the light
for? In order that Peter might see as well
as hear, and not imagine it to be all fancy.
And the command, “ Arise quickly,*” that he
may not be remiss. He also» smote him; so
deeply did he sleep. (@) “ Rise,” says he,
“quickly:” this is not to hurry him (6opv-
Bovvroc) but to persuade him not to delay. (c)
“ And” immediately “his chains fell off from
his hands.” (4) How? answer me: where.
are the heretics?—let them answer. ‘And
the Angel said unto him,” etc. (v. 8) by
this also convincing him that it is no fancy:
to this end he bids him gird himself and put
on his shoes, that he may shake off his sleep,
and know that it is real. (q@) (e) “And he
wist not that it was true that was done by the
Angel, but thought he saw a vision” (v. g):
(e) well he might, by reason of the excessive
greatness (irepBodqv) of the things taking place.
Do you mark what a thing it is for a mir-
acle to be excessive (orep| 3019) onusiov) § ? how it
amazes (éxr4yrrev) the beholder? how it will
not let the thing be believed ?° For if Peter


‘“thought he saw a vision,” though he had


girded himself and put on his shoes, what
would have been the case with another?
“ And,” it says, “‘ when they had passed the
first and the second ward, they came to the
iron gate, which opened unto them of its own
accord’ (v. 10): and yet the things that had
happened within (the prison) were more
marvellous: but this was now more after the
manner of man. ‘“ And having es out, they
went along one street and immedi iately (ail
‘until’) the Angel departed from him.’

(v. 11.) When there was no hindrance, then
the Angel departed. For Peter would not
have gone along (zpoyibev), there being so
many ‘hindrances, “And when he came to
himself :” for in very truth, it was indeed an
amazement (éx7rAysic). “ Now,” saith he, “I
know’”’—now, not then, when I was in the


4 A.B. ©. Catiikat roey TAXEL, ” wote wy paduptoa Kai
emAngev avtov: (C. xat éexmAnéis hv eis avtov) ovTw Babews
éxabevdev. Perhaps C. has preserved the true reading, see on
v.11. If so, it should be transposed with the part marked (a),
viz. ‘* —by the Angel: and it was an amazement to him, so
deeply did he sleep: but he thought he saw a vision.” The
letters as usual denote the order of parts in the Mss. Beer
(4), the clause, ‘‘ And he passed the first and second ward,’
inserted. It is not easy to see what can be the reference of fe
question, Ilws; 7ov eioty of aipertxor; it can hardly be meant
for the mention of the sandals and cloak, v. 8, for the persons
who objected to the Christians, that, according to Christ's
command, they ought to have no shoes, nor two coats, etc.
were not heretics, but heathens: see How. 7n tllud, Salutate
Prisc. et Aq. t. iii. 181. and Hom.ix. zm Philip. t. xi. 272 (the
latter cited in the Catena here).

5 A. B.C. Cat. amcatntjvat, *‘ be disbelieved?’’ But this is
evidently corrupt.


f
4
b
F
|
be


ee


DRO POL


SEs kay a Pakitin came | | f 4


HoMILy XXVI.]


Min AGES OF THE APOSTLES:


prison,—“ that the Lord hath sent His Angel,
and hath delivered me out of the hand of
Herod and from all the expectation of the
people of the Jews. And when he had con-
sidered” (v.12), it says: viz. where he was,
or, that he must not without more ado depart
but requite his Benefactor: ‘“‘he came to the
house of Mary the mother of John.” Who is
this John? Probably* he that was always
with them: for this is why he adds his dis-
tinctive name (70 rapdoyuov), “‘ whose surname
was Mark.” But observe, “ praying” in the
night, how much they got by it: what a good
thing affliction is; how wakeful it made them!
Do you see how great the gain resulting from
the death of Stephen? do you see how great
the benefit accruing from this imprisonment ?
For it is not by taking vengeance upon those
who wronged them that God shows the great-
ness of the Gospel: but in the wrong-doers
themselves, ? without any harm happening to
those, he shows what a mighty thing the afflic-
tions in themselves are, that we may not seek
in any wise deliverance from them, nor the
avenging of our wrongs. And mark how the
very servant-girls were henceforth upon an
equality with them. “ For joy,” it says, “‘she
opened not.” (v.13, 14.) This too is well
done, that they likewise may not be amazed


by seeing him at once, and that they may be |


incredulous, and their minds may be exer-
cised. ‘“‘ But ran .in;”
to do, she was eager to be herself the bringer
of the good tidings, for good news it was
indeed. ‘ And they said unto her, Thou art
mad: but she constantly affirmed that it
was even so: then said they, It is his Angel.”
(v. 15.) This is a truth, that each man has
an Angel.* And what would the Angel ??
It was from the time (of night) that they
surmised this. But when he “continued
knocking, and when they had opened, and


1 iows EKEWVOS 0 GEL AUTOLS GUVMY. CEcumen. may have read
ov« exeivos, for he has, tva detEn & OTL OU TOU aet DUVOYTOS av’TOISs
*Iwavvov Thy pyTEpa pyoiv- “to show that he does not mean
the mother of John (the Apostle) who was always with them,
he adds his distinctive name.”

2 €v avtots Tots aduxovorv. Perhaps it may mean, He brings
ic home to the conviction of the wrong-doers themselves, etc.
°Exetvwy, i.e. the enemies. But adixovjevors would suit the
meaning better than aédccovorv, and then eéxetywy would be
right: otherwise it should be avtwv.

* The interpretation ot Chrys. regarding the idea of the
company assembled in Mary’s house expressed by : “* It is his
angel,” is doubtless correct. Others interpret: ‘‘Itis his
messenger ’’—a messenger sent by Peter to them, but it is said
that Rhoda recognized Peter’s voice (14). Others understand
angel in the sense of sfzr7#—a view which is not sanctioned
by linguistic usage. Their idea was that Peter’s guardian
angel who had taken on his form and appearance was before
the door. The belief in guardian angels attending individuals
was common in later Jewish theology as well as in the Greek
and Roman religions. it was doubtless stimulated in the early
church by the saying of Jesus concerning children: ‘In
heaven theie angels do always behold the face of my Father
who is in heaven”’ (Matt. xviil. 10),
the idea (cf. Heb. 1. 14).—G. B.S.

3 nat ti BovAerat 6 ayyedos; A. B. C. Cat. The mod. text
substitutes, ‘* And whence did it come into their minds at chat
time to surmise that it was an Angel?’


which seems to sanction


etc. just as we are wont |


saw him, they were astonished. But he
beckoning to them with his hand ” (v. 16, 17),
made them keep quiet, to hear all that had
happened to him. He was now an object of
more affectionate desire to the disciples, not
only in consequence of his being saved, but
by his sudden coming in upon them and
straightway departing. Now, both his friends
learn all clearly; and the aliens also learn, if
they had a mind, but they had not. The
same thing happened in the case of Christ.
“Tell these things,” he says, “to James, and
to the brethren.” How free from all vain-
glory! Nor did he say, Make known these
things to people everywhere, but, “to the
brethren. And he withdrew to another
place:” for he did not tempt God, nor fling
himself into temptation: since, when they
were commanded to do this, then they did it.
‘““Go,” it was said, “speak in the temple to
the people.” (ch. v. 20.) But this the Angel
said not (here) ; on the contrary, by silently
removing him and bringing him out by night,
he gave him free permission to withdraw—
and this too is done, that we may learn that
many things are providentially brought about
after the manner of men—so that he should
not again fall into peril—For that they may
not say, “It was his Angel,” * after he was
gone, they say this first, ‘and then they see
himself overthrowing their notion of the
matter. Had it been the Angel, he would
have knocked at the door, would not have re-
tired to another place. And®* what followed
in the day, make them sure.

‘So Peter was kept in the prison,” etc.
(v. 5.) They, being at large, were at prayer:
he, bound, was in sleep. ‘And he wist not
that it was true.” (v.9.) If he thought it
was true that was happening, he would have
been astonished, he would not have remem-
bered ® (all the circumstances) : but now, seem-
ing to be in a dream, he was free from pertur-
bation. “When,” it says, “they were past
the first and the second ward ’’—see also how
strong the guard was—‘ they came unto the
iron gate.” (v.10.) ‘* Now know I that the
Lord hath sent His Angel.” (v.11.) Why
is not this effected by themselves?’ (I
answer,) By this also the Lord honors them,


4 i. e. It was so ordered (wxovounro) that the notion of its
being his Angel came into their minds before they saw him, in
order that it might not be possible for them to think this
after he was gone.

5 Ilkorovtac 5€ avrovs Kai To eV NMEpa ‘yevouevoyv. 1. e.

*‘ When it was day there was no small stir among the soldiers,”’
etc. v.18. The innovator, not perceiving the meaning, sub-
stitutes kai TO un ev Nuepa yevertat, ‘* And its not happening
by day, confirms their belier.”’

6 éuvnuovevoev. i. e€. astonishment would have deprived
him of the power of remembering, and afterwards relating the
circumstances, V. 17.

7 Here, and on former occasion, v, 10.
eauTwv.


Hence the plural &


172 THE WORKS OF


[Homity XXVI.


oT. ‘CHRYSOSTOsE


that by the ministry of His Angels he rescues
them. Then why was it not so in the case of
Paul? There with good reason, because the
jailer was to be converted, whereas here, it
was only that the Apostle should be released.
(ch. xvi. 25.) And God disposes all things in
divers ways. And there too, it is beautiful,
that Paul sings hymns, while here Peter was
asleep. “And when he had considered, he
came to the house of Mary,” etc. (v. 12.)
Then let us not hide God’s marvels, but for
our own good let us study to display these
abroad for the edifying of the others. For as
he deserves to be admired for choosing to be
put into bonds, so is he worthy of more
admiration, that he withdrew not until he had
reported all to his friends. ‘‘ And he said,
Tell James and the brethren.” (v. 17.) That
they may rejoice: that they may not be
anxious. Through these’ those learn, not
those through him: such thought had he for
the humbler part !—

Truly, nothing better than affliction not
above measure (cvuuétpov). What think you
must have been their state of mind—how full
of delight! Where now are those women,
who sleep the whole night through? Where
are those men, who do not even turn them-
selves in their bed? Seest thou the watchful
soul? With women, and children, and maid-
servants, they sang hymns to God, made
purer than the sky by affliction. But now, if
we see a little danger, we fall back. Nothing
ever was more splendid than that Church.
Let us imitate these, let us emulate them.
Not for this was the night made, that we
should sleep all through it and be idle. To
this bear witness the artisans, the carriers,
and the merchants (to this), the Church of
God rising up in the midst of the night. Rise
thou up also, and behold the quire of the
stars, the deep silence, the profound repose:
contemplate with awe the order (oixovouiay) of
thy Master’s household. Then is thy soul
purer: it is lighter, and subtler, and soaring
disengaged: the darkness itself, the profound
silence, are sufficient to lead thee to compunc-
tion. And if also thou look to the heavens
studded with its stars, as with ten thousand
eyes,” if thou bethink thee that all those multi-
tudes who in the daytime are shouting, laugh-
ing, frisking, leaping, wronging, grasping,
threatening, inflicting wrongs without number,


1 $ca rovTwy (the persons assembled in the house of Mary)
éxecvoc (James and the brethren), ov« éxetvor dua tovtov. This
is corrupt, but the meaning is, James and the more important
of the brethren learn the particulars through these in-
ferior persons, not these through those, but through Peter
himself. Mod. text, wa 6:a tovTwy éxetvor paviavwav, ovK
avrol di éxetvwv.

* Mod. text adds, *“‘thou wilt enjoy all pleasure, being led
forthwith to reflect on the Creator,


lie all one as dead, thou wilt condemn all the
self-willedness of man. Sleep hath invaded
and defeated (j/eysev) nature: it is the image
of death, the image of the end of all things.
If* thou (look out of window and) lean over
into the street, thou wilt not hear even a
sound: if thou look into the house, thou wilt
see all lying as it were inatomb. All this
is enough to arouse the soul, and lead it to
reflect on the end of all things.

Here indeed my discourse is for both men
and women. JBend thy knees, send forth
groans, beseech thy Master to be merciful:
He is more moved by prayers in the night,
when thou makest the time for rest a time for
mourning. Remember what words that king
uttered : “I have been weary with my groan-
ing: every night will I wash my bed, I will
water my couch with my tears.” (Ps. vi. 6.)
However delicate a liver thou mayest be, thou
art not more delicate than he: however rich
thou mayest be, thou art not richer than
David. And again the same Psalmist saith,
“At midnight I rose to give thanks unto Thee
for the judgments of Thy righteousness.”
(Ps. cxix. 62.) No vainglory then intrudes
upon thee: how can it, when all are sleeping,
and not looking at thee? Then neither sloth
nor drowsiness invades thee: how can they,
when thy soul is aroused by such great things?
After such vigils come sweet slumbers and
wondrous revelations. Do this, thou also the
man, not the woman only. Let the house be
a Church, consisting of men and women. For.
think not because thou art the only man, or
because she is the only woman there, that this
is any hindrance. “For where two,” He
saith, “are gathered together in My Name,
there am I in the midst of them.” (Matt.
XVlll. 20.) Where Christ is in the midst,
there is a great multitude. Where Christ is,
there needs must Angels be, needs must
Archangels also and the other Powers be
there. Then ye are not alone, seeing ye have
Him Who is Lord of all. Hear again the
prophet also saying, “ Better is one that doeth
the will of the Lord, than ten thousand trans-
gressors.” (comp. Ecclus. xvi. 3.) Nothing
more weak than a multitude of unrighteous
men, nothing more strong than one man who
lives according to the law of God. If thou
hast children wake up them also, and let thy
house altogether become a Church through
the night: but if they be tender, and
cannot endure the watching, let them stay
for the first or second prayer, and then
send them to rest: only stir up thyself,


S*Av dtaxvwys eis Tov orevwrdv. The orevwroi, angiportus
or vzez are the lanes or alleys in the quarters formed by inter-
section of the broad streets, wAaretat,


he


F
}
i
js
4


Homity XXVII.]} Pia: ACTS: OF
establish thyself in the habit. Nothing is
better than that storehouse which receives
such prayers as these. Hear the Prophet
speaking: “If I remembered Thee upon my
bed, I thought upon Thee in the dawn of the
morning.” (Ps. ]xili. 7.) But you will say:
I have labored much during the day, and I
cannot. Mere pretext this and subterfuge.
For however much thou hast labored, thou
wilt not toil like the smith, who lets fall such a
heavy hammer from a great height upon the
(metal flying off in) sparks, and takes in the
smoke with his whole body: and yet at this
work he spends the greater part of the night.
Ye know also how the women, if there is need
for us to go into the country, or to go forth
unto a vigil, watch through the whole night.
Then have thou also a spiritual forge, to
fashion there not pots or cauldrons, but thine
own soul, which is far better than either
coppersmith or goldsmith can fashion. Thy
soul, waxen old in sins, cast thou into the
smelting-furnace of confession: let fall the
hammer from on high: that is, the condem-
nation of thy words (rév pyudtwev tiv Katayvwor) :
light up the fire of the Spirit. Thou hast a
far mightier craft (than theirs). Thou art
beating into shape not vessels of gold, but
the soul, which is more precious than all gold,
even as the smith hammers out his vessel.
For it is no material vessel that thou art
working at, but thou art freeing thy soul from
all imaginations belonging to this life. Leta
lamp be by thy side, not that one which we
burn, but that which the prophet had, when
he said, “Thy law is a lamp unto my feet.”
(Ps. cxix. 105.) Bring thy soul to a red heat,


THE -APOGSPEES;


173


by prayer: when thou seest it hot enough,
draw it out, and mould it into what shape thou
wilt. Believe me, not fire so effectual to burn
off rust, as night prayer to remove the rust of
our sins. Let the night-watchers, if no one
else, shame us. They, by man’s law, go their
rounds in the cold, shouting loudly, and walk-
ing through lanes (crevwrav) and alleys, often-
times drenched with rain and (all) congealed
with cold, for thee and for thy safety, and the
protection of thy property. There is he tak-
ing such care for thy property, while thou
takest none even for thy soul. And yet I do
not make thee go thy rounds in the open air
like him, nor shout loudly and rend thy sides:
but in thy closet itself, or in thy bedchamber,
bend thy knees, and entreat thy Lord. Why
did Christ Himself pass a whole night on the
mountain? Was it not, that He might be an
ensample to us? Then is it that the plants
respire, in the night, I mean: and then also
does the soul take in the dew even more than
they. What the sun has parched by day
becomes cool again at night. More refresh-
ing than all dew, the tears of the night
descend upon our lusts and upon all heat and
fever of the soul, and do not let it be affected
in any such way. But if it do not enjoy the
benefit of that dew, it will be burnt up in the
daytime. But God forbid (it should be so?) !
Rather, may we all, being refreshed, and en-
joying the mercy of God, be freed from the
burden of our sins, through the grace and
mercy of our Lord Jesus Christ, with Whom
to the Father together with the Holy Spirit
be glory, might, honor, now and ever, world
without end. Amen.


HOMILY XXVII.


/sX CALMS) 2?) Bas ya rob


“ Now as soon as it was day, there was no small stir
among the soldiers, what was become of Peter.
And when Herod had sought for him, and found
him not, he examined the keepers, and command-
ed that they should be put to death. And he
went down from Judea to Czsarea, and there
abode.”


SOME persons, it is likely, are at a loss how
to explain it, that God should quietly look on
while (His) champions” are put to death, and


1 Mod. text adda wn yévorto uydeva Ume@y UTeKKavma TOU TUpdS
€xetvou yeveodar: ‘*God forbid that any of you should become
the fuel of tha: fire.”

2 reprecdev Tos adAntas amoAAvsmevous : i. €. those (as St. Ste-
phen, St. James) engaged in contending for the heavenly
prize.


now again the soldiers on account of
Peter: and yet it was possible for Him after
(delivering) Peter to rescue them also. But
it was not yet the time of judgment, so as to
render to each according to his deserts. And
besides, it was not Peter that put them into
his hands. For the thing that most annoyed
him was the being mocked; just as in the
case of his grandfather when he was deceived
by the wise men, that was what made him
Tovs maidas, Ben. 7a/antes) were put to death because of Him,


and now again,’’ etc. After this sentence, the same inserts
from the recapitulation: *‘ But—if the Angel,’’etc.to.....


The mod. t. substitutes, ‘‘ Many are quite at a loss, how ' *‘ why did He not rescue him? and besides *—


174


(feel) cut to the heart—the being (eluded
and) made ridiculous.’ ‘And having put
them to the question,” it says, ‘he ordered
them to be led away to execution.” (Matt. ii.
16.) And yet he had heard from them—for he
had put them to the question—both that the
chains had been left, and that he had taken
his sandals, and that until that night he was
with them. ‘“ Having put them to the ques-
tion:” but what did they conceal?? Why
then did they not themselves also flee? ‘“ He
ordered them to be led away to execution :”’
and yet he ought to have marvelled, ought to
have been astonished at this. The conse-
quence is, by the death of these men (the
thing), is made manifest to all: both his wick-
edness is exposed to view, and (it is made
clear that) the wonder (is) of God. “And he
went down from Judea to Cesarea, and there
abode: and Herod was highly displeased with
them of Tyre and Sidon: but they came with
one accord to him, and, having made Blastus
the king’s chamberlain their friend, desired
peace ; because their country was nourished
by the king’s country. And upon a set day
Herod, arrayed in royal apparel, sat upon his
throne, and made an oration unto them. And
the people gave a shout, saying, ‘It is the
voice of a god, and not of a man,’ And im-
mediately the angel of the Lord smote him,
because he gave not God the glory: and he
was eaten of worms, and gave up the ghost.”
iv. ex. 923.) -* *4) Dut sce lhow (the writer)
here does not hide these things. Why does
he mention this history? Say, what has it
to do with the Gospel, that Herod is incensed
with the Tyrians and Sidonians? It is not
a small matter, even this, how immediately
justice seized him; although not because of
Peter, but because of his arrogant speaking.
And yet, it may be said, if those shouted,
what is that to him? Because he accepted
the acclamation, because he accounted him-
self to be worthy of the adoration. Through
him those most receive a lesson, who so
thoughtlessly flattered him (al. oi koAaxeiovrec).
Observe again, while both parties deserve


1 waddov avrov éoter duampiegdat (as in ch. vii. 54, cut to the
heart with passion) cal katayéAagrov eitvat. The last words are
either misplaced, or something is wanting ; perhaps (after
dtampieotac), 70 dtaxpovertar Kal KaTayeAaoTor eivat.

2 i.e. what was to be drawn from them by tthe torture ?
Had they let him out, they would have contrived appearances,
or would themselves have fled. But the reporter’s notes of
what St. Chrys. said, seem to be very defective, and the
arrangement much confused.

3 GAN’ Opa Tas obTOS OV KpUTTEL TadTa. In the recapitulation
(see note 8, p. 175) he says, that the death of Herod was regarded
as a judgment for his having slain James and the soldiers.
Here, it seems, he must have said something to that effect; then,
‘but observe how St. Luke does not conceal the true state of
the case, viz. that he was punished not for this. but for the sin
which he proceeds to mention.’’ We have transposed the text
v. 20-23. Mss. and Edd. place it before ov uixpov ovd€ TovTOS
€o7.v, thus separating these words from their connection with
the preceding question, “


THE ‘WORKS -OF ST... CHRYSOSTOM


[HomILy XXVII.


punishment, this man is punished. For this
is not the time of judgment, but He punishes
him that had most to answer for, leaving the
others to profit by this man’s fate.* ‘“ And the
word of God,” it says, “ grew,” i. e. in conse-
quence of this, ‘‘ and multiplied.” (v. 24.) Do
you mark God’s providential management ?
“ But Barnabas and Saul returned from Jeru-
salem, when they had fulfilled their ministry,
and took with them John, whose surname was
Mark.” (v. 25.) ‘‘Now there were in the
Church that was at Antioch, certain prophets
and teachers; as Barnabas, and Simeon
that was called Niger, and Lucius of Cyrene,
and Manaén, which had been brought up with
Herod the tetrarch, and Saul.”f (ch. xiii. 1.)
He still mentions Barnabas first: for Paul
was not yet famous, he had not yet wrought any
sign. ‘“*.As they ministered to the Lord, and
fasted, the Holy Ghost said, Separate Me Bar-
nabas and Saul for the work whereunto I have
called them. And when they had fasted and
prayed, and laid their hands on them, they sent
them away.” (v. 2, 3.) What means, “ Min-
istering?”’ Preaching. “ Separate for Me,” it
says, ‘“‘ Barnabas and Saul.” What means,
“Separate for Me?” For the work, for the
Apostleship. See again by what persons he
is ordained (ywrorépa. Cat. ceurorépa, “more
awful.’”’) By Lucius the Cyrenean and Manaén,
or rather, by the Spirit. The less the per-
sons, the more palpable the grace. He is
ordained henceforth to Apostleship, so as to
preach with authority. How then does he
himself say, ‘‘ Not from men, nor by man?’


* Josephus’ narrative of the death of Herod (4 x7. xix. 8, 2) is
of peculiar interest here on account of its substantial agree-
ment with that of Luke. The following points of agreement
may be noted: (1) The place was Czsarea. (2) He was
attacked by disease in a public assembly when,arrayed in gor-
geous apparel, he received the impious flatteries of the people.
(3) His disease and death were a penalty for accepting the fiat-
tery of those who accorded to him divine honors. hus the
main outlines are the same. Josephus introduces some histor-
ical notices, such as that the occasion was a celebration in
honor of the Emperor Claudius, which are wanting in Luke.
He also relates that after receiving the people’s flattery, Herod
observed an owl perched on a rope above him, which he inter-
preted at once as an omen of the fate which soon befell him.
The supernatural element—“ an angel smote him ”—is wanting
in Josephus. The Jewish historian is less specific in describing
the disease which he speaks of as violent pains in the bowels
and adds that after the attack, Herod lingered five days and
died in the fifty-fourth year of his age and the seventh of his
reign.—G. B.S.

+ At this point (ch. xiii.) begins the second part of the Book
of Acts which has chiefly to do with the missionary labors of
Paul. It isa reasonable supposition that the previous chap-
ters rest upon different documents from those which follow.
From chapter xvi. onward occur the so-called ‘‘ we” pas-
sages (e. g. XVi. 10; XxX, 6. XXi. 1; XXVIi. 1) in which the writer,
identifying himself with his narratives, indicates that he writes
from personal knowledge and experience. The appointment
of Barnabas and Saul at Antioch for missionary service,
marked an epoch in the history of the early church and prac-
tically settled the questions relating to the admission of the
Gentiles to the Christian community.—G. B. S.

4 Mss. and Edd. 8 avtpwrwv, but the singular is implied
below in ovx vd 7ovde. In the old text, B. C. Cat. ** Not from
men nor by men? Because not man called nor brought him
over : that is, neither by men; therefore he says, that he was
not sent(B.,I was not sent) by this,’’ etc. The mod. text ‘* Not
from men neither by men. The one, not from men, he uses to


Homity XXVIL.]


(Gal. i. 1.) Because it was not man that
called or brought him over: this is why he
says, “Not from men. Neither by man,”
that is, that he was not sent by this (man),
but by the Spirit. Wherefore also (the writer)
thus proceeds: “So they, being sent forth by
the Holy Ghost, departed unto Seleucia; and
from thence they sailed to Cyprus.” (v. 4.)
But let us look over again what has been said.

(Recapitulation.) ‘And when it was day,”
etc. (v.18.) For if the Angel had brought
out the soldiers also, along with Peter, it
would have been thought a case of flight.
Then why, you may ask, was it not otherwise
managed? Why, where is the harm? Now,
if we see that they who have suffered unjustly,
take no harm, we shall not raise these ques-
tions. For why do you not say the same of
James? Why did not (God) rescue him?
“There was no small stir among the soldiers.”
So (clearly) had they perceived nothing (of
what had happened). Lo, I take up the plea
in their defence. The chains were there, and
the keepers within, and the prison shut, no-
where a wall broken through, all told the
same tale: the man had been carried off: ?
why dost thou condemn them? Had they
wished to let him off, they would have done
it before, or would have gone out with him.
“But he gave them money?” (ch. iii, 6.)
And how should he, who had not to give even
to a poor man, have the means to give to
these? And then neither had the chains
been broken, nor were they loosed. He
ought to have seen, that the thing was of
God, and no work of man. ‘‘And he went
down from Judea to Cesarea, and there
abode. And Herod was highly displeased
with them of Tyre and Sidon,” etc. (v. 19.)
He is now going to mention (a matter of) his-
tory: this is the reason why he adds the
names, that it may be shown how he keeps to
the truth in allthings. ‘ And,” it says, “‘ hav-
ing made Blastus the king’s chamberlain their
friend, they desired peace; because their
country was nourished by the king’s country.”
(v. 20, 21.) For probably there was a
famine. ‘And ona set day,” etc. (Joseph.
Ant. xix.) Josephus also says this, that he
fell into a lingering disease. Now the gener-


show that not man, etc.: and the other, neither by men, that
he was not sent by this (man), but by the Spirit. Wherefore,’
etc.

1 Here he further answers the question raised in the opening
of the discourse, The mod. text transposes it to that place,
beginning the recapitulation with, ‘*‘ And when it was day
there was no small stir among the soldiers because of Peter,
and having put the keepers to the question, he ordered them
to be led away to execution.’ So senseless was he, ovtws ovK
yovero, that he even sets about punishing them unjustly.”
The latter clause is added by the innovator. For yovero Cat.
_ has preserved the true reading, fovovzo.

2 avapmagtos 0 avipwmos yeyove. Ben. homo ille raptus non
est,


THES AGES OF THE: APOSTRLES.


175


ality were not aware of this,® but the Apostle
sets it down: yet at the same time their igno-
rance was an advantage, in regard that they
imputed what befell (Agrippa) to his putting
James and the soldiers to death. Observe,
when he slew the Apostle, he did nothing of
this sort but when (he slew) these ; in fact he
knew not what to say about it :* as being at a
loss, then, and feeling ashamed, “he went
down from Judea to Cxsarea.” I suppose it
was also to’ bring those (men of Tyre and
Sidon) to apologize, that he withdrew (from
Jerusalem): for with those he was incensed,
while paying such court to these. See how
vainglorious the man is: meaning to confer
the boon upon them, he makes an harangue.
But Josephus says, that he was also arrayed
in a splendid robe made of silver. Observe
both what fiatterers those were, and what a
high spirit was shown by the Apostles: the
man whom the whole nation so courted, the
same they held in contempt. (v. 24.) But
observe again a great refreshing granted to
them, and the numberless benefits accruing
from the vengeance inflicted upon him. But
if this man, because it was said to him, “ It
is the voice of God and not of aman (v. 22)
although he said nothing himself, suffered
such things: much more should Christ, had
He not Himself been God (have suffered)
for saying always as He did, “ These words
of mine are not Mine ’” (John xiv. 10; xviii.
36) and, “ Angels minister to Me,” and
such like. But that man ended His life
by a shameful and miserable death, and
thenceforth no more is seen of him. And
observe him also, easily talked over even by
Blastus, like a poor creature, soon incensed
and again pacified, and on all occasions a
slave of the populace, with nothing free and
independent about him. But mark also the
authority of the Holy Ghost: “ As they min-
istered to the Lord, and fasted, the Holy
Ghost said, Separate Me Barnabas and
Saul.” (ch. xiii. 2.) What being would have
dared, if not of the same authority, to say
this “Separate,” etc.. But this: 1sedone,


3 i. e. of the circumstances related v. 22, 23.—Below, mAnv
GAAG Kal H ayvora wheAeL, i. e. to the believers: and yet, as he
says above, the writer does not conceal the facts: see note %, p,
I


4 Mss. and Edd. ovdév rovodrov eipyagato: ote Sé tovTous,
Aourov ev adacia iv. what this means, is very obscure, only
the last clause seems to be explained by the following, are oby
NTOpHKwS Kal aioxuvvouevos, i.e. NOt Knowing what to think of
it, he withdrew from Jerusalem. Ben. guando tllos, nihil
dicebat. Erasm., et guando altos, nthil de illis traditur.
—Below, 'Emot Soxet nat exeivous mpos Thy amoAoyiav évaywr
amayayely wpyifeTo yap EKELVOLs, TOUVTOUS OUTwW BepavevwV. By
éxetvous, execvors, he means the Tyrians and Sidonians: amay-
ayeiv, Sc. €avtov, to have withdrawn himself from Jerusalem,
to Czsarea, nearer to Tyre and Sidon. The innovator substi-
tutes, "Euwot Soxet Kai éxeivous amayayety BovAduevos, mpos
amoAoylay HAGE TOUTWY' WpytCeTo yap K. T. A. Which Ben. renders
| Mihi widetur, cum tllos abducere vellet, ad hos venisse ut sese


|
| purgaret.


176 THE WORKS OF


ST. CHRYSOS#ON:


[HomiLy XXVII.


that they may not keep together among them-


selves. The Spirit saw that they had greater
power, and were able to be sufficient for
many. And how did He speak to them?


Probably by prophets: therefore the writer
premises, that there were prophets also. And
they were fasting and ministering: that thou


mayest learn that there was need of great sobri-
ety. In Antioch he is ordained, where he
preaches. Why did He not say, Separate for
the Lord, but, ‘‘ For me?” It shows that He
is of one authority and power. ‘‘ And when
they had fasted,” etc. Seest thou what a
great thing fasting is? ‘So they being sent
forth by the Holy Ghost:” it shows that the
Spirit did all.

A great, yes a great good is fasting: it is
circumscribed by no limits. When need was
to ordain, then they fast: and to them while
fasting, the Spirit spake. Thus much only
do I enjoin: (I say) not fast, but abstain from
luxury. Let us seek meats to nourish, not
things to ruin us; seek meats for food, not
occasions of diseases, of diseases both of soul
and body: seek food which hath comfort, not
luxury which is full of discomfort: the one is
luxury, the other mischief; the one is pleas-
ure, the other pain; the one is agreeable to
nature, the other contrary to nature. For
say, if one should give thee hemlock juice to
drink, would it not be against nature? if one
should give thee logs and stones, wouldest
thou not reject them? Of course, for they are
against nature. Well, and so is luxury. For
just as in a city, under an invasion of enemies
when there has been siege and tumult, great
is the uproar, so is it in the soul, under inva-
sion of wine and luxury. ‘Who hath woe?
who hath tumults? who hath discomforts and
babblings? Are they not they that tarry
long at the wine? Whose are bloodshot
eves?) ” 1)(Prov:) xxii ¥20).30,)): But yet, say
what we will, we shall not bring off those who
give themselves up to luxury, unless1 we
bring into conflict therewith a different affec-
tion. And first, let us address ourselves to the
women. Nothing uglier than a woman given
to luxury, nothing uglier than a woman given
to drink. The bloom of her complexion is
faded: the calm and mild expression of the
eyes is rendered turbid, as when a cloud inter-
cepts the rays of the sunshine. It is a vulgar,
(avereifepov) slave-like, thoroughly low-lived
habit. How disgusting is a woman when
from her breath you catch sour whiffs of


1 ovK amortTncoLEy ... GY PHN ETEPOVY aVTLaTHTWMEY TAaBoS
(Mod. text mpods er. and 70 70s), i. e. unless, as Solomon does


in the last clause of the text cited, we set against this lusta]|&


different affection. viz. vanity, especially female vanity, regard
to personal appearance. Hence that last clause might be
better transposed to the end of this sentence.


fetid wine: a woman belching, giving out a
fume (yvudv) of decomposing meats; herself
weighed down, unable to keep upright; her
face flushed with an unnatural red; yawning
incessantly, and everything swimming in a
mist before her eyes! But not such, she that
abstains from luxurious living: no (this
abstinence makes her look) a more beautiful,
well-bred (cwdpovectéoa) woman. For even to
the body, the composure of the soul imparts
a beauty of its own. Do not imagine that
the impression of beauty results only from the
bodily features. Give me a handsome girl, but
turbulent (rerapayzévyv), loquacious, railing,
given to drink, extravagant, (and tell me) if
she is not worse- looking than any ugly
woman? But if she were bashful, if she
would hold her peace, if she learnt to blush, if
to speak modestly (cuuuérpwc), if to find time
for fastings; her. beauty would be twice as
great, her freshness would be heightened, her
look more engaging, fraught with modesty
and good breeding (cw¢gpocivac Kat koomoryt r0C).
Now then, shall we speak of men? What can
be uglier than a man in drink? He isan
object of ridicule to his servants, of ridicule
to his enemies, of pity to his friends ; deserv-
ing condemnation without end: a wild beast
rather than a human being; for to devour
much food is proper to panther, and lion, and
bear. No wonder (that they do so), for those
creatures have not a reasonable soul. And
yet even they, if they be gorged with food
more than they need, and beyond the measure
appointed them by nature, get their whole
body ruined by it: how much more we?
Therefore hath God contracted our stomach
into a small compass; therefore hath He
marked out a small measure of sustenance,
that He may instruct us to attend to the soul.

Let us consider our very make, and we
shall see there is in us but one little part that
has this operation—for our mouth and tongue
are meant for singing hymns, our throat for
voice—therefore the very necessity of nature
has tied us down, that we may not, even invol-
untarily, get into much trouble (cpayyareiav)
(in this way), Since, if indeed luxurious liy-
ing had not its pains, nor sickness and infirmi-
ties, it might be tolerated: but as the case is,
He hath stinted thee by restrtctions of nature,
that even if thou wish to exceed, thou mayest
not be able to do so. Is not pleasure thine
object, beloved? This thou shalt find from
moderation. Is not health? This too thou
shalt so gain. Is not easiness of mind?
This too. Is not freedom? is not vigor and
good habit of body, is not sobriety and alert-
ness of mind? (AII these thou shalt find) ; so
entirely are all good things there, while in the


HomILy XXVII.]


ee ot OE TRE) APOSTLES.


177


other are the contraries to these, discomfort,
distemper, disease, embarrassment—waste of
substance (dveAevéepia). Then how comes it,
you will ask, that we all run eagerly after this?
It comes of disease. For say, what is it that
makes the sick man hanker after the thing
that does him harm? Is not this vety hanker-
ing a part of his disease? Why is it that the
lame man does not walk upright? This very
thing, does it come of his being lazy, and not
choosing to go to the physician? For there
are some things, in which the pleasure they
bring with them is temporary, but lasting the
punishment: others just the contrary, in which
the endurance is for a time, the pleasure
perpetual. He, therefore, that has so little
solidity and strength of purpose as not to
slight present sweets for future, is soon over-
come. Say, how came Esau to be overcome?
how came he to prefer the present pleasure
to the future honor? Through want of solid-
ity and firmness of character. (Gen. xxv. 33.)
And this fault itself, say you, whence comes
it? Of our ownselves: and it is plain from
_this consideration. When we have the mind,
we do rouse ourselves, and become capable of
endurance. Certain it is, if at any time ne-
cessity comes upon us, nay, often only from a
spirit of emulation, we get to see clearly what
is useful for us. When therefore thou art
about to indulge in luxury, consider how brief
the pleasure, consider the loss—for loss it is
indeed to spend so much money to one’s own
hurt—the diseases, the infirmities : and despise
luxury. How many shall I enumerate who
have suffered evils from indulgence? Noah
was drunken, and was exposed in his naked-
ness, and see what evils came of this. (Gen.
ix. 20.) Esau through greediness abandoned
his birthright, and was set upon fratricide.
The people of Israel “sat down to eat and to
drink, and rose up to play.” (Ex. xxxii. 6.)
Therefore saith the Scripture, ‘‘When thou
hast eaten and drunken, remember the Lord
thy God.” (Deut. vi. 12.) For they fell over
a precipice, in falling into luxury, ‘“ The
widow,” he saith, “‘that liveth in pleasure, is
dead while she liveth” (1 Tim. v. 6): and
again, “ The beloved waxed sleek, grew thick,
and kicked” (Deut. xxxii. 15): and again the
Apostle, “ Make not provision for the flesh, to
fulfil the lusts thereof.” (Rom. xiii. 14.) I
am not enacting as a law that there shall be
fasting, for indeed there is no one who would
listen; but I am doing away with daintiness,
Iam cutting off luxury for the sake of your
own profit: for like a winter torrent, luxury
overthrows ail: there is nothing to stop its
course: it casts out from a kingdom: what is
the gain of it (ri TO whéov) ?


12


Would you enjoy |


a (real) luxury? Give to the poor; invite
Christ, so that even after the table is removed,
you may still have this luxury to enjoy. For
now, indeed, you have it not, and no wonder:
but then you will have it. Would you taste a
(real) luxury? Nourish your soul, give to her
of that food to which she is used: do not kill
her by starvation.—It is the time for war, the
time for contest: and do you sit enjoying
yourself? Do you not see even those who
wield sceptres, how they live frugally while
abroad on their campaigns? “We wrestle
not against flesh and blood” (Eph. vi. 12);
and are you fattening yourself when about to
wrestle? The adversary stands grinding his
teeth, and are you giving a loose to jollity, and
devoting yourself to the table? I know that
I speak these things in vain, yet not (in vain)
for all. “He that hath ears to hear, let him
hear.” (Luke viii. 8.) Christ is pining through
hunger, and are you frittering yourself away
(dcasrG¢) with gluttony? Two inconsistencies
(Ato auetpia). For what evil does not luxury
cause? It is contrary to itself: so that I
know not how it gets its name: but just as
that is called glory, which is (really) infamy,
and that riches, which in truth is poverty, so
the name of luxury is given to that which in
reality is nauseousness. Do we intend our-
selves for the shambles, that we so fatten our-
selves? Why cater for the worm that it may
have a sumptuous larder? Why make more
of their humors (iyépac)? Why store up in
yourself sources of sweat and rank smelling?
Why make yourself useless for everything ?
Do you wish your eye to be strong? Get
your body well strung? For in musical
strings, that which is coarse and not refined, is
not fit to produce musical tones, but that
which has been well scraped, stretches well,
and vibrates with full harmony. Why do you
bury the soul alive? why make the wall about
it thicker? Why increase the reek and the
cloud, with fumes like a mist steaming up from
all sides? If none other, let the wrestlers
teach you, that the more spare the body, the
stronger it is: and (then) also the soul is
more vigorous. In fact, it is like charioteer
and horse. But there you see, just as in the
case of men giving themselves to luxury, and
making themselves plump, so the plump
horses are unwieldy, and give the driver much
ado. One may think one’s self (ayaryrdy) well
off, even with a horse obedient to the rein and
well-limbed, to be able to carry off the prize :
but when the driver is forced to drag the
horse along, and when the horse falls, though
he goad him ever so much, he cannot make
'him get up, be he ever so skilful himself, he
will be deprived of the victory. Then let us


178


not endure to see our soul wronged because
of the body, but let us make the soul herself
more clear-sighted, let us make her wing light,
her bonds looser: let us feed her with dis-
course, with frugality, (feeding) the body only
so much that it may be healthy, that it may be
vigorous, that it may rejoice and not be in
pain : that having in this sort well ordered our


THE. WORKS. OF (ST. \CHRYSOsSi 005


[HomiLy XXVIII.


concerns, we may be enabled to lay hold upon
the highest virtue, and to attain unto the
eternal good things by the grace and loving-
kindness of our Lord Jesus Christ, with Whom,
to the Father and Holy Ghost together, be
glory, dominion, honor, now and ever, world
without ed. Amen.


HOMILY XXVIII.


ACT Sex Illy tye


“So they, being sent forth by the Holy Ghost, de-
parted unto Seleucia; and from thence they sailed
to Cyprus. And when they were at Salamis, they
preached the word of God in the synagogues of
the Jews: and they had also Johto their min-
ister.’


As soon as they were ordained they went
forth, and hasted to Cyprus, that being a
place where was no ill-design hatching against
them, and where moreover the Word had been
sown already. In Antioch there were (teach-
ers) enough, and Phcenice too was near to
Palestine ; but Cyprus not so. However, you
are not to make a question of the why and
wherefore, when it is the Spirit that directs
their movements: for they were not only or-
dained by the Spirit, but sent forth by Him
likewise. “And when they were come to
Salamis, they preached the word of God in
the synagogues of the Jews.” Do you mark
how they make a point of preaching the word
to them first, not to make them more conten-
tious? * The persons mentioned before
‘spake to none but to Jews only ” (ch. xi. 19),
and so here they betook them to the syna-
gogues. ‘And when they had gone through
the isle unto Paphos, they found a certain
sorcerer, a false prophet, a Jew, whose name
was Bar-jesus: which was with the deputy of
the country, Sergius Paulus, a prudent man;
who called for Barnabas and Saul, and desired
to hear the word of God. But Elymas the


* That Barnabas and Saul preached first to the Jews for the
reason mentioned by Chrysostom is wholly improbable. The
mission to the Gentiles entrusted to them never cancelled, in
their minds, their obligation to the Jews as having in the plan
of God an economic precedence. Paul not only maintained
throughout his life an ardent love and longing for his people
(Rom, ix.) and a confident hope of their conversion (Rom. x1.),
but regarded them as still the people of privilege, on the prin-
ciple: ‘‘ To the Jew first, and also to the Greek.”’ (Rom. i. 16.)
This view, together with the fact that they were Jews, con-
stitutes a sufficient explanation for their resort to the syna-
gogues. Additional reasons may be found in the fact that in
the synagogues might be found those who were religiously in-
clined—of both Jewish and Gentile nationality—and who were
therefore most susceptible to the influence of Christian truth,
and in the fact that the freedom of speech in the synagogue-


sorcerer (for so is his name by interpretation)
withstood them, seeking to turn away the
deputy from the faith.” (v. 6-8.) Againa
Jew sorcerer, as was Simon. And observe
this man, how, while they preached to the
others, he did not take it much amiss, but
only when they approached the proconsul.
And then in respect of the proconsul the
wonder is, that although prepossessed by the
man’s sorcery, he was nevertheless willing to
hear the Apostles. So it was with the Samar-
itans: and from the competition (cvyxpicewc) the
victory appears, the sorcery being worsted.
Everywhere, vainglory and love of power are
a (fruitful) source of evils! ‘But Saul, who
is also Paul,”—(v. 9) here his name is changed
at the same time that he is ordained, as it
was in Peter’s case,t—‘‘filled with the Holy
Ghost, looked upon him, and said, O full of
all guile and all villany, thou child of the
devil:” (v. 10) and observe, this is not abuse,
but accusation: for so’ought forward, impu-
dent people to be rebuked “thou enemy of all
righteousness ;”’ here he lays bare what was
in the thoughts of the man, while under pre-


‘text of saving he was ruining the proconsul :


‘“‘wilt thou not cease,” he says, “to pervert
the ways of the Lord?” (He says it) both
confidently (agwricrwe), It is not with us thou
art warring, nor art thou fighting (with us),
but “ the ways of the Lord ” thou art pervert-


‘ing, and with praise (of these, he adds) ‘the


+ Chrysostom here hints at the most probable explanation ot
the change of name in the Acts from Saul to Paul, although
that change is not strictly simultaneous with his ordination
which occurred at Antioch (v. 3), whereas the first use of the
name “‘ Paul”’ is in connection with his labors at Paphos, after
he had preached for a time in Salamis. It seems probable
that, as in so many cases, Paul,a Hellenist, had two names, in
Hebrew Saul, and in Greek Paul, and that now when he enters
distinctively upon his mission to the Gentiles, his Gentile
name comes into exclusive use. (So, among recent critics,
De Wette, Lechler, Alford, Neander, Gloag.) Other opinions
are: (1) that he took the name Paul—signifying 27¢¢7e—out of
modesty (Augustin); (2) that he was named Paul, either by him-
self (Jerome), by his fellow-Christians (Meyer) or by the pro-


service offered the most favorable opportunity to expound the | consul (Ewald), in honor of the conversion of Sergius Paulus.


Gospel.—G, B.S.


—G. B.S.


HomMILy XXVIII.]


right” ways. “And now, behold, the hand
of the Lord is upon thee, and thou shalt be
blind.” (v. 11.) It was the sign by which he
was himself converted, and by this he would
fain convert this man. As also that expres-
sion, ‘for a season,” puts it not as an act of
punishing, but as meant for his conversion:
had it been for punishment, he would have
made him lastingly blind, but now it is not so,
but “for a season”’ (and this), that he may
gain the proconsul. For, as he was prepos-
sessed by the sorcery, it was well to teach him
a lesson by this infliction (and the sorcerer
also), in the same way as the magicians (in
Egypt) were taught by the boils.* (Ex. ix,
ee And immediately there fell on him a
mist and a darkness: and he went about seek-
ing some to lead him by the hand. Then the
deputy, when he saw what was done, believed,
being astonished at the doctrine of the
Lord.” (v. 12.) But observe, how they do
not linger there, as (they might have been
tempted to do) now that the proconsul was a
believer, nor are enervated by being courted
and honored, but immediately keep on with
their work, and set out for the country on the
opposite coast. ‘“‘Now when Paul and _ his
company loosed from Paphos, they came to
Perga in Pamphylia; and John departing
from them returned to Jerusalem. But when
they departed from Perga, they came to An-
tioch in Pisidia, and went into the synagogue
on the sabbath day, and sat down.” (v. 13, 14.)
And here again they entered the synagogues,
in the character of Jews, that they might not
be treated as enemies, and be driven away:
and in this way they carried the whole matter
successfully. ‘And after the reading of the
Law and the Prophets, the rulers of the syna-
gogue sent unto them, saying, Ye men and
brethren, if ye have any word of exhortation
for the people, say on.” (v. 15.) From this
point, we learn the history of Paul’s doings,
as in what was said above we have learned
not a little about Peter. But let us review
what has been said,


AT TS FEO


a ie


“03


Pr ger ees ang Paros Pee Fa eee ae a


(Recapitulation.) “And when they were
come to Salamis,” the metropolis of Cyprus,
“they preached the word of God.” (nS)
They had spent a year in Antioch: it behooved
that they should go hither also (to Cyprus)
and not sit permanently where they were (the
converts in Cyprus): needed greater teachers.
See too how they remain no time in Seleucia,
knowing that (the people there) might have


* It can hardly be meant that the smiting of Ely mas with
blindness was not a judicial infliction fo himse 2f; but that the
proconsul should see it rather on its merciful Side as being
only axpt xacpov. The Hebraistic use of Xeip Kupiou clearly
implies a divine judgment upon Elymas as does the whole
force of the narrative.—G. B.S.


SRE dveis OF ‘THE APOSFLES:


179


reaped much benefit from the neighboring
city (of Antioch): but they hasten on to the
more pressing duties. When they came to
the metropolis of the island, they were earnest
to disabuse (dvopHwcar) the proconsul. But that
itis no flattery that (the writer) says, “he was
with the proconsul, a prudent man” (v. 7), you
may learn from the facts; for he needed not
many discourses, and himself wished to hear
them. And’ he mentions also the names.
* * * Observe, how he said nothing to the
sorcerer, until he gave him an occasion: but
they only ‘‘ preached the word of the Lord.”
Since (though Elymas) saw the rest attending
to them, he looked only to this one object,
that the proconsul might not be won over.
Why did not (Paul) perform some other mira-
cle? Because there was none equal to this,
the taking the enemy captive. And observe,
he first impeaches, and then punishes, him.
He shows how justly the man deserved to
suffer, by his saying, “O full of all deceit”

(v. 10) : (“ full of all =) he says : nothing want-
ing to the full measure: and he well says, of
all « deceit,” for the man was playing the part
of a hypocrite.—“ Child of the devil,”’ because
he was doing his work: “enemy of all right-
eousness,” since this (which they preached)
was the whole of righteousness (though at
the same time): I suppose in these words he
reproves his manner of life. His words were
not prompted by anger, and to show this, the
writer premises, “filled with the Holy Ghost, ag
that is, with His operation. “And now be-
hold the hand of the Lord is upon thee.”
(v. 11.) It was not vengeance then, but heal-
ing: for it is as though he said: “It is not
I that do it, but the hand of God.” Mark
how unassuming! No “light,”? as in the
case of Paul, “shone round about him.”
(ch. ix. 3.) ‘Thou shalt be blind,” he says,
“not seeing the sun for a season,” that he
may give him opportunity for repentance: for
we nowhere find them wishing to be made
conspicuous by the more stern (exercise of
their authority), even though it was against
enemies that this was put forth: in respect of
those of their own body (they used severity),


1 Kai ta Ovouata b€ A€yer: ererdn mpoodatws Eypadov: dpa
x. 7. A. A. B.C. N. Cat. Itis not clear whether this relates
to the two names, Barjesus and Elymas, (if so we might
read €ypadev, ‘since he wrote just before, (whose name was
Barjesus, but now Elymas, for so is his name interpreted,” )
or to the change of the Apostle’s name, ‘** Then Saul, who is
also called Paul,’’ (and then perhaps the sense of the latter
clause may be, Since the change of name was recent: érecdn
Tpoghatws weTeypady or the like.) The mod. text substitutes,
‘*But he also recites the names of the cities: showing that
since they had but recently received the word, there was
need (for them) to be confirmed, to continue in the faith: for
which reason also they frequently visited them.”

2 Mod. text omits thissentence. The connection is: Paul in-
flicts this blindness upon him, not in vengeance, butin order to
his conversion, remembering how the Lord Himself had dealt
with him on the way to Damascus. But it was not here, as
then—no “ light shown round about him from heaven.”’


180


THE WORKS OF ‘ST. CHR¥SOSi@ar


[Homity XXVIII.


and with good reason, but in dealing with
those without, not so; that (the obedience of
faith) might not seem to be matter of compul-
sion and fear. It is a proof of his blindness,
his “ seeking some to lead him by the hand.”
(ch. v. 1. ff.) And? the proconsul sees the
blindness inflicted, “and when he saw what
was done, he believed:” and both alone be-
lieved not merely this, but, ‘“‘being astonished
at the doctrine of the Lord” (v. 12): he saw
that these things were not mere words, nor
trickery. Mark how he loved to receive in-
struction from his teachers, though he was in
a station of so high authority. And (Paul)
said not to the sorcerer, “‘ Wilt thou not cease
to pervert” the proconsul?? What may be
the reason of John’s going back from them?
For “John,” it says, “departing from them
returned to Jerusalem” (v. 13): (he does it)
because they are undertaking a still longer
journey: and yet he was their attendant, and
as for the danger, they incurred it (not he).—
Again, when they were come to Perga, they
hastily passed by the other cities, for they
were in haste to the metropolis, Antioch.
And observe how concise the historian is.
“They sat down in the synagogue,” he says,
and, “ton the sabbath day” (v. 14, 15): that
they might prepare the way beforehand for the
Word. And they do not speak first, but
when invited: since as strangers, they called
upon them to do so. Had they not waited,
there would have been no discourse. Here
for the first time we have Paul preaching.
And observe his prudence: where the word
was already sown, he passes on: but where
there was none (to preach), he makes a stay:
as he himself writes: ‘“ Yea, so have I strived
to preach the Gospel, not where Christ was
named.” (Rom. xv. 20.) Great courage this
also. Truly, from the very outset, a wonder-
ful man! crucified, ready for all encounters
(xaparerayuévoc), he knew how great grace he
had obtained, and he brought to it zeal equiv-
alent. He was not angry with John: for this
was not for him:*® but he kept to the work,
he quailed not, he was unappalled, when shut
up in the midst of a host. Observe how


1 Kai (Eira mod.) (opa C. N. Cat.) thv mipwow (Cat. tipwow)
6 av@, kai (om. Cat.) movos émiatevoev (mod. evOds muoTevec).
The reading in Cat. is meant for emendation: ‘‘ And mark the
fervor (or kindling, viz. of the proconsul’s mind): the proc.
alone believed”’ etc.

2 Mod. text adds, ‘‘ but, the ways of the Lord, which is more:
that he may not seem to pay court.”’

3 ov yap TovTov jv. ‘* Down. renders it on enim ir@ dedi-
tus erat, he was not the man for this (anger): or perhaps, For
he (John) was_not his, not associated by him, but by Barna-
bas.”’ Ben. But the meaning should rather be, ‘“‘ So greata
work was not for him (Mark); he was not equal toit.’’ The
connection is of this kind: ‘‘ Paul knew how great grace had
been bestowed on him, and on his own part he brought cor-
responding zeal. When Mark withdrew, Paul was not angry
with him, knowing that the like grace was not bestowed on
him, therefore neither could there be the like omovdy on his
part.


wisely it is ordered that Paul should not
preach at Jerusalem: the very hearing that he
is become a believer, this of itself is enough
for them ; for him to preach, they never would
have endured, such was their hatred of him:
so he departs far away, where he was not
known. But* it is well done, that “they
entered the synagogue on the sabbath day”
when all were collected together. ‘“ And after
the reading of the Law and the Prophets, the
rulers of the synagogue sent unto them, say-
ing, Ye men and brethren, if ye have any
word or exhortation for the people, say on.”
(v. 15.) Behold how they do this without
grudging, but no longer after this. If ye did
wish this (really), there was more need to
exhort.


He first convicted the sorcerer (and showed),
what he was; and that he was such, the sign
showed: “thou shalt be blind, not seeing the
sun” this was a sign of the blindness of his
soul: “fora season” (v. 11): he says, to bring
him to repentance. But, oh that love of rule!
oh, that lust of vainglory! how it does over-
turn and ruin everything ; makes people stand
up against their own, against each other’s
salvation; renders them blind indeed, and
dark, insomuch that they have even to seek.
for some to lead them by the hand! Oh that
they did even this, oh that they did seek were
it but some to lead them by the hand! But
no, they no longer endure this, they take the
whole matter into their own hands. (This
vice) will let no man see: like a mist and
thick darkness it spreads itself over them, not
letting any see through it. What pleas shall
we have to offer, we who for one evil affec-
tion, overcome another evil affection (supra
p. 176), but not for the fear of God! For ex-
ample, many who are both lewd and covetous,
have for their niggardliness put a bridle upon
their lust, while other such, on the contrary,
have for pleasure’s sake, despised riches.
Again, those who are both the one and the
other, have by the lust of vainglory overcome
both, lavishing their money unsparingly, and
practising temperance to no (good) purpose;
others again, who are exceedingly vainglori-
ous, have despised that evil affection, submit-
ting to many vile disgraces for the sake of
their amours, or for the sake of their money:
others again, that they may satiate their anger,
have chosen to suffer losses without end, and


4 In Mss. and Edd. this portion, to the end of the paragraph,
is placed after the part relating to Elymas, ‘‘ He first con-
victed,”’ etc. and immediately before the Morale, as if the oc-
casion of the invective against @rAapyia and Kevodoéia were
furnished by the conduct of the rulers of the synagogue: but
see above, p. 178, in the expos. of v. 8, mavtaxov n Kevodofia
kal 9 diAapxia aitiat THY kakwv, and below, the allusion to the
blindness of Elymas.


Homity XXVIII.]


care for none of them, provided only they may
work their own will, And yet, what passion
can do with us, the fear of God is impotent to
effect! Why speak I of passion? What
shame before men can do with us, the fear of
God has not the strength to effect! Many
are the things we do right and wrong, from a
feeling of shame before men; but God we
fear not. How many have been shamed by
regard to the opinions of men into flinging
away money! How many have mistakenly
made it a point of honor to give themselves
up to the service of their friends (only), to
their hurt! How many from respect for their
friendships have been shamed into number-
less wrong acts! Since then both passion
and regard for the opinion of men are able to
put us upon doing wrong things and right, it
is idle to say, “we cannot:”
have the mind: and we ought to have the
mind. Why canst not thou overcome the
love, of glory, when others do overcome it,
having the same soul as thou, and the same
body ; bearing the same form, and living the
same life? Think of God, think of the glory
that is from above: weigh against that the
things present, and thou wilt quickly recoil
from this worldly glory. If at all events thou
covet glory, covet that which is glory, indeed.
What kind of glory is it, when it begets in-
famy? What kind of glory, when it compels
one to desire the honor of those who are in-
ferior, and stands in need of that? Real
honor is the gaining the esteem of those who
are greater than one’s self. If at all events
thou art enamoured of glory, be thou rather
enamoured of that which comes from God. If
enamoured of that glory thou despisest this
world’s glory, thou shalt see how ignoble this
is: but so long as thou seest not that glory,
neither wilt thou be able to see this, how foul
it is, how ridiculous. For as those who are
under the spell of some wicked, hideously
ugly woman, so long as they are in love with
her, cannot see her ill-favoredness, because
their passion spreads a darkness over their
judgment: so is it here also: so long as we
are possessed with the passion, we cannot
perceive what a thing it is. How then might
we be rid of it? Think of those who (for the
sake of glory) have spent countless sums, and
now are none the better for it:1 think of the


1 cat ovdev am’ avtns Kaproumevous, i. e. reaping no fruit from
it (the glory which they sought here) where they are now.
Mod. text ovdév am’ avtwyv xaprwoauevovs. ‘‘ reaped no fruit
while here, from their money which they squandered ’’—mis-


Pitts OF THE APOSPLES:


we can, if we|


ISI


dead, what glory they got, and (now) this
glory is nowhere abiding, but all perished and
come to naught: bethink thee how it is only
a name, and has nothing real in it. For say,
what is glory? give me some definition.
“The being admired by all,” you will say.
With justice, or also not with justice? For if
it be not with justice, this is not admiration,
but crimination («aryyopia), and flattery, and
misrepresentation (dvao77). But if you say,
With justice, why that is impossible: for in
the populace there are no right judgments;
those that minister to their lusts, those are
the persons they admire. And if you would
(see the proof of this), mark those who give
away their substance to the harlots, to the
charioteers, to the dancers. But you will say,
we do not mean these, but those who are just
and upright, and able to do great and noble
good acts. Would that they wished it, and they
soon would do good: but as things are, they
do nothing of the kind. Who, I ask you, now
praises the just and upright man? Nay, it is
just the contrary. Could anything be more
preposterous than for a jnst man, when doing
any such good act, to seek glory of the many
—as if an artist of consummate skill, employed
upon an Emperor’s portrait, should wish to
have the praises of the ignorant! Moreover,
a man who looks for honor from men, will
scon enough desist from the acts which virtue
enjoins. If he will needs be gaping for their
praises, he will do just what they wish, not
what himself wishes. What then would I
advise you? You must look only to God, to
the praise that is from Him, perform all
things which are pleasing to Him, and go
after the good things (that are with Him), not
_be gaping for anything that is of man: for
this mars both fasting and prayer and alms-
giving, and makes all our good deeds void.
| Which that it be not our case, let us flee this
passion. ‘To one thing alone let us look, to
the praise which is from God, to the being
accepted of Him, to the commendation from
our common Master; that, having passed
through our present life virtuously, we may
obtain the promised blessings together with
them that love Him, through the grace and
_mercy of our Lord Jesus Christ, with whom to
‘the Father, together with the Holy Ghost, be
|glory, might, honor, now and ever, world
| without end. Amen.


| taking the meaning of the passage, which is, ‘*‘ They got what


they sought, but where is it now?


182


THE WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[HomiLy XXIX.


HOMILY »XXES


AGIS PEL 16/5072


“Then Paul stood up, and beckoning with his hand
said, Men of Israel, and ye that fear God, give
audience. The God of this people of Israel chose
our fathers, and exalted the people when they
dwelt as strangers in the land of Egypt, and with
an high arm brought He them out of it.”


BEHOLD Barnabas giving place to Paul—
how should it be otherwise ?—to him whom he
brought from Tarsus ; just as we find John on
all occasions giving way to Peter: and yet
Barnabas was more looked up to than Paul :
true, but they had an eye only to the common
advantage. ‘Then Paul stood up,” it says ;—
this! was a custom of the Jews—‘‘ and _ beck-
oned with his hand.” And see how he pre-
pares the way beforehand for his discourse :
having first praised them, and showed his
great regard for them in the words, “ ye that
fear God,” he so begins his discourse. And
he says not, Ye proselytes, since it was a term
of disadvantage.? ‘‘The God of this people
chose our fathers: and the people ’-—See, he
calls God Himself ¢hezr God peculiarly, Who
is the common God of men; and shows how
great from the first were His benefits, just as
Stephen does.
that now also God has acted after the same
custom, in sending His own Son; (Luke xx.
13): as (Christ) Himself (does) in the parable
of the vineyard—* And the people,” he says,
“He exalted when it sojourned in the land of
Egypt ’’—and yet the contrary was the case :?
true, but they increased in numbers; more-
over, the miracles were wrought on their
account: “and with an high arm brought He
them out of it.” Of these things (the won-
ders) which were done in Egypt, the prophets


1 j. e. for one of the congregation to expound or preach: or
perhaps rather, to preach standing, not sitting, as Christian
bishops did for their sermons. We have transposed the com-
ment to its proper place.—Mod. text adds, ** Wherefore he too
in accordance with this discourses to them.”’

2 orep Hv guudopas Ovowa, in regard that a proselyte might be
deemed inferior to a Jew of genuine descent, ‘‘a Hebrew of
the Hebrews.”

3 Kai uv Tovlvavtiov yéyovev. Here also we have transposed
the comment to the clause to which it belongs. In the Edd. it
comes after ‘‘ And with a high arm,”’ etc. whence Ben. mistak-
ing its reference says, ‘i. e., if I mistake not, God brought
them out of Egypt, that he might bring them into the Land of
Promise: but, for their wickedness, the contrary befell; for
the greatest part of them perished in the wilderness.’’ It
plainly refers to tWwoev—i. e. how is it said, that He exalted
them in Egypt, where, on the contrary, they were brought
low? This is true—but He did exalt them by increasing them
into a great multitude, and by the miracles which He wrought
on their behalf.


This they do to teach them, |


2s.)


are continually making mention. And _ ob-
serve, how he passes over the times of their
calamities, and nowhere brings forward their
faults, but only God’s kindness, leaving those
for themselves to think over. ‘‘ And about
the time of forty years suffered He their
manners in the wilderness.” (v. 18.) Then
the settlement. ‘ And when he had destroyed
seven nations in the land of Canaan, He
divided their land to them by lot.” (v. 19.)
And the time was long; four hundred and
fifty years. ‘And after that He gave unto
them judges about the space of four hundred
and fifty years, until Samuel the prophet.’*
(v. 20.) Here he shows that God varied His
dispensations towards them (at divers times).
“And afterward they desired a king:” and
(still) not a word of their ingratitude, but
throughout he speaks of the kindness of God. .
“And God gave unto them Saul the son of
Cis, a man of the tribe of Benjamin, by the
space’ .of » forty’ years (w.) 2m). Ame
when he had removed him, He raised up unto
them David to be their king: to whom also
He gave testimony, and said, I have found
David the son of Jesse, a man after Mine own
heart, which shall fulfil all My will. Of this
man’s seed hath God according to His prom-
ise raised unto Israel a Saviour, Jesus.” (v.
This was no small thing that Christ
should be from David. Then John bears wit-
ness to this: ‘‘ When John had first preached
before His coming the baptism of repentance
to all the people of Israel. And as John ful-
filled his course, he said, Whom think ye that


* Upon the reading of the T. R.(A. V.) the period of the
Judges is here stated to have been 450 years. This agrees with
the chronology of the book of Judges and of Josephus, but con-
flicts with 1 Kings vi. 1 where we are told that ‘‘in the four
hundred and eightieth year after the children of Israel were
come out of the land of Egypt, in the fourth year of Solomon’s
reign over Israel, he began to build the house of the Lord.”
This would give but 331 years for the period of the Judges.
It isthe view of many critics that Paul has here followed a
different chronology from that of 1 Kings which was also in
use among the Jews and was followed by Josephus (so Meyer.)
But if the reading of Tischendorf, Lechler, and Westcott and
Hort (R. V.) is adopted—and it is sustained by A. B. C. N—the
difficulty, so far as Acts xili. 21 is concerned, disappears. This
reading places peta tavta after ws Eteowv sq. and inserts a
period after mevtjxovra. Then the translation would be, ‘* He
gave them their land for an inheritance for about four hundred
and fifty years. And after these things He gave them
judges,’’ etc. On this reading the 450 years is the period of
their inheritance, approximately stated, up to the time of the
judges. The point from which Paul reckoned is not stated
and is ae cae This is the,preferable reading and explana-
tion.—G,


PPCM St


HomiLy XXIX.]


THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. 183


I am? I am not He. But, behold, there
cometh one after me, whose shoes of His feet
I am not worthy to loose.” (v. 24,25.) And
John too not merely bears witness (to the
fact), but (does it in such sort that) when men
were bringing the glory to him, he declines it:
for it is one thing (not to affect) an honor
which nobody thinks of offering; and another,
to reject it when all men are ready to give it,
and not only to reject it, but to do so with
such humility. ‘‘ Men and brethren, children
of the stock of Abraham, and whosoever
among you feareth God, to you is the word of
this salvation sent. For they that dwell at
Jerusalem, and their rulers, because they
knew Him not, nor yet the voices of the
prophets which are read every sabbath day,
they have fulfilled them in condemning Him.
And though they found no cause of death in
Him, yet desired they Pilate that He should
be slain.” (v. 26-28.) On all occasions we
find them making a great point of showing
this, that the blessing is peculiarly theirs, that
they may not flee (from Christ), as thinking
they had nothing to do with Him, because
they had crucified Him. ‘ Because they
knew Him not,” he says: so that the sin was
one of ignorance. See how he gently makes
an apology even on behalf of those (crucifiers).
And not only this: but he adds also, that thus
it must needs be. And’ how so? “ By con-
demning Him, they fulfilled the voices of the
prophets.” Then again from the Scriptures.
**And when they had fulfilled all that was
written of Him, they took Him down from the
tree, and laid Him in a sepulchre. But God
raised Him from the dead. And He was
seen many days of them which came up with
Him from Galilee to Jerusalem, who are His
witnesses unto the people—’(v. 29-31) that
He rose again. ‘“ And we declare unto you
glad tidings, how that the promise which was
made unto the fathers, God hath fulfilled the
same unto us their children, in that He hath
raised up Jesus again; as it is also written in
the second Psalm, Thou art My Son, this day
have I begotten Thee. And as concerning
that He raised Him up from the dead, now no
more to return to corruption, He said on this
wise, I will give you the sure mercies of
David. Wherefore he saith also in another
Psalm, Thou shalt not suffer Thine Holy One
to see corruption. For David, after he had
served his own generation by the will of God,


1 Kai wo0ev ore avéotyn dyno Kai paptupes eiow. Elta wadw
amo tav ypahov, followed by v. 29-37. We read, cai roev;
OTL Tas hwvas TOV TpOd., KpivavTes TOUTOY EemANpwoav. Elta raAdcy
amd T. yp. V. 29-31, ending, kat maptupes avTov eia.y mpos Tov
Aady ott avéotn. The mod. text ‘‘And that no man may say,
And whence is this manifest that He roseagain? He says
that (word), And are His witnesses. Then again He presses
them from the Scriptures, v. 29-37.”


fell on sleep, and was laid unto his fathers,
and saw corruption: but He, Whom God
raised again, saw no corruption. Be it known
unto you therefore, men and brethren, that
through this Man is preached unto you the
forgiveness of sins: and by Him all that
believe are justified from all things, from
which ye could not be justified by the law of
Moses.” (v. 32-39.) Observe? how Paul
here is more vehement in his discourse: we
nowhere find Peter saying this. Then too he
adds the terrifying words: ‘“ Beware therefore,
lest that come upon you, which is spoken of in
the prophets; Behold, ye despisers, and won-
der, and perish: for I work a work in your
days, a work which ye shall in no wise believe,
though a man declare it unto you.” (v. 40,
41.)

(a) Observe * how he twines (the thread of)
his discourse (alternately) from things present,
from the prophets. Thus, “from‘ (this
man’s) seed according to the promise ”"—(v.
23): (c) the name of David was dear to them ;
well then, is it not (a thing to be desired) that
a son of his, he says, should be their king ?—
(6) then he adduces John: then again the
prophets, where he says, “ By condemning
they fulfilled,” and again, ‘“ All that was writ-
ten:” then the Apostles as witnesses of the
Resurrection: then David bearing witness.
For neither the Old Testament proofs
seemed so cogent when taken by themselves
as they are in this way, nor yet the latter testi-
monies apart from the former: wherefore he
makes them mutually confirm each other.
(Mienr amd brethren,” etesad ‘(vin20:) yer
since they were possessed by fear, as having
slain Him, and conscience made them aliens
(the Apostles), discourse not with them as unto
Christicides, neither as putting into their
hands a good which was not theirs, but one
peculiarly their own. (@) “For they that
dwell at Jerusalem, and their rulers:”’ as


2 This comment, which in the Mss. and Edd. is inserted
after v. 37, refers to the following verses 38, 39, i. e. to what is
there said of the insufficiency of the Law for justification : we
have therefore transposed it.

3 In the old text the parts lie in the order here shown by the
letters a, 4, etc. The confusion may be explained by the
scribe’s copying in the wrong order from the four pages of his
tablets: viz. in the first place, in the order 1, 3, 2,4: then 2, 4,
1,3: and lastly, 2,1. In the modern text, a different arrange-
ment is attempted by which all is thrown into worse confu-
sion. Thus it was not perceived that Chrys. having in a cur-
sory way read through v. 24-41, begins his exposition in detail
with the remark of the Apostle’s passing and repassing from
the Old to the New Test. and vce versa, viz. alleging first the
Promise, then John, then the Prophets, then the Apostles, then
David and Isaiah, v. 24-34; then comments upon the matters
contained in these and the following verses, and then as usual
goes over the whole again in a second exposition. Now the
innovator makes the recapitulation begin immediately after
(a), commencing it at v. 26, and collecting the comments in
this order: v. 26-32: V. 24-36: V. 17-41

4 The transposition of the part (c), makes this read in the
Mss. and Edd. as if it were parallel with avd tay mapévtwr (i. e.
New Testament facts), a0 tov Ipodnrtav (Old Testament tes-
timonies).


184


THE WORKS OF ‘ST. CHEMSOSTOn:


[HomILy XXIX.


much as to say, not ye, but they:* and again,
apologizing even for those, “ Because they
knew Him not, and the voices of the Prophets
which are read every sabbath day, in con-
demning Him, they fulfilled them.” A great
charge it is against them that they continually
hearing heeded not. But no marvel: for what
was said above concerning Egypt and the wil-
derness, was enough to show their ingratitude.
And observe how this Apostle also, as one
moved by the Spirit Himself,! continually
preaches the Passion, the Burial. (g) “ Hav-
ing taken Him down from the tree.” Ob-
serve, what a great point they make of this.
He speaks of the manner of His death,
Moreover they bring Pilate (conspicuously)
forward, that (the fact of) the Passion may be
proved by the mention of the tribunal (by
which he was condemned), but at the same
time, for the greater impeachment. of those
(His crucifiers), seeing they delivered Him up
to an alien. And he does not say, They made
a complaint (against Him), (évéruyon, al. évrvy-
ya) but, “They desired, though having
found no cause of death” (in Him), “ that He
should be slain. (¢) Who appeared,” he says,
“for many days to them that came up with
Him from Galilee to Jerusalem.” (Rom. xi.
2.) Instead of? * * he says, “Who are His
witnesses unto the people,” to wit, ‘‘ The men
which came up with Him from Galilee to
Jerusalem.” Then he produces David and
Esaias bearing witness. ‘“ The faithful (mer-
cies),” the abiding (mercies), those which
never perish. (4) Paul loved them exceed-
ingly. And observe, he does not enlarge on
the ingratitude of the fathers, but puts before
them what they must fear. For Stephen in-
deed with good reason does this, seeing he
was about to be put to death, not teaching
them; and showing them, that the Law is
even now on the point of being abolished:
(ch. vii.) but not so Paul; he does but
threaten and put them in fear. (/) And he
does not dwell long on these,’ as taking it for


* Itis probable that Chrys. has pointed out the true con-
nection of thought as established by yap (27). ‘ The word of
this salvation is sent unto you (of the dispersion) on the
Bound that the Jews at Jerusalem have rejected it.’’ (So
Meyer, Gloag.) The more common explanation is: The word
is sent unto you because the Jews have fulfilled the prophecies
which spoke of the rejection of the Messiah and have thus
Breve hat He is the Messiah. (De Wette, Hackett, Lechler.)

1 ij, e. Though not one of the original witnesses. v. 31, yet,
being one who has been moved or raised up, cexcvnyuevov, by
the Spirit of Christ Himself, he preaches as they did, insisting
much on the Passion, etc.

2°Avti tov, Ot avépes ot cuvavaBavtes x. 7. A. Perhaps the
sense may be supplied thus: ’Avti rod, OF mavTes nmets eomev
paptupes, ii, 32, ov Nuets papT. eouer, iii. 15. Instead of saying
as Peter does, ‘*‘ Whereof we are witnesses.”

3 Kat ovx eyxpoviger tovTo1s, as in the recapitulation on Vv. 40,
41. Kal Opa, Tpaxv ov mas UVroTeuverar. Hence it is clear that
Tovtots refers not to “‘ the sure mercies of David,’’ as in Mss.
and Edd. (end of ¢), but to the threats and terrors (end of £).
Below, for aad’ émcteiver Thy KoAacw the sense of émuteiver (not
as Ben. mznatur, but zxtentat, ‘* makes much of, aggravates,


granted that the word is of course believed ;
nor enlarge upon the greatness of their pun-
ishment, and assail that which they affection-
ately love, by showing the Law about to be
cast out: but dwells upon that which is for
their good (telling them), that great shall be
the blessings for them being obedient, and
great the evils being disobedient.

But let us look over again what has been
said... “ Ye men of~Israel,™ete, | «(v..mb-205)
The Promise then, he says, the fathers re-
ceived ; ye, the reality. (7) And observe, he
nowhere mentions right deeds of theirs, but
(only) benefits on God’s part: ‘‘ He chose:
exalted: Suffered their manners:” these are
no matters of praise to them: ‘“ They asked,
He gave.” But David he does praise (and
him) only, because from him the Christ was to
come. “I have found David, the son of
Jesse, a man after Mine own heart, which
shall fulfil all My will.” (v. 22.) (Z) Observe
also, it is with praise (that he says of him),
“David after that he had served the will of
God:” just as Peter—seeing it was then the
beginning of the Gospel—making mention of
him, said, ‘‘ Let it be permitted me to speak
freely of the patriarch David.” (ch. ii. 29.)
Also, he does not say, Died, but, “ was added
to his fathers. (&) Of this man’s seed,” etc.
“When John,” he says, “had first preached
before His entry ”’—by entry he means the In-
carnation—*“ the baptism of repentance to all
the.people. of UIsrael.”. , (v..23-25.)) Thus
also John, writing his Gospel, continually has
recourse to him: for his name was much
thought of in all parts of the world. And
observe, he “does not say it “Of this man’s
seed,” etc. from himself, but brings John’s
testimony.

“Men and brethren, children of the stock
of Abraham’—he also calis them after
their father—‘‘unto you was the word of
this salvation sent.” (v. 26.) Here the
expression, ‘Unto you,’ does not mean,
Unto (you) Jews, but it gives them a right
to sever themselves from those who dared
that murder. And what he adds, shows
this plainly. “For,” he says, “they that
dwell at Jerusalem, because they know Him
not.” (v. (27.) “And how; you: williisags
could they be ignorant, with John to tell
them? What marvel, seeing they were so,
with the prophets continually crying aloud
to them? Then follows another charge:


dwells upon the greatness of)”’, and the whole scope of the
passage, require us to read ovde. Then, xai merépxerar with
the negative extending to the whole clause, ‘‘ and (like Ste-
phen) assail that which is dear to them, (viz. their preéminence
as Jews,) by showing the Law on the point of being cast out ;”
then, adda (so we restore for cat) 76 umd. evdcaTp., but dwells,
etc.


HomILy XXIX.]


PEE AGES OF THE APOSTLES.


185


“And having found no cause of death in
Him:” in which ignorance had nothing to
do. For let us put the case, that they did
not hold Him to be the Christ: why did
they also kill Him? And “they desired
of Pilate, he says, that He should be slain.”
(v. 28.) “And when they had fulfilled all


that was written of Him.” (v. 29.) Observe
what a point he makes of showing that the
(whole) thing was a (Divine) Dispensation.
See,’ by saying what did they persuade
men? (By telling them) that He. was
crucified? Why, what could be less per-
suasive than this? That He was buried—
by them to whom it was promised that He
should be salvation? that He who was
buried forgives sins, yea, more than the
Law (has power to do)? And (observe),
he does not say, From which ye would not,
but, “from which ye could not be justified
by. the Law of Moses.” (v. 39.) ‘“ Every
one,” he says: be who he may. For those
(ordinances) are of no use, unless there be
some benefit (accruing therefrom.) This
is why he brings in forgiveness later: and
shows it to be greater, when, the thing being
(otherwise) impossible, yet this is effected.
“Who are His witnesses,” he says, “unto
the people”—the people that slew Him.
Who would never have been so, were they
not strengthened by a Divine Power: for
they would never have borne such witness
to blood-thirsty men, to the very persons
that killed Him. But, “He hath raised
up Jesus again: This day,” he says, “I
have begotten thee.”* (v. 33.) Aye, upon
this the rest follows of course. Why did
he not allege some text by which they would
be persuaded that forgiveness of sins is by
Him? Because the great point with them
was to show, in the first place, that He
was risen: this being acknowledged, the
other was unquestionable. “Through this
man,’ nay more, by Him, “is remission of


, } Edd. ‘But let us hear ti nat A€yovtes oi ’Andar. Ereroar,
ott eotavpwOn, by saying what, by what announcement, the
Apostles persuaded (men) that He was crucified.’’ For ti
TovTov am@. B. has 70 7. a. “*(yea), what is more incredible
still.”’ Both clauses must be read interrogatively, The scope
of the whole passage (which is obscure in the original) is, the
supreme importance of the article of the Resurrection, Leave
that out, and see what the preaching of the Apostles would
have been ; how it would have been received.

* The reading : ‘‘In the Second Psalm” is the best attested
and is followed by the T. R., R. V. and Wescott and Hort.
Ilpwt» is found in D. and is supported by the Fathers. It is
the more difficult reading and for this reason is preferred by
Tischendorf, Lachmann, Meyer, Alford and Gloag. If it is cor-
rect, we must suppose that what we now call the first psalm
was considered introductory and that our second psalm was
counted as the first. In some Heb. Mss. this order actually
occurs. The reading devrépw, however, is better supported.
The expression: ‘‘ this day have I begotten thee” refers evi-
dently to the resurrection of Christ. (Cf. Heb.i. 5; Rom. i. 4.)
The resurrection is conceived as the solemn inauguration of


Christ into his office as theocratic king represented under the |
figure of begetting.—G. B. S.


sins,” (v. °38.) And besides, he wished
to bring them to a longing desire of this
great thing. Well then, His death was not
dereliction, but fulfilling of Prophecy.—For
the rest, he puts them in mind of historical
facts, wherein they through ignorance suf-
fered evils without number. And this he
hints in the conclusion, saying, ‘Look, ye
despisers, and behold.” And observe how,
this being’ harsh, he cuts it short. Let
not that, he says, come upon you, which
was spoken for the others, that ‘I work
a work which ye shall in no wise believe,
though one declare it unto you.” (v. 41.)
Marvel not that it seems incredible: this
very thing was foretold from the first—
(that it would not be believed). ‘“‘ Behold,
ye despisers,” as regards those who dis-
believe in the Resurrection,

This too might with reason be said to
uss? 4 “Behold: :ye. « despisers.”)1) For the
Church indeed is in very evil case, although
ye think her affairs to be in peace. For
the mischief of it is, that while we labor
under so many evils, we do not even know
that we have any. “What sayest thou?
We are in possession of our Churches, our
Church property, and all the rest, the services
are held, the congregation comes to Church
every day.” * True, but one is not to judge
of the state of a Church from these things.
From what then? Whether there be piety,
whether we return home with profit each
day, whether reaping some fruit, be it much
or little, whether we do it not merely of
routine and for the formal acquittance of
a duty (dgocvtpevor), Who has become a
better man by attending (daily) service for
a whole month? That is the point: other-
wise the very thing which seems to bespeak
a flourishing condition (of the Church,)
does in fact bespeak an ill condition, when
all this is done, and nothing comes of it.
Would to God (that were all), that noth-


ing comes of it: but indeed, as things
are, it turns out even for the worse. What
fruit do ye get from your services? Surely


if you were getting any profit by them,
ye ought to have been long leading the
life of true wisdom (ric gAocooiac), with so
many Prophets twice in every week dis-
coursing to you, so many Apostles, and
Evangelists, all setting forth the doctrines
of salvation, and placing before you with
much exactness that which can form the
character aright. The soldier by going to


2 We have transposed this clause from before, *‘ Behold,”


etc. preceding. i .
3 Mod. text needlessly adds, Kat xatadpovovuev; ** And do


| we make light of these things ?”’


186


THE WORKS: OF ST.) CHENSOSTei


[Homity XXIX.


his drill, becomes more perfect in his tactics:
the wrestler by frequenting the gymnastic
ground becomes more skilful in wrestling:
the physician by attending on his teacher
becomes more accurate, and knows more,
and learns more: and thou—what hast
thou gained? I speak not to those who
have been members of the Church only
a year, but to those who from their earliest


age have been attending the _ services.
Think you that to be religious is to be
constant in Church-going (rapaSddAew 77)


ovate)? This is nothing, unless we reap
some fruit for ourselves: if (from the gather-
ing together in Church) we do not gather
(cuvdyouev) something for ourselves, it were
better to remain at home. For our fore-
fathers built the Churches for us, not just
to bring us together from our private houses
and show us one to another: since this
could have been done also in a market-
place, and in baths, and in a public proces-
sion :—but to bring together learners and
teachers, and make the one better by means
of the other. With us it has all become
mere customary routine, and formal discharge
of a duty: a thing we are used to; that is
all. Easter comes, and then great the
stir, great the hubbub, and crowding of—
I had rather not call them human beings,
for their behavior is not commonly human.
Easter goes, the tumult abates, but then the
quiet which succeeds is again fruitless of
good. “ Vigils, and holy hymn-singing.”—
And what is got by these? Nay, it is all
the worse. Many do so merely out of
vanity. Think how sick at heart it must
make me, to see it all like (so much water)
poured into a cask with holes in it! But
ye will assuredly say to me, We know the
Scriptures. And what of that? If ye ex-
emplify the Scriptures by your works, that
is the gain, that the profit. The Church
is a dyer’s vat: if time after time perpet-
ually ye go hence without receiving any
dye, what is the use of coming here con-
tinually ? Why, the mischief is all the
greater. Who (of you) has added ought to
the customary practices he received from
his fathers? For example: such an one has
a custom of observing the memorial of his
mother, or his wife, or his child: this he
does whether he be told or whether he
be not told by us, drawn to it by force of
habit and conscience. Does this displease
thee, you ask? God forbid: on the contrary,
I am glad of it with all my heart: only,
I would wish that he had gained some fruit
also from our discoursing, and that the effect
which habit has, were also the effect as re-


gards us! (your teachers)—the superinducing
of another habit. Else why do I weary my-
self in vain, and talk uselessly, if ye are to
remain in the same state, if the Church
services work no good in you? Nay, you
will say, we pray. And what of that? “Not
every one that saith unto Me, Lord, Lord,
shall enter into the Kingdom of heaven;
but he that doeth the will of My Father
which is in heaven.” (Matt. vii. 21.) Many
a time have I determined to hold my peace,
seeing no benefit accruing to you from my
words; or perhaps there does accrue some,
but I, through insatiableness and strong
desire, am affected in the same way as those
that are mad after riches. For just as they,
however much they may get, think they
have nothing; so I, because I ardently desire
your salvation, until I see you to have made
good progress, think nothing done, because
of my exceeding eager desire that you
should arrive at the very summit. I would
that this were the case, and that my eager-
ness were in fault, not your sloth: but I fear
I conjecture but too rightly. For ye must
needs be persuaded, that if any benefit had
arisen in all this length of time, we ought
ere now to have done speaking. In such
case, there were no need to you of words,
since both in those already spoken there
had been enough said for you,* and you
would be yourselves able to correct others.
But the fact, that there is still a necessity
of our discoursing to you, only shows, that
matters with you are not in a state of high
perfection. Then what would we have to
be brought about? for one must not merely
find fault. I beseech and entreat you not
to think it enough to have invaded® the
Church, but that ye also withdraw hence,
having taken somewhat, some medicine, for
the curing of your own maladies: and, if not
from us, at any rate from the Scriptures, ye
have the remedies suitable for each. For
instance, is any passionate? Let him attend
to the Scripture-readings, and he will of a
surety find such either in history or exhorta-
tion. In exhortation, when it is said, “The
sway of his fury is his destruction ” (Ecclus.
i. 22); and, “A passionate man is not
seemly ” (Prov. xi. 25); and such like: and


1 Tovto kai eh’ yuav yeverOar, eTépav eTeccaxOyjvar cuvyGerav.
Morel. Ben. ad’ nuav, ‘** By our means,” zdgue unum proban-
dum, Ed. Par. but éé’ nuov is not as he renders it, 7z xodis;
the meaning is, ‘‘ where habit works, this is the effect (in the
Srahl habit): I wish it were so in the case of us (where we
work).”’ ;

2 Mod. text ‘‘ Having been so sufficiently spoken, that ye are
able to correct others, eiye atovTwy whéAera Tis Duty mpogeyiv-
eto, Since in their absence some benefit accrued to you.”

3 omws eis "ExxAnoiav éeuBadnte, add’ Omws Te Kat AaBovTes
avaxwpyte. (Above we had the phrase mapaBadAeww tH avvaker.)
Here the metaphor is taken from an invading army, So be-
low, p. 188, wy €uBaAns ets ayopav.


HomILy XXIX.]


again, ‘A man full of words shall not pros-
per” (Ps. cxl. 11) ; and Christ again, “He
that is angry with his brother without a
cause (Matt. v. 22); and again the Prophet,
“‘ Be ye angry, and sin not” (Ps. iv. 4); and,
“Cursed be their anger, for it was fierce.”
(Gen. xlix. 7.) And in histories, as when
thou hearest of Pharaoh filled with much
wrath, and the Assyrian. Again, is any
one taken captive by love of money? let
him hear, that “‘ There is not a more wicked
thing than a covetous man: for this man
setteth even his own soul for sale (Ecclus.
ix. g); and how Christ saith, ‘“‘Ye cannot
serve God and mammon” (Matt. vi. 24);
and the Apostle, that “the love of money
is a root of all evils” (2 Tim. vi. 10); and
the Prophet, ‘If riches flow in, set not
your heart upon them” (Ps. Ixii. 10); and
many other like sayings. And from the
histories thou hearest of Gehazi, Judas, the
chief scribes, and that “gifts blind the eyes
of the wise.” (Exod. xxiii. 8 and Deut. xvi.
1g.) Is another proud? Let him hear,
that “God resisteth the proud” (James
iv. 6); and, “Pride is the beginning of sin”
(Ecclus. x. 14) and, “Every one that hath
a high heart, is impure before the Lord.”
(Prov. xvi. 5.) And in the histories, the
devil, and all the rest. In a word, since it
is impossible to recount all, let each choose
out from the Divine Scriptures the remedies
for his own hurts. So wash out, if not the
whole at once, a part at any rate, part to-
day, and part to-morrow, and then the whole.
And with regard to repentance too, and
confession, and almsgiving, and justice also,
and temperance, and all other things, thou
wilt find many examples. “For all these
things,” says the Apostle, “were written
for our admonition.” (1 Cor. x. 11.) If then
Scripture in all its discoursing is for our
admonition, let us attend to it as we ought.
Why do we deceive ourselves in vain? I fear
it may be said of us also, that “our days
have fallen short in vanity, and our years
with haste.” (Ps. Ixxvii. 33.) Who from
hearing us has given up the theatres? Who
has given up his covetousness? Who has
become more ready for almsgiving? I would
wish to know this, not for the sake of vain-
glory, but that I may be inspirited to more
zeal, seeing the fruit of my labors to be
clearly evident. But as things now are, how
shall I put my hand to the work, when I see
that for all the rain of doctrine pouring
down upon you shower after shower, still
our Crops remain at the same measure, and
the plants have waxed none the higher?
Anon the time of threshing is at hand (and)


SHE AGES ION -THE APOSTLES.


187


He with the fan. I fear me, lest it be all
stubble: I fear, lest we be all cast into the
furnace. ‘lhe summer is past, the winter is
come: we sit, both young and old, taken
captive by our own evil passions. Tell not
me, I do not commit fornication: for what
art thou the better, if though thou be no
fornicator thou art covetous? It matters not
to the sparrow caught in the snare that he
is not held tight in every part, but only by
the foot: he is a lost bird for all that; in the
snare he is, and it profits him not that he has
his wings free, so long as his foot is held
tight. Just so, thou art caught, not by
fornication, but by love of money: but caught
thou art nevertheless; and the point is, not
how thou art caught, but ‘az thou art caught.
Let not the young man say, I am no money-
lover: well, but perchance thou art a
fornicator : and then again what art thou the
better? For the fact is, it is not possible for
all the passions to set upon us at one and the
same time of life: they are divided and
marked off, and that, through the mercy of
God, that they may not by assailing us all at
once become insuperable, and so our wres-
tling with them be made more difficult. What
wretched inertness it shows, not to be able
to conquer our passions even when taken one
by one, but to be defeated at each several
period of our life, and to take credit to our-
selves for those which (let us alone) not in
consequence of our own hearty endeavors,
but merely because, by reason of the time of
life, they are dormant? Look at the chariot-
drivers, do you not see how exceedingly
careful and strict they are with themselves
in their training-practice, their labors, their
diet, and all the rest, that they may not be
thrown down from their chariots, and dragged


along (by the reins)?—See what a thing
art is. Often even a strong man cannot
master a single horse: but a mere boy


who has learnt the art shall often take
the pair in hand, and with ease lead them
and drive them where he will. Nay, in
India it is said that a huge monster of an
elephant shall yield to a stripling of fifteen,
who manages him with the utmost ease. To
what purpose have I said all this? To show
that, if by dint of study and practice we can
throttle into submission (ayyouev) even elephants
and wild horses, much more the passions
within us. Whence is it that throughout life
we continually fail (in every encounter) ?
We have never practised this art: never in
a time of leisure when there is no contest,
talked over with ourselves what shall be use-
ful for us. We are never to be seen in our
place on the chariot, until the time for the


188


THE WORKS OF -ST. CHRYSOSTOM:


[HomILy XXX.


contest is actually come.
lous figure we make there. Have I not often
said, Let us practise ourselves upon those
of our own family before the time of trial?
With our servants (raidac) at home we are
often exasperated, let us there quell our
anger, that in our intercourse with our friends
we may come to have it easily under control.
And so, in the case of all the other passions,
if we practised ourselves beforehand, we
should not make a ridiculous figure in the
contests themselves. But now we have our
implements and our exercises and our train-
ings for other things, for arts and feats of the
palestra, but for virtue nothing of the sort.
The husbandman would not venture to
meddle with a vine, unless he had first been
practised in the culture of it: nor the pilot to
sit by the helm, unless he had first practised
himself well at it: but we, in all respects
unpractised, wish for the first prizes! It
were good to be silent, good to have no com-
munication with any man in act or word,
until we were able to charm (xarerqdew) the
wild beast that is within us. The wild
beast, I say: for indeed is it not worse than
the attack of any wild beast, when wrath and
lust make war upon us? Beware of invading
the market-place (Mj éuBadne cic dyopav) with these


Hence the ridicu-| beasts, until thou have got the muzzle well


upon their mouths, until thou have tamed
and made them tractable. ‘Those who lead
about their tame lions in the market-place,
do you not see what a gain they make of it,
what admiration they get, because in the
irrational beast they have succeeded in pro-
ducing such tameness—but, should the lion
suddenly take a savage fit, how he scares all
the people out of the market-place, and then
both the man that leads him about is himself
in danger, and if there be loss of life to others,
it is his doing? Well then do thou also
first tame thy lion, and so lead him about, not
for the purpose of receiving money, but that
thou mayest acquire a gain, to which there
is none equal. For there is nothing equal to
gentleness, which both to those that possess it,
and to those who are its objects, is exceeding
useful. This then let us follow after, that
having kept in the way of virtue, and with all
diligence finished our course therein, we may
be enabled to attain unto the good things
eternal, through the grace and mercy of our
Lord Jesus Christ, with Whom to the Father
and the Holy Ghost together be glory,
might, honor, now and ever, world without
end, Amen.


HOMELY XX


ACTS. XIII. 42.


“And as they were going out (text rec. ‘from the syn.
of the Jews,’) they besought (the Gentiles) that
these words might be spoken unto them on the
following sabbath.”


Do you mark Paul’s wisdom? He not only
gained admiration at the time, but put into
them a longing desire for a second hearing,
while in what he said he dropped some seeds
(eixév teva orépuata) as it were, and forbore to
solve (the questions raised), or to follow out
the subject to its conclusion, his plan being to
interest them and engage their good-will to
himself, and not make (people) listless and
indifferent by casting all at once into the
minds of those (who first heard him). He
told them the fact, that ‘“ through this Man is


! Mss. and Edd. amdpticar kai oixetaoar éav7o. The Catena
has preserved the true reading avaprjoa. in the sense, to
make them hang upon (him for further communications).—
Below, T@ wavta aOpoov eis tas exeivwy pipar Wuyxds, the exeivwv
distinguishes the first hearers from the people generally : if he
had spoken all at once to those, the consequence would have
been xavvorepous epyacac@ar, not that ‘nearly the whole city”
should assemble on the following sabbath.


remission of sins announced unto you,” but
the how, he did not declare. “And when the
congregation was broken up, many of the Jews
and worshipping proselytes followed Paul
and Barnabas ”—after this point he puts Paul —
first "—“ who, speaking unto them, persuaded
them to continue in the grace of God.”
(v. 43.) Do you observe the eagerness, how
great it is? They “followed” them, it says.
Why did they not baptize them immediately ?
It was not the proper time: there was need to
persuade them in order to their steadfast abid-
ing therein. “And the next sabbath day
came almost the whole city together to hear
the word of God.” (v. 44.) “ But when the
Jews saw the multitudes, they were filled with
envy, and contradicted the things spoken by
Paul, contradicting and blaspheming.” (v. 45.)
See malice wounded in wounding others: this


? Edd. from E. F. airos éavtov instead of rod IlavAov. We
have restored the comments to their proper clauses in the
Scripture text.


Homity XXX.]


URE Als OF THE APOS?PLES:


189


made the Apostles more conspicuous—the
contradiction which those offered. In the
first instance then they of their own accord
besought them to speak (and now they op-
posed them): “ contradicting,” it says, ‘and
blaspheming.” O recklessness! “Then Paul
and Barnabas waxed bold, and said, It was
necessary that the word of God should first
have been spoken to you: but seeing ye put it
from you, and judge yourselves unworthy of
everlasting life, lo, we turn to the Gentiles.”
(v. 46.) Do you mark how by their con-
tentious behavior they the more extended the
preaching, and (how the Apostles here) gave
themselves the more to the Gentiles, having
(by this very thing) pleaded their justification,
and made themselves clear of all blame with
their own people (at Jerusalem)? (c) See1
how by their “envy” they bring about great
things, other (than they looked for): they
brought it about that the Apostles spake out
boldly, and came to the Gentiles! For this
is why he says, “And speaking out boldly,
Paul and Barnabas said.’’ They were to go
out to the Gentiles : but observe the boldness
coming with measure:? for if Peter pleaded
in his justification, much more these needed a
plea, none having called them there. (ch. xi.
4.) But by saying “ To you first,” he showed
that to those also it was their duty (to
preach), and in saying “Necessary,” he
showed that it was necessary to be preached
to them also. ‘But since ye turn away from
it’”—he does not say, “‘ Woe unto you,” and
“Ye are punished,” but “ We turn unto the
Gentiles.” With great gentleness is the bold-
ness fraught! (@) Also he does not say, “ Ye
are unworthy,” but ‘“‘ Have judged yourselves
unworthy. Lo, we turn unto the Gentiles.
For so hath the Lord commanded us, saying,
I have sent thee to be a light of the Gentiles,
that thou shouldest be for salvation unto the
emcs “of the earth: (v:47.) For thats: the
Gentiles might not be hurt at hearing this,
as* if the case were so that, had the Jews
been in earnest, they themselves would not
have obtained the blessings, therefore he
brings in the prophecy, saying, “A light of
the Gentiles,” and, “for salvation unto the
ends of the earth. And hearing” (this) ‘ the
Gentiles” (v. 48)—this, while it was more


2 The order of the exposition in the Mss. and Edd. marked
by the letters a, 4, etc. is much confused, but notirremediably.

he matter falls into suitable connection, when the parts are
taken in the order c, a, d, 6.

2 add’ Opa Thy Tappyoiay meta méeTpov yiwomerny, A. weTa TO
metpov. Mod. text wetpw. If this be not corrupt, it may be ex-
plained by the clause at the end of c, moAAjs Emceckelas n Tapp.
yeuovoa, but then the connection with the following et yap
Ilétpos x. tr. A. is obscure. Perhaps from A. we may restore
preta To Ilétpov - ‘‘ the boldness coming to them after the affair
of Peter.”

_ 3 ws ex THs exetvwr orovdys wy (om. A. B.) tvyxavovta trav
ayabwr.


cheering to them, seeing the case was this,
that whereas those were of right to hear first,
they themselves enjoy the blessing, was at the
same time more stinging to those—“ and the
Gentiles,” it says, “ hearing” (this) ‘‘ were glad,
and glorified the word of the Lord: and be-
lieved, as many as were ordained unto eternal
life’: i. e., set apart for God.* Observe how
he shows the speediness of the benefit : “* And
the word of the Lord was borne through all
the region,” (Vv. 49) diegépero, *instead of
duexouitero, ““ was carried or conveyed through
(it).” (@) “ But the Jews stirred up the devout
and honorable women, and the chief men of
the city, and raised persecution against Paul
and Barnabas, and expelled them out of their
coasts.” (v. 59.) ‘“‘ The devout women,” (d)
*instead of the proselyte-women. They did
not stop at “envy,” but added deeds also.
(e) Do you see what they effected by their
opposing the preaching? to what dishonor
they brought these (‘honorable women ”)?
“But they shook off the dust of their feet
against them,and came unto Iconium.” (v.
51.) Here now they used that terrible sign
which Christ enjoined, “If any receive you
not, shake off the dust from your feet”
(Matt. x. 14; Mark vi, 11); but these did it
upon no light ground, but because they were
driven away by them. This was no hurt to
the disciples; on the contrary, they the more
continued in the word: “And the disciples
were filled with joy, and with the Holy
Ghost” (v. 32) for the suffering of the teacher
does not check his boldness, but makes the
disciple more courageous.

“And it came to pass in Iconium, that they
went both together into the synagogue of the
Jews.” (ch. xiv. 1.) Again they entered into
the synagogues. See how far they were from


* The expression: ‘‘ As many as were ordained to eternal
life believed,” has been both minimized and exaggerated.
Chrys. points the way to its correct interpretation in saying :
‘set apart for God’’ and adding later: ‘‘not in regard of
necessity.” The writer is by no means seeking to define a
doctrine of the divine plan in its bearing upon human self-de-
termination, but pointing out a historical sequence. Those
who became believers were as truly so in God’s plan as they
areso infact. The passage says nothing of the relation of
God’s ordainment to the believer’s choice. Itis an example of
the Pauline type of thought which grounds salvation upon the
eternal purpose of God. Whoever are saved in fact, were
saved in God’s purpose. If as matter of fact they are saved
on condition of faith and not through the enforcement of a
decretum absolutum, then it 1s certain that their salvation as
foreseen in God’s purpose does not exclude their self-determi-
nation and personal acceptance.—G. B.S. |

4 Scehepero, was published, E. V. dtadepery ayyedcas, * to bear
tidings,’ and dradépetar 0 Adyos, ‘the saying is bruited,” are
classical, but perhaps the expression was not familiar to
Chrysostom’s hearers.

5 "Apri Tov, ovK éotTnoav mexpi Tov GyAov, Asin the Mss. this
clause follows that at the end of a, avi Tov, duexouigero, the
avti Tov may be only an accidental repetition. At the end of
this clause, the Mss. have opa madw mas (om. A. C. Cat.)
Suwkomevor, and then, mas (C. Cat.) érepa xatack. (beginning of
c.) The former clause, as the conclusion of 6, may be com-
pleted with “ they extend the preaching,” or the like. But
probably Stwxduevor is due to the scribes, who seem to have
understood by ¢yAov here the zeal of the Apostles, not the envy
of the Jews, v. 45.


190


THE WORKS OF ‘ST. CHRYSOSTOM


[HomiLty XXX.


becoming more timid! Having said, ‘“‘ We
turn unto the Gentiles,” nevertheless? (by
going into the synagogues) they supera-
bundantly fortify their own justification (with
their Jewish brethren). “So that,” it says,
‘“‘a great multitude both of Jews and Greeks
believed.” For it is likely they discoursed as
to Greeks also. ‘But the unbelieving Jews
stirred up the Gentiles, and made their minds
evil affected against the brethren.” (v. 2.)
Together (with themselves) now they took to
stirring up the Gentiles too, as not being
themselves sufficient. Then why did the
Apostles not go forth thence? Why, they
were not driven away, only attacked. ‘“‘ Long
time therefore abode they speaking boldly in
the Lord, which gave testimony unto the
word of His grace, and granted signs and
wonders to be done by their hands.” (v. 3.)
This caused their boldness; or rather, of their
boldness indeed their own hearty good-will
was the cause—therefore it is that for a long
while they work no signs—while the conver-
sion of the hearers was (the effect) of the
signs,” though their boldness also contributed
somewhat. ‘“‘ But the multitude of the city
was divided: and part held with the Jews, and
part with the Apostles.” (v. 4.) No small
matter this dividing. And this was what the
Lord said, ‘I am not come to bring peace,
but a sword.” (Matt. x. 34.) “And when
there was an assault made both of the Gen-
tiles, and also of the Jews with their rulers, to
use them despitefully, and to stone them, they
were ware of it, and fled unto Lystra and
Derbe, cities of Lycaonia, and unto the region
that lieth round about: and there they
preached the Gospel.” (v. 5-7.) Again, as if
they purposely wished to extend the preach-
ing after it was increased, they once more
sent them out. See on all occasions the per-
secutions working great good, and defeating
the persecutors, and making the persecuted
illustrious. For having come to Lystra, he
works a great miracle, by raising the lame
man.’ “And there sat a certain man at Lys-


1 €k TOAANS TEpLovalas Guws avatpodaty avT@Y THY amoAoyiar.
The sense is evidently as above, but ava:p. will hardly bear
this meaning, and perhaps was substituted for some other
word by the copyist, who took it to mean, ‘‘ They leave the
Jews no excuse.’’—The connection is, It was not because they
were less bold than when they said, ‘‘ We turn unto the Gen-
tiles,” that they still went to the Jews first : but ex abundanti
they enabled themselves to say to their brethren at Jerusalem,
We did not seek the Gentiles, until repulsed by the Jews.

2 tov onuetwy Hv. A. has onuecov qv. In the preceding clause,
C., wexpt moAAOD onmeELa ToLovGL, the rest ov movodar. The an-
tithesis Thy mev (om. A.) wappyoiav .. . . To d€ musTEVTaL Must
be rendered as above: not as Ben. zimo fiduciam addebat
tpsorum alacritas.... Quod autem auditores crederent in-
ter signa reputandum.

3 Here all the Mss. have kat weyadn tH dwvy (to which mod.
text adds xai mas, dxove.) then the text 8, 9, 10, followed by Ava
Tl, wey. T) b. and so all the Edd. But in fact that clause is
only the reporter’s abbreviation of the Scripture text, cai [ev
Avotpo.s. . . . to] weyaAn TH bwvy, followed by its comment.


tra, impotent in his feet, being a cripple from
his mother’s womb, who never had walked:
the same heard Paul speak: who steadfastly
beholding him, and perceiving that he had
faith to be healed, said with a loud voice ”—
why with a loud voice? that the multitude
should believe—“ Stand upright on thy feet.”
(v. 8, 9.) But observe, he gave heed, it says,
to the things spoken by Paul.* Do you mark
the elevation of the man’s mind (g:Aeon¢lav) ?
He was nothing defeated (xape37487) by his
lameness for earnestness of hearing. ‘Who
fixing his eyes upon him, and perceiving,” it
says, “that he had faith to be made whole.”
He was already predisposed in purpose of
mind.? And yet in the case of the others, it
was the reverse: for first receiving healing in
their bodies, they were then taken in hand for
cure of their souls, but this man not so. It
seems to me, that Paul saw into his soul.
“And he leaped,” it says, “and walked.”
(v. 10.) It was a proof of his perfect cure,
the leaping. “And when the people saw
what Paul had done, they lifted up their
voices, saying in the speech of Lycaonia, The
gods are come down to us in the likeness of
men. And they called Barnabas, Jupiter;
and Paul, Mercurius, because he was the
chief speaker. ‘Then the priest of Jupiter,
which was before their city, brought oxen and
garlands unto the gates, and would have done
sacrifice with the people. (v. 11-13.) But
this purpose was not yet manifest, for they
spake in their own tongue, saying, “The gods
in the likeness of men are come down to us:”
therefore the Apostle said nothing to them as
yet. But when they saw the garlands, then
they went out, and rent their garments,
“Which when the Apostles, Barnabas and
Paul, heard of, they rent their clothes, and
ran in among the people, crying out, and say-
ing, Sirs, why do ye these things? We also
are men of like passions with you.” (v. 14, 15.)
See how on all occasions they are clean from
the lust of glory, not only not coveting, but
even repudiating it when offered: just as
Peter also said, “Why gaze ye on us, as
though by our own power or holiness we had
made him to walk” (ch. ili. 12)? so these
also say the same. And Joseph also said of
the dreams, “Is not their interpretation of
God?” (Gen. Ix. 8.) And Daniel in like man-
ner, “And to me also, not through the wis-
dom that is in me was .it revealed.” (Dan.
ii, 30.) And Paul everywhere says this, as


4 Mod. text adds, rovTo yap eat 70 yHKovoev.—Below mape-
BAaBy is an expression taken from the foot-race: this was a
race in which his lameness was no hindrance.

5 "Hén wkeiwro Thy mpoatpeoww, Strangely rendered by Eras-
mus, Jam preelectione assumptus familiariter erat, and Ben.
Jan preelectionem in fantiliaritatem assumserat.


HomiLy XXX.]


2h AGS OF -THE APOSPLES:


IgI


when he says, “‘ And for these things who is
sufficient? Not that we are sufficient of our-
selves to think (aught) as of ourselves, but
our sufficiency is of God.” (2 Cor. ii. 16; ili. 5.)
But let us look over again what has been said.
(Recapitulation.) ‘And when they were
gone out,” etc. (v. 42), Not merely were the
multitudes drawn to them, but how? they be-
sought to have the same words spoken to them
again, and by their actions they showed their
earnestness. ‘‘ Now when the congregation,”
etc. (v. 43.) See the Apostles on all occa-
sions exhorting, not merely accepting men,
nor courting them, but, ‘speaking unto them,”
it says, ‘“‘they persuaded them to continue in
the grace of God. But when the Jews,” etc.
(v. 45.) Why did they not contradict before
this? Do you observe who on all occasions
they were moved by passion? And they not
only contradicted, but blasphemed also. For
indeed malice stops at nothing. But see what
boldness of speech! ‘“ It was necessary,” he
says, “ that the word should have been spoken
first to you, but since ye put it from you,”—
(v. 46) it! is not put as affronting (though)
it is in fact what they did in the case of the
prophets : “ Talk not to us,” said they, “with
talk ” —(s. AES ra). * but since ye put it
from you’’— it, he saith, not us: for the affront
on your part is not tous. For that none may
take it as an expression of their piety (that he
says,) “Ye judge not yourselves worthy,”
therefore he first says, ‘‘ Ye put it from you,”
and then, “‘ We turn unto the Gentiles.” The
expression is full of gentleness. He does
not say, We abandon you, but so that it is
possible—he would say—that we may also
turn hither again: and this too is not the


1 ovdev UBpraotiKov, 0 dy Kal emt THY Tpod. emocovv. The mean-
ing appears from the context to be: he speaks throughout
with much émetxeca, When he says amw@etaGe, he does not
upbraid them with this as vfpis, a personal outrage to himself
and Barnabas. though in fact he might have done so, being
just what their fathers did to the prophets: but he does not
say, Ye repulse us, for the affront is not to us. And he says
it to show that in what he is going to say, ‘‘ Ye judge your-
selves not worthy of eternal life,’’ he does not mean that they
do this of humility. In short, he says it not by way of com-
oe but to justify what he ‘adds, ** Lo, we turn to the Gen-
tiles

2 Mod. text omits this clause, which we take as an interlocu-
tion: q.d. ‘‘If the Lord ordered you to goto the Gentiles,
why did ye not do this in the first instance?”’ In the next
sentence, A. C. kai tovTo ov Tap MOV Tap Unov be yeyove TO, ™po
vuov (B., with accidental omission, kat tovTo mpd dor.
OvTw yap), meaning, “‘ And this is not our doing, but yours,
the ‘ before you:’ i.e. the Gentiles hearing the word before
you. But Cat., cai rodro ov ™po UMOV, Tap vuwy dé x, T. A, (at-
tested by the mutilated reading in B.) which we have ex-
pressed in the translation. —The mod. text has mAyy rovro ov
Tap HUY, Tap Vuwrv de yéyove TO mpd Vuay OdetAov: which Ben.
takes to be corrupt, but leaves in the text, only adopting in the
translation 70 map nuay odetdov, which 7zfe rpres legisse vide-
tur. Downe af. Sav. proposes 70 mpd TovTwy vuty oherdAopevov
vel opetdov. Sed prestare heacags lectio guam propono,
guamgue secutus est vetus Inte rpre Ss Latinus, en. forgetting
that the Latin bia is Erasmus’s (Veruntamen hoc non ex
nobis facimus. A vobis autem factum est, guod a nobis opor-
tebat, Erasm.) and was made from E. which has no such read-
ing here. Ed. Par. Ben. 2. expresses the sense of E. thus,
Quod nos oporteat ante vos gentes erudire, it is your doing
that it is become our duty to teach the Gentiles before you.


consequence of the affront from you, “ for so
hath (the Lord) commanded us.”—(v. 47.)
““Then why have ye not done this?” 2 It was
indeed needful that the Gentiles should hear,
and this not before you: it is your own doing,
the ‘before you.” ‘For so hath the Lord
commanded us: I have set thee for a light of
the Gentiles, that thou shouldest be for salva-
tion,” i. e. for knowledge which is unto salva-
tion, and not merely of the Gentiles, but of all
men, “unto the ends of the earth—As many
as were ordained unto eternal life”’ (v. 48.) :
this is also a proof, that their having received
these Gentiles was agreeable with the mind
of God. But “ordained,” not in regard of
necessity: ‘‘whom He foreknew,” saith the
Apostle, ‘‘ He did predestinate.” (Rom. viii.
2g.) ‘ And the word of the Lord,” etc. (v. 49.)
No longer in the city (only) were (their doc-
trines) disseminated, but also in the (whole)
region. For when they of the Gentiles had
heard it, they also after a little while came
over. ‘But the Jews stirred up the devout
women, and raised persecution’’—observe even
of what is done by the women, they are the
authors—‘ and cast them,” it says, “out of
their coasts ” (v. 50), not from the city merely.

Then, what is more terrible, “they shook off
the dust of their feet against them, and came
unto Iconium. But the disciples, it says, were
filled with joy, and with the Holy Ghost.”
(v. 51, 52.) The teachers were suffering
persecution, and the disciples rejoiced.

“And so spake, that a great multitude,”
etc. (ch. xiv. 1.) Do you mark the nature
of the Gospel, the great virtue ithas? ‘* Made
their minds evil-affected,” it says, “‘ against the
brethren 7(vei2s).1se; slandered the “Apostles,
raised numberless accusations against them:
(these people, being simple,’ they “made evil-
affected,” disposed them to act a malignant
part. And see how on all occasions he refers
all to God. ‘Long time,” he says, ‘‘ abode
they speaking boldly in the Lord, w hich g gave
testimony unto the word of His grace.” (v. 3: )
Think not this (expression, “Gave testimony,’ )
hath aught derogatory * (to the Lord’s Divine
Majesty): “‘ Who witnessed,” it is said, “ before
Pontius Pilate.” (1 Tim. vi. 13.) Then the
boldness—“ and granted signs and wonders
to be done by their hands.” Here he speaks


3 amAaarous ovras (i. €. the Gentiles who would otherwise
have received the Apostles) kaxovpyws dcéOnxav, evidently the
interpretation of exaxwoay: not evil-treated the Apostles, etc,

4 My TodTo éAatTwoews elvac voutons. The innovator (Edd.),
mistaking the meaning, connects thisand the following clauses
thus : ‘‘For when they said, ore yap €Aeyorv, * Which wit-
nessed,”’ saithit, ‘‘ before Pontius P., then the (His ?) boldness
was shown, but here he speaks concerning the people :’’ what
he meant is not easy to see, nor does it much matter. Below,
évtavda rept Tov Aaov dyary, i. e. the taogpyata is in reference to
their own nation (Israel): they spake ooldly to the Gentiles,
fearless of the reproaches of the Jews.


192 TEE WORKS


OF ST. CHRYSOSTORE


[HomILy XXX.


it as concerning their own nation. ‘ And the
mivititude, cf ithe city,” ete.) vig, 5:).) “AS
cordingly they did not wait for it, but saw the
intention of attacking them,* and fled, on no
occasion kindling their wrath,’ “to the cities
of Lycaonia, Lystra, and Derbe, and the ad-
jacent region.” (v. 6.). They went away into
the country, not into the cities only—Observe
both the simplicity of the Gentiles, and the
malignity of the Jews. By their actions they
showed that they were worthy to hear: they
so honored them from the miracles only. The
one sort honored them as gods, the other per-
secuted them as pestilent fellows : and (those)
not only did not take offence at the preaching,
but what say they? ‘The gods, in the like-
ness of men, are come down to us; but the
Jews were offended. ‘‘ And they called Bayna-
bas, Jupiter; and Paul, Mercurius.” (v. 11,
12.) I suppose Barnabas was a man of digni-
fied appearance also. Here was a new sort
of trial, from immoderate zeal, and no small
one: but hence also is shown the virtue of the
Apostles, (and) how on all occasions they
ascribe all to God.

Let us imitate them: let us think nothing
our own, seeing even faith itself is not our own,
but more God’s (than ours).? ‘‘ For by grace
are ye saved through faith; and this,” saith he,
“not of ourselves ; it is the gift of God.” (Eph.
il. 8.) Then let us not think great things of
ourselves, nor be puffed up, being as we are,
men, dust and ashes, smoke and_ shadow.
For say, Why dost thou think great things of
thyself? Hast thou given alms, and lavished
thy substance? And what of that? Think,
what if God had chosen not to make thee
rich ? think of them that are impoverished, or
rather, think how many have given (not their
substance only, but) their bodies moreover,
and after their numberless sacrifices, have #


felt still that they were miserable creatures !


* It seems clear from the fact that the apostles are said to
have been aware (v. 6) of what the Jews had done against
them, that the word opzy (v. 5) can hardly mean an ‘‘assault”’
(A. V.) or even “ onset’’ (R. V.) in the sense of any open vio-
lence. There would be no propriety in Luke adding that they
became aware of an attack upon them. ‘Opyzy must have here
the sense of affetitus animi—a strong movement of mind, an
intention to attack them— Trieb,”’ ‘“* Drang.”’ (Meyer.) The
word occurs in but one other passage (Jas. iii. 4) where the
opzy of the pilot is spoken of as directing the ship, evidently,
meaning the ** purpose ” or ‘‘intention.’’ (So Trench, Gloag,
Meyer, Lechler, Alford.)—G. B.S.

1 ovdanovd Tov Ovpov a’ToV éxKalovtes (restored to its fitting-
place after karépuyov), i. e. as on all occasions we find them for-
bearing to kindle the wrath of their enemies, so here, seeing
the intended assault, they fled. Mod. text €v@a ovdamod and
exkaiewv nv, ‘fled to Derbe,” etc. where (the enemies) had no-
where power to let their wrath blaze against them: so that
they went away into the country-parts, etc.

2 So the order must be restored instead of, cat rovrT6 dyat ba
TLaTEWS OVK EF HU@V' GAA TO TAEOY TOD cod: Meov yap dyae Td
d@pov. The mod, text, ‘‘ And that it is not ours, but the more
(part) God’s:”’ hear Paul saying, ‘‘ And this not of ourselves,
it is the gift of God :”’ omitting éta miarews, which is essential
ee the sense,—Perhaps we may read, kat tovto, gyal, 70

ta 7,


3 e€auTovs éTadavicay, ‘


“not as thou, eavtois éuaxapicay.””


Thou gavest for thyself, Christ (not for Him-
self, but) for thee: thou didst but pay a debt,
Christ owed thee not.—See the uncertainty of
the future, and “be not high-minded, but
fear” (Rom. xi. 20); do not lessen thy virtue
by boastfulness. Wouldest thou do some-
thing truly great? Never let a surmise of thy
attainments as great enter thy mind. But thou
art a virgin? So were those in (the Gospel)
virgins, but they got no benefit from their
virginity, because of their cruelty and in-


humanity. (Matt. xxv. 12.) Nothing
like humility: this is mother, and _ root,
and nurse, and _ foundation, and _ bond
of all good things: without this we are


abominable, and execrable, and polluted.
For say—let there be some man rais-
ing the dead, and healing the lame,


and cleansing the lepers, but with® proud
self-complacency: than this there can be noth-
ing more execrable, nothing more impious,
nothing more detestable. Account nothing
to be of thyself. Hast thou utterance and
grace of teaching? Do not for this account
thyself to have aught more than other men.
For this cause especially thou oughtest to be
humbled, because thou hast been vouchsafed
more abundant gifts. For he to whom more |
was forgiven, will love more (Luke vii. 47):
if so,° then oughtest thou to be humbled also,
for that God having passed, by others, took
notice of thee. Fear thou because of this:
for often this is a cause of destruction to thee,
if thou be not watchful. Why thinkest thou
great things of thyself? Because thou
teachest by words? But this is easy, to
philosophize in words: teach me by thy life:
that is the best teaching. Sayest thou that it
is right to be moderate, and dost thou make a
long speech about this thing, and play the
orator, pouring forth thy eloquence without a
check? But “better than thou is he” shall
one say to thee, ‘“‘ who teaches me this by his
deeds ”’—for not so much are those lessons
wont to be fixed in the mind which consist in
words, as those which teach by things: since
if thou hast not the deed, thou not only hast
not profited him by thy words, but hast even
hurt him the more—‘‘ better thou wert silent.”
Wherefore? ‘Because the thing thou pro-
posest to me is impossible: for I consider,
that if thou who hast so much to say about it,


4 dca Thy WuOTYTa Kal THY aTavOpwriav, A strong expression,
but so in the Homzly on the Parable of the Virgins, Matt. p.
751, Am. Ed. p. 470, he interprets that the oil is charity (alms-
giving), and thateven virgins, lacking this, *‘ are cast out with
the harlots: ’’ kai tov amavOpwrov wat Tov aveAenmova Lorna
eT avT@v (SC. Tay TOpYwr).

5 weTa amovoias, so Hom. xxx1.
did not bear themselves proudly.”’

8 ovKovY Kal Tamecvovdbat xpy. ‘if he to whom most is for-
given, loveth most,so ought he to whom more is given, to
humble himself more.”


. 196, ovK amevonOnoar, *‘ they


HomMILy XXX.]


iiss ee SOF TTHE “APOSPIES:


195


succeedest not in this, much more am I excus-
able.” For this cause the Prophet says, ‘ But
unto the sinner said God. Why declarest
thou My statutes ?”’ (Ps. Ix. 16.) For this is a
worse mischief, when one who teaches well in
words, impugns the teaching by his deeds.
This has been the cause of many evils in the
Churches. Wherefore pardon me, I beseech
you, that my discourse dwells long on this evil
affection (afe:). Many take a deal of pains
to be able to stand up in public, and make a
long speech: and if they get applause from
the multitude, it is to them as if they gained
the very kingdom (of heaven): but if silence
follows the close of their speech, it is worse
than hell itself, the dejection that falls upon
their spirits from the silence! This has
turned the Churches upside down, because
both you desire not to hear a discourse cal-
culated to lead you to compunction, but one
that may delight you from the sound and com-
position of the words, as though you were
listening to singers and minstrels («apwdav xai
KiBapiotov, Supra p. 68): and we too act a pre-
posterous and pitiable part in being led by
your lusts, when we ought to root them out.
And’ so it is just as if the father of a poor
cold-blooded child (already, more delicate than
it ought to be, should, although it is so feeble,
give it cake and cold (drink) and whatever
only pleases the child, and take no account of
what might do it good; and then, being re-
proved by the physicians, should excuse him-
self by saying, “ What can I do? I cannot
bear to see the child crying.” Thou poor,
wretched creature, thou betrayer! for I cannot
call such a one a father: how much better were
it for thee, by paining him for a short time, to
restore him to health forever, than to make
this short-lived pleasure the foundation of a
lasting sorrow? Just such is our case, when
we idly busy ourselves about beautiful expres-
sions, and the composition and harmony of
our sentences, in order that we may please,
not profit: (when) we make it our aim to be
admired, not to instruct ; to delight, not prick
to the heart ; to be applauded and depart with
praise, not to correct men’s manners! Believe
me, I speak not other than I feel—when as
I discourse I hear myself applauded, at the
moment indeed I feel it as a man (for why


1 Kat TavTov yivetat, olov av ei Tis maTHp Wuxpod (mod. text
Om.) Kai mépa Tov SéovTos padPaxov maidcov K. T. A. mAaKovYTA
ém6@ Kai Wuxpov kal ooa Tépret wovoy x. tT. A. Erasmus trans-
lates loosely, videns puerum, quent supra modum tenereamat,
egrotum, tli frigida et quecumgue oblectant, porrigat.
Ben., s¢ pater nimis molli puero, etsi infirmanti, frigidam
placentam et que solum oblectant porrigat. If the text be not
corrupt, wépa rov 6. wad@. may mean, *‘ brought up more ten-
derly than need be although ill,’’ and Wvyxpov, ‘‘silly.’’ But
the Wuxpov following may rather imply the physical sense as
above expressed : the child is a poor creature, with no warmth
or life in it, yet the father instead of warm and nourishing
food, gives it cake and cold drink, etc.


LS,


should I not own the truth ?): I am delighted,
and give way to the pleasurable feeling: but
when I get home, and bethink me that those
who applauded received no benefit from my
discourse, but that whatever benefit they
ought to have got, they lost it while applaud-
ing and praising, I am in pain, and groan, and
weep, and feel as if I had spoken all in vain.
I say to myself: “ What profit comes to me
from my labors, while the hearers do not
choose to benefit by what they hear from us?”
Nay, often have I thought to make a rule which
should prevent all applauding, and persuade
you to listen with silence and becoming order-
liness. But bear with me, I beseech you, and
be persuaded by me, and, if it seem good to
you, let us even now establish this rule, that
no hearer be permitted to applaud in the midst
of any person’s discourse, but if he will needs
admire, let him admire in silence: there is
none to prevent him: and let all his study
and eager desire be set upon the receiving
the things spoken.—What means that noise
again?” JI am laying down a rule against this
very thing, and you have not the forbearance
even to hear me!—Many will be the good
effects of this regulation: it will be a disci-
pline of philosophy. Even the heathen philoso-
phers—we hear of their discoursing, and no-
where do we find that noisy applause accom-
panied their words: we hear of the Apostles,
making public speeches, and yet nowhere do
the accounts add, that in the midst of their
speeches the hearers interrupted the speakers
with loud expressions of approbation. A
great gain will this be to us. But let us
establish this rule: in quiet let us all hear, and
speak the whole (of what we have to say).
For if indeed it were the case that we departed
retaining what we had heard, what I insist
upon is, that even so the praise is not benefi-
cial °—but not to go too much into particulars
(on this point) ; let none tax me with rudeness
—but since nothing is gained by it, nay, it is
even mischievous, let us loose the hindrance,
let us put a stop to the boundings, let us
retrench the gambollings of the soul. Christ
spoke publicly on the Mount: yet no one
said aught, until He had finished His dis-
course. I do not rob those who wish to be
applauded: on the contrary, I make them to


2 Ava ti expotygate; even now while he was protesting
against this evil custom, derived from the theatres, some of
the hearers could not refrain from expressing their approba~-
tion by applause.—Comp. de Sacerdot. lib. v. init. Hom. xv.
zn Rom. tin, Hom, vii. in Laz. § 1. xvii. 72 Matt. § 7.

3 uddtota méev ovSE OVTW XpHOLWOS O ETaLvOs. i. e. AS APpears
from the context, ‘tothe preacher:”’ it does him no good, it
is even aharm, both by hindering him (xwAvua) and by elat-
ing his mind (cxtptypata Kat mndypata THs Wuyx7s). In the in-
termediate clause, aAA’ ovK av nxpiBoAoynoauny, MH ME TIS
aypoxias ypadeTw, the meaning implied seems to be—‘“‘as it
would be easy to show, were it not ungracious to point out
to you how little your praise is worth.”


194


THE | WORKS OR ST.


CHRYSOSTORE: [HomiILy XXX.


be more admired. It is far better that one’s
hearer, having listened in silence, should by
his memory throughout all time applaud, both
at home and abroad, than that having lost all
he should return home empty, not possessed
of that which was the subject of his applauses.
For how shall the hearer be otherwise than
ridiculous? Nay, he will be deemed a flat-
terer, and his praises no better than irony,
when he declares that the teacher spoke beau-
tifully, but what he said, this he cannot tell.
This has all the appearance of adulation.
For when indeed one has been hearing min-
strels and players, it is no wonder if such be
the case with him, seeing he knows not how
to utter the strain in the same manner: but
where the matter is not an exhibition of song
or of voice, but the drift and purport of
thoughts and wise reflection (gAocogiac), and it
is easy for every one to tell and report what
was said, how can he but deserve the accusa-
tion, who cannot tell what the matter was for
which he praised the speaker? Nothing so
becomes a Church as silence and good order.
Noise belongs to theatres, and baths, and
public processions, and market-places: but
where doctrines, and such doctrines, are the
subject of teaching, there should be stillness,
and quiet, and calm reflection, and a haven
of much repose (d20c0dia Kai moAve Oo ui).
These things I beseech and entreat: for I go
about in quest of ways’? by which I shall


be enabled to profit your souls. And no
small ‘way I take this to be: it will
profit not you only, but us also. So


shall we not be carried away with pride
(éxtpayydilecta), not be tempted to love
praises and honor, not be led to speak those
things which delight, but those which profit :
so shall we lay the whole stress of our time
and diligence not upon arts of composition
and beauties of expression, but upon the
matter and meaning of the thoughts. Go
into a painter’s study, and you will observe


) Tlepterut yap Ttovtovs Cntwv. Read tpomovs. Mod. text adds
mavTas eidéva to the former sentence, and here II. yap kai
GUTOS TPOTOUS TAYTOLOUS ETLONTOV.


how silent all is there. Then so ought it to
be here: for here too we are employed in
painting portraits, royal portraits (every one
of them), none of any private man, by means?
of the colors of virtue—How now? Applaud-
ing again? This is a reform not easy, but
(only) by reason of long habit, to be effected
—The pencil moreover is the tongue, and the
Artist the Holy Spirit. Say, during the cele-
bration of the Mysteries, is there any noise?
any disturbance? when we are baptizing
(BarriZoueta), When we are doing all the other
acts? Is not all Nature decked (as it were)
with stillness and silence ?* Over all the face
of heaven is scattered this charm (of repose).
—On this account are we evil spoken of
even among the Gentiles, as though wedid all
for display and ostentation, But if this be pre-
vented, the love of the chief seats also will be
extinguished. It is sufficient, if any one be
enamoured of praise, that he should obtain it
after having been heard, when all is gathered
int Yea, I beseech you, let us establish this
rule, that doing all things according to God’s
will, we may be found worthy of the mercy
which is from Him, through the grace and
compassion of His only begotten Son our Lord
Jesus Christ, with Whom to the Father to-
gether with the Holy Spirit be glory,
dominion, honor, now and ever, world without
end. Amen.


2 Sa tov xpwneTwv THs apeTys. Erasm. and Ben. ungram-
matically, propter (0b) coloris virtutem,; as meaning that
such is the virtue or value of the colors, that they are fit to be
employed only on imperial portraits. But the connection is
plainly this : ‘t the colors are the hues of virtue, the pencil is
the tongue, the Artist the Holy Spirit.” In the next sentence
the old text has: ovx evKoAov ToOUTO adAa TO LH TOAAH auYybEia
Kkatop§w6yvat, which is corrupt, unless indeed it may be con-
strued, ‘* but (it is) the not being, by reason of long habit, suc-
cessfully achieved : i. e. it only shows that I have not, such is
the force of long habit, succeeded in carrying my point.’’ The
mod. text Ovx eve. TO mpayua Soxel, Kal TOUTO av Piger dAAa TS
ovvybeia TOAA MyTw KaTopbovY av’TO peuabyxévar. ‘* Itseems to
be no easy matter, this : and this, not naturally, but by reason
that from long habit you have not yet learnt to effect this re-
formation.” :

3 ovk Hovxia Kat ovyn (Mss. Hovxta Kai ovyn) Ta TavTa
Kexoguntac (mod. text katexet). We alter the punctuation, and
understand by ta wavra not “‘all the proceedings in Church,”
but “all nature.”

4 Orav mavta ovddéeyn, When all (that he has spoken) is
gathered in by diligent attention of the hearers. Mod. text
Otay Tovs Kapmous svAAEyp, ** when he collects the fruits.”


Homity XXXI.]


“Which when the Apostles, Barnabas and Paul,
heard of, they rent their clothes, and ran in among
the people, crying out, and saying, Sirs, why do
ye these things? We also are men of like pas-
sions with you, and preach unto you that ye should
turn from these vanities unto the living God, which
made heaven, and earth, and the sea, and all things
that are therein.”


Mark the vehemence with which all this is
done by the Apostles: “rent their clothes,
ran in, cried out,” all from strong affection
of the soul, revolted’ by the things that were
done. For it was a grief, indeed a grief in-
consolable, that they should needs be thought
gods, and introduce idolatry, the very thing
which they came to destroy! This also was a
contrivance of the devil—but he did not prevail.”
But what saythey? ‘“* We also are men of like
passions with you.” At the very outset they
overthrew the evil. ‘They said not simply,
“Men,” but “As ye.” ‘Then, that they may
not seem to honor the gods, hear what they
add: “Preaching unto you, that ye should
turn from these vanities unto the living God,
Who made heaven, the sea, and all things
that are therein.’”’ Observe how they nowhere
mention things invisible.? (0) For4 they had


1 A. B.C. Cat. amootpepouevns Mod. text amootpepopuevor,
ne adds kai rev@ous onmeta movouvtes, and so GEcumen.

2 A.B. C. aaa’ ovx novxacav. The true reading is pre-
cape by Cat. add’ ove toxvoev. Mod. text add’ ovx novxa-
ovo.

3 Allour Mss. tev mpopntav. From the recapitulation we
restore Tov aopatwy. The meaning may be, He abstains from
the mention of things invisible, because he would recall them
from their polythesim, therefore avoids whatever would seem
to favor the notion of inferior gods. With the restoration
aopatwy we obtain a suitable connection for the part 4, both
grammatically (in respect of the AZ. €ua@ov), and in respect
of the sense : they spoke only of things visible, for they had
learned not always to speak according to the dignity of the
subject, but according to the needs of the hearers. In the
next sentence (a) in A. B.C. ti ody ; et ravtwv éoti Syurovpyos,
dua Ti my Kal eis TavTa mpovoei; we may understand by eis
tavra **the nations of the world, or their doings:’’ but the
sense perhaps would be improved by supplying els after ei,
and oe els for eis. Perhaps also ravta is a corruption
of mavta f One be the eged = all, why not One also
direct all by His Providence :”’ if One Creator, why not
One Providence? Why i te ainte. ‘a nanGee of inferior Provi-
dences ?—Mod. text “ nowhere mentioning the Prophets, nor,
saying for what reason, being Maker of all, He left the Gen-
tiles independent, Ta €6vy adyjrev aitovoua. 4

4 From this point to the end of the recapitulation the mat-
ter required to berearranged. The letters show the sequence
of the parts in the old text : in the mod. text a partial restora-
tion of the order has been attempted. The ‘‘ method”? of the
derangement explains itself thus—the true order being
denoted by the figures 1, 2, 35 etc. we have two portions trans-
posed into the order, 2,1; (a, 4): then four portions taken
alternately in the order 1, 3, 2, 4. (c to f): then again two
_ portions in the order 2, 1, (g, 4): then again four portions in
the alternate order 1. 3, 2, 4,(¢ to #z): and lastly, two in the
order 2, r.


Site Aero, OF: THE (APOSTLES.


}
|


Eee Ty ORY,


AG TS xiv. 145


15.


learnt that one should study not so much to
say somewhat worthy of God, as to say what
is profitable for the hearers. ‘(a) What then ?
if He be Maker of all things, why does He
not also attend to these things by His Provi-
dence ?>—“ Who in times past suffered all
nations to walk in their own ways” (v. 16)—
but wherefore He suffered them, this he does
not say, for at present he keeps to the matter
of immediate importance, nowhere bringing
in the name of Christ. Observe, he does not
wish to swell the accusation against them,
but ° rather that they themselves should refer
all to God. ‘‘ Nevertheless, He left not Him-
self without witness, in that He did good,
giving you rain from heaven, and fruitful
seasons, filling your hearts with food and
gladness.” (v. 17.) (¢) See how covertly he
puts the accusation “in that He did good,”
etc. And yet if God did this, He could not
have “let them alone;” on the contrary,
they ought to be punished, for that, enjoying
so great benefits, they had not acknowledged
Him, not even as their feeder.* “From
heaven,” he says, “giving you rain.” Thus
also David said, “‘ From the fruit of their corn
and wine and oil were they made to abound ”
(Ps. iv. 7), and in many places speaking of


5 GAAa maddAor emi TOY @cov To mav ayew avTous execvous, A. B,
C. As v. 17, ‘“* Nevertheless,” etc. is placed in the Mss. before
““ Observe, he does not wish,” etc. the intention is that 70 wav
should refer to the contents of that verse: “he does not say
this to increase their culpability, but he wishes them to refer
all to God.’”’ But then éxetvous is idle, accordingly mod. text
substitutes macdevec. We have removed the text v. 17. to the
end of this sentence, so that its comment is (c) dpa mas
AavOavovtws x. T. A.. and Opa ov BovAeTar x. T. A. will belong to
v.16, and 70 way will refer to their ignorance and walking in
their own ways.—So Cat. seems to take it, reading aye 7
avTovs €xeivous, viz. he rather refers the whole to God, than
to those (the heathen) themselves.

* There was doubtless something polemic in the words of
vv. 16, 17 inasmuch as the apostle ascribes to the “living God ”
alone the blessings which the heathen were wont to attribute
to their divinities. The language has also a conciliatory ele-
ment. Their guilt is mitigated, no doubt, by their limited
light, but by no means removed, because God had given them
evidences of his goodness and power in the return of seasons
and harvests. The thought is closely akin to that in the ad-
dress at Athens (xvii. 23-31) where God is said to have over-
looked the times of the ignorance of the heathen, and to that
of Rom. i. ii. 14, 15, Where emphasis is laid upon the
revelation of God to the heathen world which renders their
sinful lives without excuse. The three passages combined
yield the following ideas: (1) God has revealed Himself to
the heathen in nature and conscience. (2) This revelation is
sufficient to found responsibility. (3) As obedience to this
inner law would merit God’s approval (Rom. ii. 14), so diso-
bedience to it would merit his displeasure. (4) As matter of
fact the Gentiles have not followed the light which they had
and thus they have wickedly brought upon themselves the
wrath of God and the penalties of his moral law.—G. B. S.


g > .
18-32;


196


THE WORKS OF -ST. CHRYSOST Oar


[HomILty XXXI.


Creation, he brings forward these benefits:
and Jeremiah mentions first Creation, then
Providence (shown) by the rains, so that the
Apostle here discourses as taught from those
Scriptures. “Filling,” he says, “with food
and gladness.” (Jer. v. 24.) With large
- liberality (¢:Aormiac) the food is given, not
merely for a frugal sufficiency, nor stinted by
the need. “And saying these things, they
scarcely stopped the multitudes” (v. 18)—in-
deed by this very thing they gained most
admiration—“ from sacrificing to them.” Do
you observe that this was the point with them
to put an end to that madness? ‘“ But there
came,” it says, “certain Jews from Antioch
and Iconium” (v. 19).—Indeed children of
the devil, that not in their own cities only, but
also beyond them, they did these things, and
as much made it their study to make an end
of the preaching, as the Apostles were in
earnest to establish it !—‘“ and having per-
suaded the multitude and stoned Paul, they
dragged him out of the city.” (¢) So then,
the Gentiles regarded them as gods, but these
“dragged” him, “out of the city, supposing
he had been dead. Having persuaded the
multitude ”—for it is not likely that all thus
reverenced them. In the very city in which
they received this reverence, in the same were
they thus terribly ill treated. And this also
profited the beholders. ‘Lest any man,” he
says, “should think of me above that which
he seeth me to be, or that he heareth aught
from me.” (v. 20.)—‘* Howbeit as the disciples
stood round about him, he rose up and came
into: the: city.” (@) Here\ is fulfilled: that
saying, “ My grace is sufficient for thee, for
My strength is made perfect in weakness.”
(2 Cor. xii.g.) Greater this than the raising
of the lame man! (/) “Came into the city.”
Do you mark the zeal, do you mark how
fervent he! is, how set on fire! He came
into the city itself again: for proof that if on
any occasion he did retire, it was because he
had sown the word, and because it was not right
to inflame their wrath. (4%) Then they went
over all the cities in which they had been in
danger. “And on the morrow,” it says, “he
went forth with Barnabas to Derbe. And
when they had preached the Gospel to that
city, and had taught many, they returned
again to Lystra, and to Iconium, and Antioch,
confirming the souls of the disciples, and ex-
horting them to continue in the faith, and
that we must through much tribulation enter
into the kingdom of God.” (v. 21, 22.) This


1B. and mod, text have 700ov “ his affection,’ C. and Cat.
om, A. *‘‘ his zeal, fervent and set on fire.’’ Below, for cateo-
mapkevat, mod. text BovAecGar oreipar, ‘* because he wished
to sow the word (elsewhere).”’


they said, this they showed. But it is pur-
posely so done, not only by? the Apostles,
but by the disciples also, that they may learn
from the very outset both the might of the
preaching, and that they must themselves also
suffer such things, that they may stand nobly,
not idly gaping for the miracles, but much
more (ready) for the trials. Therefore also
the Apostle himself said, ‘‘ Having the same
conflict which ye saw in me and _ heard.”
(Phil. i. 30.) Persecutions succeeded to per-
secutions: wars, fightings, stonings. (g)
These things, not less than the miracles, both
made them more illustrious, and prepared for
them a greater rejoicing. The Scripture no-
where says that they returned rejoicing be-
cause they had done miracles, but (it does
say that they rejoiced), that “they were
counted worthy for that Name to suffer
shame.” (ch. v. 41.) And this they were
taught of Christ, saying, “‘ Rejoice not that
the devils obey you.” (Luke x. 20.) For the
joy indeed and without alloy is this, to suffer
aught for Christ’s sake. (¢) “And _ that
through much tribulation:” what sort of
cheering (xporpor#) is this? how did they per-
suade them, by telling them at the outset of
tribulations? Then also another consola-
tion. “And when they had appointed for
them elders in every Church,* and had
prayed with fasting, they commended them to
the Lord, on whom they believed. (v. 23.)
Do you mark Paul’s ardor ?—Then other con-
solation : ‘‘ Commended them,” it says, “ to the
Lord. And after they had passed throughout
Pisidia, they came to Pamphylia. And when
they had preached the word in Perga, they
went down into Attalia (v. 24, 25): (2) and
thence sailed to Antioch, from whence they


’


2 ov dca Tav amoctoAwy k. tT. A. sO all our Mss. The sense
rather requires é:a Tovs am, or evexa Tov ar. ** for the sake of
the Apostles,” etc.

3 rapauvéia. i, e. by the ordination of elders, as explained
below in the recap. ‘*‘ but there they needed moAAns wapapuuOias,
and especially they of the Gentiles, who behooved to be
taught much.’’— The @epporns of Paul, shown in his zeal for
the establishment of the Gospel among the Gentiles: see
below at the end of the recap. Then, eita adAyn wapapv6la, if
it be not an accidental repetition of the clause before v. 23.
must be referred to the clause. ‘‘ They commended them to
the Lord,’ which it follows in the Mss.

* The appointment of elders in every church (which the
apostles visited on this journey) is made by Paul and Barna-
bas. Meyer supposes that the apostles only superintended the
popular choice by the church itself. The word employed
(xetporovew), meaning to stretch forth the hand, as in voting
would seem especially appropriate to the idea of a popular
election, but the participle here employed (xetpotovngavtes) has
not the church but Paul and Barnabas for its subject. It
seems necessary, therefore, to take it in the general and de-
rived sense—to e/ect—to choose. There were several elders for
each church as there had been several for each synagogue, the
model for the constitution of the early churches. They were
also called bishops (exioxomor}. These with the deacons were
the only church officers. (Phil. i. 1.) Their duty was to be
leaders, teachers, and rulers in the churches. They were at
once pastors, teachers and rulers. Their functions were coor-
dinate. No one of them was above the others in any particu-
lar church. Each church had several co-pastors, teachers or
bishops.—G. B. S.


.


HomiLty XXXI.] THE AGES


had been recommended to the grace of God
for the work which they fulfilled.” (v. 26.)
Why do they come back to Antioch? To
report what had taken place yonder. And
besides, there is a great purpose of Providence
concerned: for it was needful that they
should thenceforth preach with boldness to
the Gentiles. They comé therefore, reporting
these things, that they may be able to know
them: and it is providentially ordered, that
just then came those who forbade to keep
company with the Gentiles in order that from
Jerusalem they might obtain great encourage-
ment, and so go their ways with boldness.
And besides, it shows that in their temper
there was nothing of self-will : for they come,
at the same time showing their boldness, in
that without the authority of those (at Jerusa-
lem) they had preached to the Gentiles, and
their obedience, in that they refer the matter
to them: for they were not made arrogant,
as (azevoyfyoav) having achieved so great suc-
cesses. ‘‘ Whence,” it says, ‘they had been
recommended to the grace of God for the
work which they had fulfilled.” And yet more-
over the Spirit had said, “Separate Me Bar-
nabas and Saul for the work whereunto I
have called them.” (ch. xiii. 2.) ‘‘ And when
they were come, and had gathered the Church
together, they rehearsed all that God had
done with them, and how He had opened the
door of faith unto the Gentiles. And there
they abode long time with the disciples.”
(v. 27, 28.) For the city being great had
need of teachers.—But let us look over again
what has been said.

(Recapitulation.) “ Which when the Apos-
tles,” etc. (v.14). First by the sight they
checked them, by rending their garments.
This did Joshua the son of Nun upon the
occasion of the defeat of the people. Then
think not that this action was unworthy of


them: for such was the eagerness, they
would not otherwise have restrained it,
would not otherwise have quenched the


conflagration (xipav). Therefore when need
is to do something that is fit to be done,
let us not decline it. For if even after all
this they hardly persuaded them, if they
had not acted thus, what might have been
the consequence? For if they had not done
thus, they would have been thought to make
a show of humility (razewodpoveiv), and to be
all the more desirous of the honor. And
observe their language, how in rebuking it
is moderated, alike full of wonder and of
rebuke. This above all it was that hindered
them, the saying, “Preaching unto you to
turn from these vanities unto God.”
We are men indeed, they say, but greater


OF: THE “APOSTLES:


ie BI


197


than these: for these are dead things,
Mark how they not only subvert (the false),
but teach (the true), saying nothing about
things invisible—‘‘ Who made,” say they,
“heaven and earth, and the sea, and all things
that are therein. Who in times past,” etc.
(v. 16, 17.) He names as witnesses even
the years (in their courses).? ‘And there
came thither certain Jews,” etc. (v. 19.)
O that Jewish madness! Among a people
that had so honored the Apostles, they had
the hardihood to come, and to stone Paul.
“And they dragged him out of the city,”
being afraid of those (others),—‘ Supposing
he had been dead.” (&) ‘“‘ Howbeit,” ete.
‘“‘and came into the city.” (v.20.) For that
the spirits of the disciples might not be
downcast because they who were accounted
gods suffered such treatment, they came in
unto them and discoursed. ‘Then on the
morrow,” etc, And observe, first he goes .
forth to Derbe, and then comes back to
Lystra and Iconium and Antioch, (v. 21)
giving way to them while their passions
are roused, but when they have ceased, then
attacking them again. Do you mark, that
it was not by (supernatural) grace that they
managed all that they did, but by their own
diligence? “Confirming,” it says ‘‘the souls
of the disciples:” éxvornpifovrec, ‘‘ further
establishing ;” so that they were established,
but they added more thereto. “ And that
we “must * "ete. # ive, ses)s they “tener
(this), that they might not be offended.
“And when they had appointed for them,”


etc. Again the ordinations accompanied
with fastings: and again fasting, that
purifying of our souls. (m) “And having


prayed,” it says, “with fastings, they com-
mended them unto the Lord” (v. 23): they
taught them to fast also in their trials. (@)
Why did they not make elders in Cyprus nor
in Samaria? Because the latter was near
to Jerusalem, the former to Antioch, and
the word was strong there; whereas in those
parts they needed much consolation, espe-
cially they of the Gentiles, who behooved
to have much instruction. “And when
they? were’“come,’”.| ete.’ “Cy 27.))" hee
came, teaching them that with good reason


had they been ordained by the Spirit.
(z) They said not what they themselves,
but ‘what God had done with them.” It


seems to me, that they mean their trials. It
was not for nothing that they come here, nor


1 zots évtavtovs. Cat. Tots é€viavaraious veTous, ** the yearly
’


rains.’’—Below, our Mss. have, “ And out of the city,” being
afraid of those, O the madness! ‘'they dragged him,” etc.
(® THs wavias! repeated from above).—Mod. text But ‘* out of


| the city they dragged” (him). perhaps being afraid of him,


e€KEeLVOV,


198


THE WORKS “OF ST. CHRASOSiere


[HoMILy XXXI


to rest, but providentially guided by the
Spirit, to the end that the preaching to
the Gentiles might be firmly established.
(p) And mark Paul’s ardor. He does not
ask whether it be right to speak to Gentiles,
but he straightway speaks: therefore it is
that he says, “I did not refer myself to
flesh and blood.” (Gal. i. 16.)

For it is indeed? a great thing, a great, a
generous soul (like this)! How many have
since believed, and none of them all has
shone like him! What we want is earnest-
ness, exceeding ardor, a soul ready to en-
counterdeath. Else is it not possible to attain
unto the Kingdom, not being crucified. Let
us not deceive ourselves. For if in war
it is impossible to come off safe while
living: daintily, and trafficking, and huck-
stering and idling, much more in this
war. Or think ye not that it is a war worse
than all others? .(Zu/ra,; |p. 204, mote ji)
“For we wrestle not,’ he says, “against
flesh and blood.” (Eph. vi. 12.) Since
even while taking our meals and walking,
and bathing, the enemy is present with us,
and knows no time of truce, except that of
sleep only: nay, often even then he carries
on the war, injecting into us_ unclean
thoughts, and making us lewd by means
of dreams. We watch not, we do not rouse
ourselves up, do not look to the multitude
of the forces opposed to us, do not reflect,
that this very thing constitutes the greatest
misfortune—that though surrounded by so
great wars, we live daintily as in time of
peace. Believe me, worse than Paul suffered
may have to be suffered now. ‘Those enemies
wounded him with stones: there is a wound-
ing with words, even worse than stones.
What then must we do? The same that he
did: he did not hate those who cast stones
at him, but after they had dragged him out,
he entered again into their city, to be a
benefactor to those who had done him such
wrongs. If thou also endurest him who
harshly insults thee, and has done thee
wrongs, then hast thou too been stoned. Say
nog. “1 have dooney him »nepanjury.7) For
what injury had Paul done, that he should
be stoned? He was announcing a Kingdom,
he was bringing men away from error, and
bringing them to God: benefits these, worthy
of crowns, worthy of proclamation by voice
of herald, worthy of a thousand good things—
not of stones. And yet (far from resenting)


7 Meya yap ovtws weyadn Wx yevvaia, for this, which is evi-
dently meant as eulogy of St Paul. the mod. text substitutes
Meya Ovtws ayabov OAiWis: Kai pweyadns Wuyys Kal yevvaias
katopOwua. ‘* A great benefit indeed is affliction, and an
achievement of a great and generous soul.”


he did? just the contrary. For this is the
splendid victory. ‘And they dragged him,”
(v. 19) it says, These too they often drag:
but be not thou angry; on the contrary,
preach thou the word with gentleness. Hath
one insulted thee? Hold thy peace, and
bless if thou canst, and thou also hast
preached the word, hast given a lesson of
gentleness, a lesson of meekness. I know
that many. do not so smart under wounds,
as they do under the blow which is inflicted
by words: as indeed the one wound the body
receives the other the soul. But let us not
smart, or rather feeling the smart let us
endure. Do you not see the pugilists, how,
with their heads sorely battered, they bite
their teeth into their lips, and so bear their
smarts kindly? No need to grind the teeth,
no need to bite (the lips). Remember thy
Master, and by the remembrance thou hast
at once applied the remedy. Remember
Paul: reflect that thou, the beaten hast con-
quered, and he the beater, is defeated; and
by this hast thou cured the whole. It? is
the turning of the scale a moment and thou
hast achieved the whole: be not hurried
away, do not even move, thou hast extin-
guished the whole (fire). Great* eloquence
of persuasion there is in suffering aught for.
Christ: thou preachest not the word of
faith, but thou preachest the word of patience
(dc20c0diac). But, you will say, the more he
sees my gentleness, the more he sets upon
me. Is it for this then that thou art pained,
that he increases thy rewards the more?
“But® this is the way,” you say, “to make
him unbearable.” This is mere pretext of
thine own littleness of mind: on the contrary,
the other is the way to make him unbearable,
namely, that thou avenge thyself. If God
had known, that through forbearance of
revenge, the unjust became unbearable, He
would not have done® this Himself: on
the contrary, He would have said, Avenge
thyself: but He knew, that cther than this
is the more likely way to do good. Make
not thou a law contary to God: do as He
bids thee. Thou art not kinder than He
that made us. He hath said, “ Bear to be


2 GAN duws Tavavtia éroter. But A. mabey, mod. text emacxer,
‘““the treatment he received was just the opposite to these
(honors),”’

3 tovs od0vtas évdaxvovotr. Erasm. dentibus studentes,
evdaxovtes mod. text for which, as “ gnashing the teeth ” does
not suit the context, Ben. gives dentes excuss?.

4 porn earl, Kal TO TAY KaTwWPOwWaas EVOEWS, MN TUVapTayys "NSE
kuvnOys. Mod. text powy é€ore, ‘*be not hurried, and thou,” etc ;
ay Kw., “do not move, and,” etc.—Below peyaAyn mapapvdia.
meaning either consolation to the beholders, or rather as
below, a soothing of the excited passions of the opponent.

5 "AAN’ axpnotos yiverar: i.e. “It is bad for himself that he
should go unpunished: so he becomes good for nothing.”

® éroinoev : i.e. ‘* He would not Himself have exercised this
forbearance.”’ Mod. text éwétaéev, ‘‘ He would not have en-
joined this.”


HomiLy XXXL] THE? ACES OF


THE- APOSTLES.


199


wronged:” thou sayest, “I requite wrong
for wrong, that he may not become unbear-
able.” Hast thou then more care for him
than God has? Such talk is mere passion
and ill temper, arrogance and setting up laws
against God’s laws. For even if the man
were hurt (by our forbearance), would it not
be our duty to obey? When God orders
anything, let us not make a contrary law.
‘A submissive answer,” we read, turneth
away wrath” (Prov. xvi, 1): not an answer
of opposition. If it profits thee, it profits
him also: but if it hurts thee who art to set
him right, how much more will it hurt him?
«Physician, heal thyself.” Hath one spoken
ill of thee? Commend him thou. Hath he
reviled thee? Praise him thou. Hath he
plotted against thee? Do him a kindness.
Requite ‘him with the contrary things, if
at least thou at all carest for his. salvation,
and wish not thou to revenge thine own
suffering. And yet, you will say, though he
has often met with long-suffering from me,
he has become worse. This is not thine
affair, but his. Wilt thou learn what wrongs
God suffered? They threw down His altars,
and slew His prophets (1 Kings xix, 10),
yet He endured it all. Could He not have
launched a thunderbolt from above? Nay,
when He had sent His prophets, and they
killed them, then He sent His Son (Matt.
xxi. 37), when they wrought greater impieties,
then He sent them greater benefits. And thou
too, if thou seest one exasperated, then yield
the more: since this madness has greater
need of soothing (zapapiac) The more
grievous his abuse of thee, the more meek-
ness does he need from thee: and even as
a gale’ when it blows strong, then it requires
yielding to, so also he who is in a passion.
When the wild beast is most savage, then
we all flee: soalso should we flee from him
that is angry. Think not that this is an
honor to him: for is it an honor we show to
the wild beast, and to madmen, when we turn
aside out of their way? By no means:
it isa dishonor and a scorn: or rather not
dishonor and_ scorn, but compassion and
aumanity. Seest thou not how the sailors,
when the wind blows violently, take down
their sails, that the vessel may not sink?
how, when the horses have run away with
the driver, he only leads them into the
(open) plain, and does not pull against them
that he may not voluntarily exhaust his
strength? This do thou also. Wrath is a


1 Allour Mss. xat ka@arep mupetos oTav apodpov mvevon, and
this the Edd. retain without remark. We restore VEDA, or
aqveuwos... ododpa. Between mvevua and QVELOS as an inter-
linear correction arose the absurd reading rupetos.


fire, it is a quick flame needing fuel: do
not supply food to the fire, and thou hast
soon extinguished the evil. Anger has no
power of itself; there must be another to
feed it. For thee there is no excuse. He
is possessed with madness, and knows not
what he does; but when thou, seeing what
he is, fallest into the same evils, and art not
brought to thy right senses by the sight,
what excuse can there be for thee? If
coming to a feast thou see at the very outset
of the feast some one drunken and acting
unseemly, would not he, who after seeing him
makes himself drunk, be much more inexcus-
able? Just so it is here. Do we think i
any excuse to say, I was not the first to
begin? This is against us, that even the
sight of the other in that condition did not
bring us to our right senses. It is just
as if one should say, ‘‘I did not murder
him first,” For this very thing makes thee
deserving of punishment, that even upon
the warning of such a spectacle thou didst not
restrain thyself. If thou shouldest see the
drunken man in the act of vomiting, retching,
bursting, his eyes strained, filling the table
with his filthiness, everybody hurrying out
of his way, and then shouldest fall into the
same state thyself, wouldest thou not be more
hateful? Like him is he that is in a passion:
more than he who vomits, he has his veins
distended, his eyes inflamed, his bowels
racked; he vomits forth words far more filthy
than that food; all crude what he utters,
nothing duly digested, for his passion will
not let it be. But as in that case excess of
fumes (yuuov), making an uproar in the stom-
ach, often rejects all its contents; so here,
excess of heat, making a tumult in the soul
suffers him not to conceal what it were right
to leave unsaid, but things fit and unfit to be
spoken, he says all alike, not putting the
hearers but himself to shame. As then we
get out of the way of those that vomit, so let
us from those who are angry. Let us cast
dust upon their vomit: By doing what ?*
By holding our peace: let us call the dogs
to eat up the vomit. I know that ye are
disgusted at hearing this: but I wish you
to ‘feel this same disgust when ye see these
things take place, and not to be pleased at
the thing. The abusive man is filthier than
the dog that returneth to its own vomit.
For if “indeed having vomited once he were
done with it, he would not be like that dog:
but if he vomits the same things again, it
is plain that he does so from having eaten


1s placed before Kovw emcB.
‘by hold-


2 Inthe mod. text Tt mocouvres ;
and ovyortes is connected with Tovs xuvas KkaA@pmev.
ing our peace jet us call the dogs,”’ etc.


i


200 THE (WORKS “OF


ST. CHERYSOSTORE [Homity XXXI.


What then is more abom-
inable than such an one? What filthier than
that mouth which chews such food? And
yet this isa work of nature, but the other not ;
or rather both the one and the other are
contrary to nature. How? Since it is not
according to nature to be causelessly abusive,
but against nature: he speaks nothing then
like a man, but part as beast, part as mad-
man. As then the disease of the body is
contrary to nature, so also is this. And
to show that it is contrary to nature, if he
shall continue in it, he will perish by little
and little: but if he continue in that which
is natural, he will not perish. I had rather
sit at table with a man who eats dirt, than
with one who speaks such words. See ye
not the swine devouring dung? So also
do these. For what is more stinking than
the words which abusive men utter? It is
their study to speak nothing wholesome,
nothing pure, but whatever is base, whatever
is unseemly, that they study both to do and
say: and what is worse, they think to dis-
grace others, while they in fact are disgrac-
ing themselves. For that it is themselves
they disgrace is plain. For, leaving out
of the question those who speak lies (in
their railings), say it be some notorious
harlot, or even from the stage some other
(abandoned creature), and let that person be
having a fight with some other person: then
let the latter cast this up to the former (what
she or he is), and the former retort upon
the latter the same reproach: which of
them is most damaged by the words? For?
the former is but called what in fact he
or she is, which is not the case with the other :
so that the first gets nothing more in the way
of shame (than there was before), while to
the other there accrues a great accession
of disgrace. But again, let there be some
hidden actions (mod. text cipyacuéva ‘ which have
been done”), and let only the person
abusing know of them: then, holding his
peace until now, let him openly parade
(éxxowrevérw) the reproach: even so, he himself
is more disgraced than the other. How?
by making himself the herald of the wicked-
ness, so* getting for himself either the


the same again.


1 Tn the original the sense is perplexed by the negligent use
of the demonstr. otros and exeivos, supra p. 42. The
meaning is: ‘*B.(the second person mentioned) says to A.
(suppose a 7opvy weprbavys), ** You are so and so,” such being
the fact : she retorts with a like reproach, which is not true:
whether is most damaged (UBpiotat)? Not she, for being
what the other calls her she is just where she was before.
The disgrace is to him ; and that, not from her words, for they
do not fit: but from his own indecent railing: so that he
thinking to disgrace her has more disgraced himself. He is
more disgraced by calling the other the thing that she is, than
by being called by her the thing that he is not.”’

2 agvverdyatas amvorov dofav AaBwv ; which being unintelligi-


imputation of not being privy to any such
thing, or the character of one not fit to be
trusted. And you shall see all men forth-
with accuse him: “If indeed he had been
privy to a murder being done, he ought to
have revealed it all:’ and so they regard
him with aversion as not human even, they
hate him, they say he is a wild beast, fierce


and cruel: while the other they pardon
much rather than him. For we do not so
much hate those that have wounds, as


those that compel one to uncover and show
them. Thus that man has not only dis-
graced the other, but himself as well and
his hearers, and the common nature of men:
he has wounded the hearer, done no good.
For this reason Paul says: “If there be
any word that is good for edifying, that
it may minister grace unto the hearers.”
(Eph, iv. 29.) Let us get a tongue speaking
only good things, that we may be lovely
and amiable. But indeed, everything is come
to that pitch of wickedness, that many boast
of the very things, for which they should hide
their faces. For the threats of the many
are of this kind: “thou canst not bear my
tongue,” say they. Words, these, worthy
only of a woman, of an abandoned drunken
old hag, one of those that are dragged (to.
punishment)*® in the forum, a_ procuress.
Nothing more shameful than these words,
nothing more unmanly, more womanlike,
than to have your strength in the tongue,
and to think great things of yourself because
you can rail, just like the fellows in proces-
sions, like the buffoons, parasites, and flatter-
ers. Swine they are rather than men, who
pride themselves upon this. Whereas you
should (sooner) have buried yourself, and
if another gave you this character, should
recoil from the charge as odious and
unmanly, instead of that you have made
yourself the herald of (your own) disgrace
(i8peov). But you will not be able to hurt
him you speak ill of. Wherefore I beseech
you, considering how the wickedness is
come to such a height, that many boast of
it, let us return to our senses, let us recover
those who are thus mad, let us take away
these councils* out of the city, let us make


ble, must be restored by replacing » before acvy. and before
amcotov (so mod. text rightly for amuatov). ‘‘He gets the dofa
either of aguve.d. in which case he is a foul calumniator, or of an
amvatos :’’ which latter in the way in which it 1s put supra
Hom. xiv. p. 193: ‘‘as regards himself, he has shown all men
that he is not to be trusted, as not knowing how to screen his
neighbor’s faults.”’

3 Tov em ayopas cvpomevwyv, not as Ben. corune gui forum fre-
guentant,; but, ‘Sone of those old hags, bawds, and the like,
whom for their crimes you may see dragged by the officers to
punishment, and screaming out their foul-mouthed railings.”

4 ravtTa ex THS T6AEwS Ta GUVEdpia, So all our Mss.: perhaps.
TavTas——tas cuvnbecas.


Homity XXXII] THE. ACTS: -OF


our tongue gracious, let us rid it of all evil
speaking, that being clean from sins, we may
be able to draw down upon us the eood- will
from above, and to have mercy vouchsafed
unto us from God, through the grace and


THESAPOSITLES. 201
compassion of His only-begotten Son, with
Whom to the Father, together with the


Holy Spirit, be glory, might, honor, now and
ever, world without end. Amen.


FIOM. 25 41.


ACTS


“And certain men which came down from Judea
taught the brethren, and said, Except ye be cir-
cumcised after the manner of Moses, ye cannot be
saved.”


Mark’ how at every step of the right prog-
ress in respect of the Gentiles, the begin-
ning is brought in as matter of necessity.
Before this (Peter) being found fault with,
justified himself, and said all that he said
in the tone of apology, which was what
made his words acceptable : then, the Jews
having turned away, upon this (Paul) came
to the Gentiles. Here again, seeing another
extravagance coming in, upon this (the apos-
tle) enacts the law. For as it is likely that
they, as being taught of God, discoursed to
all indifferently, this moved to jealousy them
of the Jews (who had believed). And _ they
did not merely speak of circumcision, but
they said, Ye cannot even be __ saved.
Whereas the very opposite to this was the
case, that receiving circumcision — they
could not be saved. Do you mark how
closely the trials succeed each other, from
within, from without? It is well ordered too,
that this happens when Paul is present, that
he may answer them. ‘“ When therefore Paul
and Barnabas had no small dissension and
disputation with them, they determined that
Paul and Barnabas, and certain other of
them, should go up to Jerusalem unto the
apostles and elders about this question.”
(v. 2.) And Paul does not say, What? Have
I not a right to be believed after so many
signs? but he complied for their sakes.
“And being brought on their way by the


1 "Opa mavtaxov Tis els Ta EOvy StopAwoews (the putting things
right, the introduction of the right and proper course: mod.
text peTaBacews) avaykatav THV apxnv eigayouevnv. Mod. text
an’ avT@yv eicay. which Ben. renders, vide wbique transitum ad
Gentes necessario a Juda@is inductum. But the meaning is:
_** Throughout, it is so ordered by the Providence of God, that
the Apostles do not seem to act spontaneously | in this matter,
but to be led by the force of circumstances.’’ The persons
(Peter, Paul, James) are not specified, the sense being: First,
upon fault being found, there is apologizing and self- -justify-
ing: then, upon the Jews’ open aversion, the preaching comes
to the Gentiles : now, upon a new emergency, a law is enact-
ed.—In the next sentence, B. C. dtadopws: A. and mod, text

aétapopws, which we retain.


XV. I

Church, they passed through Phenice and
Samaria, declaring the conversion of the
Gentiles: and they caused great joy unto all
ihe. brethren, 21 (Wc 3s) And observe, the
consequence is that all the Samaritans also,
learn what has come to the Gentiles : and
they rejoiced. ‘And when they were come
to Jerusalem, they were received of the
Church, and of the apostles and elders, and
they declared all things that God had done
with them.” (v. 4.) See what a providence
is here! ‘But there rose up certain of the
sect of the Pharisees which believed, saying,
That it was needful to circumcise them, and
to command them to keep the law of Moses.
And the apostles and elders came together
to consider of this matter. And when
there had been much disputing, Peter rose up
and said unto them, Men and brethren, ye
know how that of old days God made choice
among us, that the Gentiles by my mouth
should hear the word of the Gospel, and
believe.” (v. 5-7.) Observe Peter from the
first standing aloof (keywprouévov) from the affair,
and even to this time judaizing. And
yee (says he) ‘ve know.’* «(ch. x: 45 mre)
Perhaps those were present who of old
found fault with him in the matter of Cornel-
ius, and went in with him (on that occasion):
for this reason he brings them forward as wit-
nesses. ‘From old days,” he says, “did
choose among you.” What means, “ Among
you?”’ Either, in Palestine, or, you being
present. “ By my mouth.” Observe how he
shows that it was God speaking by him, and
no human utterance. ‘‘ And God, that know-
eth the hearts, gave testimony unto them:” he
refers them to the spiritual testimony: “by
giving them the Holy Ghost even as unto us.”
(v.8.) Everywhere he puts the Gentiles upon
a ete! equality. “And put no difference
between us and them, having purified their
hearts by faith.” (v. 9.) From faith alone,


he says, they obtained the same gifts. This
is also meant as a_ lesson to those
(objectors); this is able to teach even them


202


THE WORKS OF ST. CHEAYSGSIGR


[HomiLy XXXII.


that faith only is needed, not works nor cir-
cumcision. For indeed they do not say all
this only by way of apology for the Gentiles,
but to teach (the Jewish believers) also to
abandon the Law. However, at present this
is not said. ‘‘ Now therefore why tempt ye
God, to put ayoke upon the neck of the
disciples?”’ (v. 10.) What means, “'Tempt
ye God?” As if He had not power to save
by faith. Consequently, it proceeds from a
want of faith, this bringing in the Law.
Then he shows that they themselves were
nothing benefited by it, and he turns the
whole (stress of his speech) against the Law,
not against them, and (so) cuts short the accu-
sation of them: “which neither our fathers
nor we were able to bear. But we believe
that through the grace of the Lord Jesus we
shall be saved, even as they.” (v. 11.) How
full of power these words! The same that
Paul says at large in the Epistle to the
Romans, the same says Peter here. “ For if
Abraham,” says (Paul), ‘was justified by
works, he hath whereof to glory, but not
before God.” (Rom. iv. 2.) Do you per-
ceive that all this is more a lesson for them
than apology for the Gentiles? However, if
he had spoken this without a plea for speak-
ing, he 1 would have been suspected : an occa-
sion having offered, he lays hold of it, and
speaks out fearlessly. See on all occasions
how the designs of their foes are made to
work with them. If those had not stirred the
question, these things would not have been
spoken, nor what follows.*


(Recapitulation.) (6) But 2 let us look more


1 Mod. text tows ovdauas vrontos qv, “ perhaps he would zot
have been any way suspected.”’

* With Luke’s narrative of the Apostolic council at Jerusa-
lem should be compared Paul’s (Gal. ii.) which gives addi-
tional particulars. The conference marked an epoch in the
history of the church. Here came into decisive conflict two
opposing tendencies—the Pharisaic tendency which insisted
that the Gentiles must enter the Kingdom through the door
of the law, and the catholic spirit which. following the prin-
ciples of Stephen’s apology and appreciating the revelations
made to Peter, insisted that adherence to the Mosaic law was
not only unnecessary, but was positively inconsistent with the
freedom and completeness of Christ’s salvation. The decree
of the council was, no doubt, of great service in checking the
Judaizing tendencies of the early church. It was in the line
of this decree that the work of Paul was done, as the cham-
pion of catholic Christianity. The chief pointsto be noted in
vy. 1-12 are: (1) The representatives of the narrower Jewish
view came to Antioch on purpose to antagonize the work of
Paul and Barnabas among the Gentiles (v. 1). (2) They took
the extreme position that salvation depended on circumcision
and caused great anxiety and debate among the Gentile Chris-
tians regarding their relations to the Mosaic law (v. 2). (3)
The Apostles and messengers who were sent to appeal the
question to the leaders of the mother church at Jerusalem an-
swered their objections by the fact of the Gentiles’ conver-
sion (v. 3-5). (4) Peter’s position was now clear and pro-
nounced. This is implied even in his subsequent conduct at
Antioch whence he withdrew from the Gentiles (Gal. ii. 11 sq.)
which Paul represents as an zzconsistency. (5) Peter’s view is
first given both on account of his prominence among the Apos-
tles and because he had been the first to bear the gospel to the
Gentiles.—G. B. S.

2 In the Mss. and Edd. the part marked (4) is transposed to
the beginning (c) of the remarks introductory to the morale, so


closely at what has been said. ‘“ And cer-
tain men,” etc. In Jerusalem, then, there
were not any believers from among the Gen-
tiles: but in Antioch of course there were.
Therefore 3 there came down certain yet
laboring under this disease of the love of
rule, and wishing to have those of the Gen-
tiles attached to them. And yet Paul, though
he too was learned in the Law, was not thus
affected. ‘*‘When therefore Paul and Barna-
bas had no small disputation with them,” etc.
(v. 2.) But when he returned from thence,
the doctrine also became more exact. For
if they at Jerusalem enjoin no such thing,
much more these (have no right to do so).
“And being brought on their way,” etc,
‘“‘ they caused no small joy to the brethren.”
(v. 3.) Do you mark, as many as are not
enamoured of rule, rejoiced in their believing?
It was no ambitious feeling that prompted
their recitals, neither was it for display, but
in justification of the preaching to the Gen-
tiles. (v. 4.) Thus they say nothing of what
had happened in the matter of the Jews.t
‘“‘ But there arose up certain of the sect of the
Pharisees. which, believed,” ete.” (v5.) (2)
But even if they would needs bring over the
Gentiles to their side, they learn that neither
must the Apostles overlook it. “And the.
Apostles and elders,” etc. (v. 6.) “ Among
us,’ he says, “God “chose:”” andi? fromijsord
days :” long ago, he says, not now. And°*
this too is no small point—at a time when
Jews believed, not turned away (from the
Gospel). “Among us;” an argument from
the place: “of old days,” from the time.
And that expression, “ Chose:” just as in
their own case‘ he says not, (so) willed it, but,


’


that the Recapitulation (announced by mod. text at the end of
the first sentence of (a) is split into two halves and the latter
given first. In the old text the two parts (4) (c) make the en-
tire Recapitulation, so that it is by no means axpiBéoTepor,

3 Mod. text ‘“‘ Therefore they depart (thither) and stay no
short time there (ch. xiv. 28). * But there arose certain of the
Pharisees (v. 5) yet laboring under the disease,”’ etc.

4 twv els ToUs ‘Iovdatous cuuBeByKoTwv: i. e. of the dispute
about circumcision, see below p. 203,note’. The first sentence
of (c) “Great effrontery (this) of the Pharisees,’’ etc., would
come in suitably here, but it is required for introduction of the
sentence which follows it, ‘‘ But see the Apostles,” etc.

5 Here mod. text has the formula, “AAA’ idwnev avwhev Ta
eipnueva,

6 Kai tovto S€ ov pixpor, “lovdaiwy muotevovtwy Kal ToOUTwWY OvK
aTrooTpadevtwy, amo Tov TOTOV, ao Tov Karpov. Mod. text substi-
tutes the sense of the latter words: 6évo tovtots 6 A€yer mo-
TOUTAL, TW Kalpw Kal TM TOMw: but for the former, ov pexpor de
70 Kat ‘lovéaiwy migTevovTwy TovTO aTooTpadyvat, guod etiam
Judeis credentibus hoc avertatur. Ben. We reject tovTwr,
which disturbs the sense. He says: ‘‘ Long ago—therefore
why raise this question now, which was settled in those early
days, when Jews received the faith, not rejected it with aver-
sion? which aversion of theirs is zow the occasion of the
preachers’ turning to the Gentiles. Yet even then the will of
God was plainly declared. Thus the Apostle argues strongly
both from the place—here in the midst of the Jews—and from
the time.”

7 @oTep ex’ a’tay- referring to i. 24. as below on kapé.oyvwo-
ms. He means, ‘*‘It was a purpose of the Lord, and a high
distinction : therefore he does not say, He would, or was will-
ing that the Gentiles should hear, but He elected me for this
work, as He elected us to the Apostleship.”


PRE pS a


«
TF


‘


- “And put no difference between


HoMILY XXXII.]


Hues ACES, OF: THE: APOSTLES:


203


“Chose that the Gentiles by my mouth
should hear the word of the Gospel and
believe.” Whence is this proved? From the
Spirit. Then he shows that the testimony
given them is not of grace merely, but of
their virtue. ‘‘ And God which knoweth the
hearts bare them witness” (v. 8); having
afforded to them nothing less (than to us),
for, he says,“ Put no difference between us
and them.” (v.9.) Why then, hearts are
what one must everywhere look to.’ And it
is very appositely said, ‘God that knoweth
the hearts bare them witness:” as in the
former instance, ‘‘ Thou, Lord, that knowest
the hearts of all men.” (ch. i. 24.) For to
show that this is the meaning, observe what
he adds, “Put no difference between us and
them.” When he has mentioned the testi-
mony borne to them, then he utters that
great word, the same which Paul speaks,
“Neither circumcision availeth anything, nor
uncircumcision.” (1 Cor. vii, 19.) ‘‘ That he
may make the twain one in Himself.” (Eph.

Ee) Of all-these the ‘seeds fie in »Peter’s
discourse. And he does not say (between)
them of the circumcision, but “ Between us,”
that is the Apostles, “and them.” Then,
that the expression, “no difference ” may not
seem an outrage, After faith, he says—“ Hav-


ing purified their hearts by faith” (v. 10)—
He thoroughly cleansed them first.2 Then he


shows, not that the Law was evil, but them-
selves weak.—“ But we believe that through
the grace of the Lord Jesus we shall be saved
even as they.” (v.11.) Mark how he ends
with a fearful consideration, He* does not
discourse to them from the Prophets, but
from things present, of which themselves
were witnesses. Of course* (the Prophets)
also themselves anon add their testimony
(infra v.15), and make the reason stronger
by what has now come to pass. And
observe, he first permits the question to be
moved in the Church, and then _ speaks.
”—he said


1 "Apa xapdSias Set mavtaxov Cnrecv. i. e. ‘‘ He implies that God,
as knowing the hearts of all men saw the fitness of these Gen-
tiles, therefore chose them, and made no distinction between
us and them in point of fitness. Consequently, the heart, not
circumcision, is what we must everywhere look to. Nay, he
adds, this same expression,
Apostles on the occasion above referred to:
using it here also, declares the Gentiles to be upon a par with
the Apostles themselves : no difference between ws the Apos-
tles, and them.’


2 “Mss. *Efexadape mpoTepov Tov Aoyor, kal Tore K. 7, A. Ether |


tov Adyov has come in from another place (perhaps after eis


oBepov xatéAnfe below), or some words are lost, e. g. mioret 77)


€is Tov Adyor.

3 The doB8epov is in the xa’ Oy tpomov Kakecvou. ‘* Our
danger, through the Law, is greater than theirs. Not only are
they put upon a par with us, but we may be thankful to be
put upon a par with them.” To bring out this point, he
Teviews the tenor and drift of St. Peter’s speech.

4 Eixotws Kat avtoi Aowroy eriuaptupover - that avrol means
the Prophets (cited by St. James), seems to be shown by ots
dyn yevouevots, ** what they long ago foretold, which is even
now come to pass.’


kapd.toyvwaotyns was used by the |
so that Peter, by |


not, them of the circumcision, but “us and
them,” i.e. the Gentiles: for® this (gradual
advance) little by little is stronger. “ Why
therefore tempt ye God?” who is become
(the) God of the Gentiles: for this was tempt-
ing :®° * * * whether He is able to save even
after the Law. See what he does. He shows
that they are in danger. For if, what the
Law could not do, faith had power to do,

‘we believe that through the grace of the
Lord Jesus we shall be saved even as they”
(comp. Gal. il. 16): but faith falling off,
behold, themselves (are) in destruction.
And he did not say, Why do ye disbelieve ?
which was more harsh, but, “Tempt God,”
and that when the fact is demonstrated.

(¢) Great effrontery this, of the Pharisees,
that even after faith they set up the Law, and
will not obey the Apostles. But see these,
how mildly they speak, and not in the tone of
authority: such words are amiable, and more
apt to fix themselves in the mind. Observe,
it is nowhere a display of words, but demon-
stration by facts, by the Spirit. And yet,
though they have such proofs, they still
speak gently. And observe they? do not
come accusing those at Antioch, but “ declar-
ing all things that God had done with them :”
(v. 4) but thence again these men lay hold
upon the occasion (to compass their own
objects), ‘but there rose up,’ etc. (v. 1.) Such
were the pains they took in their love of
power: and it was not with the knowledge of
the Apostles that they Paul and Barnabas
were blamed. But still they brought forward
none of these charges: but when they have
proved the matter, then (the Apostles) write
in stronger terms.


For gentleness ® is everywhere a great good:


5 ro yap KaTQ/ALKpOV TOUTO toXUpoTEpov yevouevov Tov ebvav-
TOUTO yap TetpacovTos Hv Ke TA. Mod. text Touto yap KaTa
MuKpov émayouevov eylveTo LaxupoTEpor’ Exeivo dé reip. Hv.—The
meaning is: ‘‘He does not come at once to the point, but
advances to it gradually : first, ‘Put no difference’—though,
as he afterwards shows, if there bea difference it is in their
favor: we are not to think it much that they are to be saved as
we, but that we may trust to be saved * even as they.’”’

6 Above, it was ‘** disbelieving God, as not able to save by
faith.” Here, ‘You are tempting God by your unbelief:
whereas the question is not so much whether He can save
without the Law, as ei Svvatac cai meta vouorv(B. tod voyov)
gaca..”’

7 ovK amépxovrat dcaBaddovtes To’s ev Avt. This also shows
the émceckeca of Paul and Barnabas, that when they come to
Jerusalem, we do not find them complaining of the Jews who
had come to Antioch, but they confine themselves to the
recital of ‘‘ all that God had done with them,’ v. 4: as he had
said above, ovdév A€yovat Tept TOY els TOUS "Tov8aious oupBeBnxo-
twv. The next clause, AAA’ exeiBev madtv AaunBavovo. adopuny
may be referred to the Apostles, “ they again take advantage
of this opportunity, viz. of the Judaizin opposition, to estab-
lish the freedom of the Gentiles.’’ We have referred it to the
Pharisaic brethren, v. 5, for the sake of connection with the
following ovTwsS €wedeTw TO diAapxecv, —In the next clause, cai
(mod, text ot cat) ovx eidotwy Tov atoaToAwy eueudOnoar, Sav.
marg. has ‘reud@noay, * ‘these Judaizers were not sent with
knowledge of the Apostles.”’

8 ’Ececxeca, gentleness, in the sense of moderation and
forbearance, keeping one’s temper: here distinguished from
the temper of the Wuxpos, pos ar is unruffled only because he
does not feel, and that of the flatterer, who puts up with
everything for the sake of pleasing.


204 THE WORKS OF


ST: CHRYSOSTOR:


[HomiILty XXXII.


gentleness,
gentleness, not adulation :
there is a vast difference. Nothing ruffled
Paul, nothing discomposed Peter. When thou
hast convincing proofs, why lose thy temper,
to render these of none effect? It is impos-
sible for one who is out of temper ever to
persuade. Yesterday also we discoursed
about anger; but there is no reason why we
should not to-day also; perchance a second
exhortation coming directly after the first will
effect somewhat. For indeed a medicine
though of virtue to heal a wound, unless it be
constantly renewed, mars all. And think not
that our continual discoursing about the same
things is a condemning of you: for if we con-
demned you, we should not discourse; but
now, hoping that you will gain much, we
speak these things. Would indeed that we
did speak constantly of the same things:
would that there were no other subject of our
discourses, than how we might overcome our
passions. For is it not contrary to all reason,
that while emperors, living in luxury and so
great honor, have no subject of discourse
either while sitting at table, or at any other
time, save only how to overcome their ene-
mies \—and therefore it is that they hold their
assemblies each day, and appoint generals
and soldiers, and demand taxes and tributes ;
and that of all state affairs, the moving causes
are these two, the overcoming of those who
make war upon them, and the establishing of
their subjects in peace—we have no mind for


I say, not stupid indifference ;
for between these


such themes as this, nor ever even dream of |


conversing upon them: but how we may buy
land, or purchase slaves, and make our prop-
erty greater, these are subjects we can talk
about every day, and never be tired of them:
while concerning things in ourselves and
really our own, we neither wish to speak our-
selves, nor so much as dream of tolerating
advice, nor of enduring to hear others speak-
ing about them? But answer me, what do
you talk about? About dinner? Why that is
a subject for cooks. Of money? Nay, that
is.a theme for hucksters and merchants. Of
buildings? That belongs to carpenters and
builders. Of land? That talk is for hus-
bandmen. But for us, there is no other
proper business, save this, how we may make
wealth for the soul. Then let not the dis-


1 He means, that to BagvAets, when there is an enemy in the
field against them, the engrossing theme of_discourse, even at
table, is how to overcome their enemies. Such was probably
the state of things when this Homily was preached : for the
note of time in Hom, xliv. implies that it was delivered either
at the close of 400 or the beginning of 401 A. D.: now the
former of these years was signalized by the revolt and defeat
of Gainas. Hence the following passage might be rendered,

‘they are holding assemblies each day, appointing generals
and demanding taxes,’ etc. The war ended Dec. 400, in the
defeat of Gainas.


course be wearisome to you. Why is it that
none finds fault with the physician for always
discoursing of the healing art, nor with people
of other crafts for talking about their peculiar
arts? If indeed the mastery over our pas-
sions were really achieved, so that there were
no need of putting us in mind, we might
reasonably be taxed with ambition and dis-
play: or rather, not then either. For even if
it were gained, for all that, there would be
need of discoursing, that one might not re-
lapse and remain uncorrected: as in fact
physicians discourse not only to the sick, but
also to the whole, and they have books on this
subject, on the one part how to free from
disease, on the other how to preserve health.
So that even if we are well, still we must not
give over, but must do all in order to the
preserving of our health. And when we are


sick there is a twofold necessity for advice:


first, that we may be freed from the disease;
secondly, that having been freed, we may not
fall into it again. Well then, we are discours-
ing now by the method of treating the sick,
not by the rules for the treatment of the
healthy.

How then may one root out this evil pas-
sion? how subdue (izockedicee) this violent
fever? Let us see whence it had its birth, and .
let us remove the cause. Whence is it wont
to arise?) From arrogance and much haughti-
ness. This cause then let us remove, and the
disease is removed together with it. But what
is arrogance ? whence does it arise? for per-
haps we are likely to have to go back to a still
higher origin. But whatever course the rea-
son of the thing may point out, that let us
take, that we may go to the bottom of the
mischief, and pluck it up by the roots.
Whence then comes arrogance? From our
not looking into our own concerns, but in-
stead of that, busying ourselves about the
nature of land, though we are not husband-
men, and the nature of gold, though we are
not merchants, and concerning clothing, and
everything else: while to ourselves and our
own nature we never look at all. And who,
you will say, is ignorant of his own nature?
Many: perhaps all, save a few: and if ye will,
I will show the proof of it. For, tell me, what
is man? If one were asked, will he be able
to answer outright to the questions, In what
he differs from the brutes, in what he is akin
to the heavenly inhabitants, what can be made
of man? For as in the case of any other
material, so also in this case: man is the
subject-matter, but of this can be made either
an angel or a beast. Does not this seem a
strange saying? And yet ye have often heard
it in the Scriptures. For of certain human


Homity XXXIII.]


Peeve rs: OF- THE cArOsrLeEs,


205


beings it was said, “he is the angel of the
Lord” (Mal. ii. 7): and “from his lips,”
saith it, “they shall seek judgment” (Mal.
iii. 1): and again, “I send My angel before
Thy face:’”’ but of some, “Serpents, genera-
tion of vipers.” (Matt. xii. 34.) So then, it
all depends upon the use. Why do I say, an
angel? the man can become God, and a child
of God. For we read, “I have said, Ye are
gods, and all of you are children of the Most
High.” (Ps. Ixxxii. 6.) And what is greater,
the power to become both God and angel and
child of God is put into his own hands. Yea,
so it is, man can be the maker of an angel.
Perchance this sayinghas startled you? Hear
however Christ saying: “In the Resurrection
they neither marry nor are given in marriage,
but are like unto the angels.” (Matt. xxii. 30.)
And again, “He that is able to receive
it, let him receive it.” (Matt. xix. 12.) Ina
word, it is virtue which makes angels: but
this is in our power: therefore we are able to
make angels, though not in nature, certainly
in will. For indeed if virtue be absent, it is
no advantage to be an angel by nature; and
the Devil is a proof of this, who was an angel
once: but if virtue be present, it is no loss to
be a man by nature; and John isa proof of
this, who was a man, and Elias who went up
into heaven, and all those who are about to
depart thither. For these indeed, though
with bodies, were not prevented from dwell-


ing in heaven: while those others, though
without bodies, could not remain in heaven.
Let no one then grieve or be vexed with his
nature as if it were a hindrance to him, but
with his will. He (the Devil) from being
incorporeal became a lion: for lo! it saith,
“Our adversary, as a roaring lion, walketh
about, seeking whom he may devour (1 Pet. v.
'8): we from being corporeal, become angels.
For just as if a person, having found some
precious material, should despise it, as not
being an artificer, it will be a great loss to
him, whether it be pearls, or a pearl shell, or
any other such thing that he has seen; so we
likewise, if we are ignorant of our own na-
ture, shall despise it much: but if we know
what it is, we shall exhibit much zeal, and
reap the greatest profits. For from this
nature is wrought a king’s robe, from this a
king’s house, from this nature are fashioned a
king’s members: all are kingly. Let us not
then misuse our own nature to our hurt. He
has made us “a little lower than the angels,”
(Ps. viii. 5), I mean, by reason of death: but
even that little we have now recovered.
There is nothing therefore to hinder us from
becoming nigh to the angels, if we will. Let
us then will it, let us will it, and having exer-
cised ourselves thoroughly, let us return
honor to the Father, and the Son, and the
Holy Spirit, now and ever, world without end,
| Amen.


HOM PEN | A2OK1 1.


BOTS CVS 1g, 15


** And after they had held their peace, James answered,
saying, Men and brethren, hearken unto me: Sy-
meon hath declared how God at the first did visit
the Gentiles, to take out of them a people for his
name. And to this agree the words of the
prophets.”


Tuts (James) was bishop, as they say, and
therefore he speaks last, and herein is fulfilled
that saying, “ In the mouth of two or three
witnesses shall every word be established.”
(Deut. xvii. 6; Matt. xviii. 16.) But observe
the discretion shown by him also, in making
his argument good from the prophets, both


D
new and old For he had no acts of his own


1 All our Mss. and the Cat. amo Te véwy amo te madaov
BeBatovmévov Tav mpodytav Tov Aoyov, which must be rendered,
**Confirming the word of the prophets:”’ so Ed. Par. Ben. 2,
where the other Edd. have mad. mpod. BeB. x. tT. A., Which is in
fact what the sense requires: ‘‘from the prophets, new (as
Symeon) and old.”


to declare, as Peter had and Paul. And in-
deed it is wisely ordered that this (the active)
part is assigned to those, as not intended, to
be locally fixed in Jerusalem, whereas (James)
here, who performs the part of teacher, is no
way responsible for what has been done,
while however he is not divided from them in
opinion.* (8) “Men and brethren,” he says,
‘“hearken unto me.” Great is the moderation
of the man. His also is a more complete
oration, as indeed it puts the completion to
the matter under discussion. (a) “Symeon,”
he says, “declared :” (namely,) in Luke, in
that he prophesied, “ Which Thou hast pre-
pared before the face of all nations, a light to


* This was James, the Lord’s brother (Gal. i. 19), who, ac-
cording to the uniform tradition of the early church, was the
Bishop of Jerusalem. He evidently was the chief pastor, as he
presides at this conference, and when Judaizing teachers


206


lighten the Gentiles, and the glory of Thy
people Israel.”1 (c) ‘“ How God at the first
did visit the Gentiles, to take out of them a
people for His Name.” (Luke ii. 25.) Then,
since that (witness), though? from the time in-
deed he was manifest, yet had not authority
by reason of his not being ancient, therefore
he produces ancient prophecy also, saying,
“ And to this agree the words of the Proph-
ets, as it is written: After this I will return,
and will build again the tabernacle of David,
which is fallen down; and I wiil build again
the ruins thereof, and I will set it up.” (v.
16.) What? was Jerusalem raised up? Was
it not rather thrown down? What? sort of
raising up does he call that which took place
after the return from Babylon? ‘“ That the
residue of men,” he says, ‘‘may seek the
Lord, even ail the Gentiles upon whom My
Name is called.” (v. 17.) Then, what makes
his word authoritative—“ Saith the Lord, which
doeth all these things: ” and, for that this is
no new thing, but all was planned from the be-
ginning, ‘Known unto God are all His works
from everlasting.” * (v. 18.) And then again


afterwards went down to Antioch from Jerusalem they are
spoken of as coming ‘‘from James” (Gal. 1i. 12). From this it
has been inferred that he was the leader of a Judaistic party,
but this view is inconsistent with his address here and also
with Paul's testimony who says that the “pillar’’ apostles
‘““imparted nothing”’ to him, that is, did not correct or sup-
plement his teaching. He was no doubt of a conservative
tendency respecting the questions in dispute and may not
have been always self-consistent, as Petercertainly was not,
but there can be no doubt of his substantial agreement with
Paul. His doctrine of justification by works as well as by faith
in his epistle is not against this view, since he uses both the
words “ faith” and ‘‘ works” ina different sense from Paul,
meaning by the former “belief ’’ and by the latter the deeds
which are the fruit of the Christian life, instead of meritorious
obedience to the Mosaic law.—G. B. S.

1 Edd. émcywpiagerv, Cat. éyxpovigerv, substituted for the less
usual €yxwptacerv of A. B. C. Sav.--Below, Supewy, dyciv, eEny7-
aazo ev TH AouKa mpopytevoas. Cat. ** He whoin Luke prophe-
sied, Lord, now lettest Thou Thy servant depart.’’—It is remark-
able that it does not occur to Chrys, that Symeon is Simon
Peter, though 2 Pet. i. 1 has Svuewv Iérpos in the Cod. Alex-
andr., and many other Mss.” In the Mod. text Chrys. is made
to say: ‘“*Some say that this is he who is mentioned by
Luke : others, that he is some other person of the same name.
(Acts xiii. 1?) But whether it be the one or the other isa
point about which there is no need to be particular ; but only
to receive as necessary the things which the person declared.”

amo ev TOU xpdvou SyAOs jv, TO d€ akiomiaTov ovK eixe: the
former clause seems to be corrupt. The sense in general is,
He was manifestly (a prophet), but had not the same authority
as the old prophets. Probably the form of opposition was
this: émerdy execvos ato ev * * SHAos Hv, amo S€ TOV xpovov TO
agiomurTov ovK elxe dua TO MH Tadards eivar. ‘Since Symeon,
though from * * he was manifestly (a prophet), yet from
time had not the like authority because he was not ancient.”

5 Mod. text, ‘‘ But it is not of these things that he speaks.
And what raising up, you will say, doeshe mean? That
after Babylon.”’ We pointit, motav A€yer Eyepory THY meTa
BafvA@va; ‘‘Was it raised up? was it not rather razed to
the ground (by the Romans)? True it was rebuilt after the
return from Babylon, but what sort of raising up does he call
that?’’ For the answer to these questions, not given here,
see the Recapitulation (note 4, p. 207).

* Most modern texts omit mav7a at the end of v. 17 and then
join directly to it yywora am a.wvos only, dropping out the
words of the T. R.: €o7t7@ Oew!tavta ta Epya avtov. This
reading yields the following translation: ‘“‘ the Gentiles upon
whom my name is called, saith the Lord, who maketh these
things known from the beginning of the world.’”’ (So Tisch-
endort, Alford, Meyer, Westcott and Hort, Gloag, R. V.).
This reading encounters the difficulty that the words yrwora
am’ ai@vos are considered as a part of the quotation which, in
reality, they are not. Itis probable that this fact may have
led to their expansion into an independent sentence.—G. B. S.


THE WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM


[HomILy XXXIII.


his authority (kai 7d agioua zazv) (as Bishop) :
‘“‘Wherefore my sentence is, that we trouble
not them, which from among the Gentiles are
turned to God: but that we write unto them,
that they abstain from pollution of idols, and
from fornication, and from things strangled,
and from blood. For Moses of old time hath
in every city them that preach him, being
read in the synagogues every sabbath day.”
(v. Ig-21.) Since* then they had heard of
the Law, with good reason he enjoins these
things from the Law, that he may not seem to
make it of no authority. And (yet) observe
how he does not let them be told these things
from the Law, but from himself, saying, It is
not that 1 heard these things from the Law,
but how? ‘We have judged.” Then the
decree is made in common. “Then pleased
it the Apostles and elders, together with the
whole Church, to choose men of their own
company ’”’—do you observe they do not
merely enact these matters, and nothing
more ?-—‘“‘and send them to Antioch with
Paul and Barnabas: namely, Judas surnamed
Barsabas, and Silas, chief men among the
brethren: and they wrote letters by them
after this manner.” (v. 22.) And observe, the
more to authenticate the decree, they send
men of their own, that there may be no room -
for regarding Paul] and his company with sus-
picion. ‘The Apostles and elders and breth-
ren send greeting unto the brethren which are
of the Gentiles in Antioch and Syria and
Cilicia.” (v. 23.) And mark® with what for-
bearance of all harsh vituperation of those
(brethren) they indite their epistle. “ Foras-
much as we have heard, that certain which
went out from us have troubled you with
words, subverting your souls, saying, Ye must
be circumcised, and keep the Law: to whom
we gave no such commandment.” (v. 24.)
Sufficient was this charge against the temerity
of those men, and worthy of the Apostles’
moderation, that they said nothing beyond
this. Then to show that they do not act des-
potically, that all are agreed in this, that with
deliberation they write this—‘‘ It seemed good
to us, being assembled with one accord, to
send men of ours whom we have chosen”
(v. 25)—then, that it may not look like dis-
paragement of Paul and Barnabas, that those
men are sent, observe the encomium passed
upon them—* together with our beloved Bar-


4 All our Mss. ézecdn ovx Foav axnxodtes Tov voxov, which
contradicts v. 21. We restore éreidy odv. In B. C. v. 21, with
the words éze:dy ovK }oav ax. TOU vouou is repeated after, *‘ We
have judged.”’

5 Mss. and Edd. Kat épa mas gopikas exetvous dtaBaddAovtes
émigtéAAovawv. The sense absolutely requires mas ov gopt. It
would be strange if Chrys. made 70 doptixov and 70 dcaBadAcrv
matter of commendation: moreover in his very next remark
he says just the contrary, and below, p. 209.


HomiLy XXXIE1.)


Wie he OP. THE SPOSTLES: 207


nabas and Paul, men that have hazarded their
lives for the name of our Lord Jesus Christ.
We have sent therefore Judas and Silas, who
shall also tell you the same things by mouth.
For it seemed good to the Holy Spirit and to
us ’—it is not man’s doing, it says—‘“ to lay
upon you no greater burden ’’—again it calls
the Law a burden: then apologizing even for
these injunctions—“save + these necessary
things” (v. 26-28): “That ye abstain from
meats offered to idols, and from blood, and
from things strangled, and from fornication :
from which if ye keep yourselves, ye shall do
well. (v. 29.) For these things the New Tes-
tament did not enjoin: we nowhere find that
Christ discoursed about these matters; but
these things they take from the Law. ‘“ From
things strangled,” it says, “and from blood.”
here it prohibits murder. (Comp. Gen. ix. 5.)
“So when they were dismissed, they came to
Antioch: and when they had gathered the
multitude together, they delivered the epistle :
which when they had read, they rejoiced for
the consolation.” (v. 30-31.) Then. those
(brethren) also exhorted them: and having
established them, for towards Paul they were
contentiously disposed, so departed from them
in peace. ‘And Judas and Silas, being
prophets also themselves, exhorted the breth-
ren with many words, and confirmed them.
And after they had tarried there a space, they
were let go in peace from the brethren unto
the Apostles.” (v. 32-33.) No more factions
and fightings, but thenceforth Paul taught.’


(Recapitulation.) ‘Then all the multitude
kept silence,” etc. (v. 12.) There was no arro-
gance in the Church. After Peter Paul speaks,
and none silences him: James waits patiently,
not starts up * (for the next word). Great the
orderliness (of the proceedings). No word
speaks John here, no word the other Apostles,
but held their peace, for James was invested
with the chief rule, and think it no hardship.
So clean was their soul from love of glory.
‘‘And after that they had held their peace,
James answered,” etc. (v.13.) (6) Peter in-
deed spoke more strongly, but James here
more mildly : for thus it behooves one in high
authority, to leave what is unpleasant for others
to say, while he himself appears in the milder


1 TladAos 5é Aouroyv edidacxeyv. Perhaps this may belong to
the Recapitulation, v. 12.—In the mod. text the matter is a
good deal transposed, without any necessity, and the Recapit-
ulation is made to begin after the sentence ending, ‘love of
glory.’’—This seems to be the proper place for the first of the
sentences following the Recapitulation, p. 210, note 4, viz.
‘““No more faction. On this occasion I suppose it was that
they received the right hand, as he says himself,‘ They gave
to me and Barnabas the right hands of fellowship.’ n this
(same) occasion he says, ‘They added nothing to me.’ For
they confirmed his view: they praised and admired it.”

2 émurnda N. Cat. (€mymda sic A. B, C.) mod. text amomnéa,
“recoils ’’ from hearing Paul.


part. (a) But what means it, “‘ How God
first (xparov) did visit?” (v. 14.) (It means)
from the beginning (é dpyjc).? (¢) Moreover
he well says, “ Symeon expounded ” (é&yy4caT0)
(or, interpreted), implying that he too spake
the mind of others. “And to this agree,” etc.
Observe how he shows that this is a doctrine
of old time. ‘To take out of the Gentiles,”
he says, ‘a people for His Name.” (v. 15.)
Not simply, Chose, but, “for His Name,”
that is for His glory. His Name is not
shamed by the taking (xpo%fyer) the Gentiles
first, but it is even a greater glory.—Here
some even great thing is hinted at: that these
are chosen before all.* ‘“ After this I will re-
turn, and rebuild the tabernacle of David which
is fallen down.” (v. 16.) But if one would look
into the matter closely, the kingdom of David
does in fact now stand, his Offspring reigning
everywhere. For what is the good of the
buildings and the city, with none obeying
there? And what is the harm arising from
the destruction of the city, when all are will-
ing to give their very souls? There is that
come which is more illustrious than David:
in all parts of the world is he now sung. This
has come to pass: if so, then must this also
come to pass, “ And I will build again the
ruins thereof, and I will set it up:” to what
end? ‘that the residue of men may seek the
Lord, and all the Gentiles, upon whom My
Name is called.” (v. 17.) If then it was to
this end that the city rose again (namely)
because of Him (that was to come) of them,
it shows that of the building of the city the
cause is, the calling of the Gentiles. Who
are “the residue?” those who are then left.°
“ And all the Gentiles, upon whom My Name
is called:’’ but observe, how he keeps the
due order, and brings them in second.


3 The scribes did not perceive thateé apxjjs is the answer to
the question, Ti eat, Kadws TpOTOV K. T. A. therefore trans-
posed this sentence and gave €& apxjjs to the sentence (a) (Cat.
omits them.) Mod. text, the question being thus left unan-
swered, substitutes ‘‘Symeon hath declared ’’—xa@us mp. x. 7.
A. "EE apxijs apodpotepov mev. ; 2 : i

4 Orumpo mavTwv ovto. Here also, and in ty mpoAynwer Tov
é@vav, there seems to be a reference to 7pwroy, as If the mean-
ing were, God * looked upon the Gentiles first to take from
them,” before the Jews, etc.—After the text, the questions left
unanswered above (see note 2, p. 206) might be advantageously
introduced. ‘‘ How could that restoration (after Babylon) be
called an €yepats, especially as the city was eventually razed
to the ground by the Romans? True: but the kingdom of
David is in fact more gloriously raised up, in the reign of
David’s offspring throughout the world. As for the buildings
and city, what loss is that? Nay, David himself is more glori-
ous now than he was before, sung as he is in all parts of the
world. If then this which the Prophet foretold is come to
pass—this is put as St. James’s argument—namely that the
city was raised from its ruins (and the subsequent overthrow,
when the end of that restoration was attained, does not inval-
idate the fulfilment), then must the dca te of this restoration
also come to pass, namely, that the residue shall seek the Lord,
and all the Gentiles upon whom that Name is called. The
city, was raised up for the sake of Christ, to come of them, and
to reign over all nations. Consequently, the Prophet shows
that the aircov (i. e. the dca 7, or final clause) of the building of
the city is—the calling of the Gentiles, 70 7a €6vm KAnPyvat.’

5 of vroAciTomevot ToTE, the Jews whom that (the Babylon-
ian) judgment leaves.


208


**Saith the Lord, which doeth these things.”
Not “saith ” (only), but “doeth.” Why then,
it was God’s work.—‘ But the question is
other than this (namely), what Peter spoke
more plainly, whether they must be circum-
cised. ‘Then why dost thou harangue about
these matters?” For what the objectors
asserted, was not that they must not be
received upon believing, but that it must be
with the Law. And upon this Peter well
pleaded: but then, as this very thing above
all others troubled the hearers, therefore he
sets this to rights again (fepareve.). And
observe, that which was needful to be enacted
as a rule, that it is not necessary to keep the
Law, this Peter introduced: but the milder
part,! the truth which was received of old,
this James saith, and dwells upon that con-
cerning which nothing is” written, in order
that having soothed their minds by that
which is acknowledged, he may opportunely
introduce this likewise. ‘‘ Wherefore,” saith
he, “my sentence is, not to trouble them
which from among the Gentiles do turn unto
God” (v. 19), that is, not to subvert: for, if
God called them, and these observances sub-
vert, we fight against God. And? again,
“them which from the Gentiles,” he saith, “do
turn.” And he says well, with authority, the
“my sentence is. But that we write unto
them that they abstain from pollutions of
idols, and from fornication”’—(d) and yet
they often insisted upon these points in dis-
coursing to them4*—but, that he may seem


1 Mss. and Edd. ro S€ nuérepov. We must read 7d de
HMepwrepov, as above: in the preceding clause something is
wanted for antithesis, probably kat opa, 70 wev doptiKwtepor,
omep K. T. X.

2 Urép ov ovdev yeypamtar, ‘This also requires emendation. The
sense demands, ‘* About which there is no dispute.’’ The
yéypanrtac may have come in from the text referred to: “‘ to
wit, Ka@ws yéypamtat,”’ etc.

3 The report seems to be defective here; and in fact N.
(Sav. marg.) inserts after the text, “*showing both God’s care
towards them and mercy, and their ready mind and piety in
obeying : and he says well,” etc. But this addition is un-
known to A. B. C. Cat., and N. frequently adds to or other-
wise alters the original text, where the sense or connection is
obscure.—Perhaps however these two sentences may be better
transposed to follow the part (4), so that the connection would
be, ‘‘ And again, observe he has been speaking concerning the
Gentile converts, not openly of the Jewish believers, and
yet in fact what he says is no less for them.’’—Mod. text with
partial transposition, ‘‘And he well says, To them, etc.
declaring both the purpose of God from the beginning with
respect to them, amd their obedience and readiness for the
calling. What means it? I judge? ‘Instead of, With
authority I say that this isso, *‘ But that we write to them,’
he says, ‘toabstain from’ etc. For these, though bodily, etc.
(as below.) And that none may object, why then do we not
enjoin the same thing to the Jews? He adds, ‘For Moses,’
etc. : i.e. Moses discourses to them continually : for this is
the meaning of, ‘Being read every Sabbath day.’ See what
condescension !”’

4 Kaitou ye ToAAGKLS avTots UTép (not mepi as Ben. renders, de
his) dceAex@joav mod. text dreAexOy, referred perhaps to Moses
or.the Law, as in the trajection this sentence follows the last
of (2). The clause seems to refer to ** pollutions of idols and
fornication.’”’ q.d. ‘‘Why mention these in the decree? The
Apostles, especially Paul, often discoursed to them on behalf
of these points of Christian duty, i. e. the abstaining from all
approach to idolatry, as in the matter of eiSwAd@uTa, and from
fornication.’’ The answer is: ‘‘He mentions them, for the
purpose of seeming to maintain the Law, (though at the same


THE WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTORM


[HomiLy XXXIII.


also to honor the Law (he mentions), these
also, speaking (however) not as from Moses
but from the Apostles, and to make the com-
mandments many, he has divided the one
into two (saying), “ and from things strangled,
and from blood.” (v. 20.) For these, although
relating to the body, were necessary to be ob-
served, because (these things) caused great evils,
“For Moses hath‘of old times in every city,”
etc. (v. 21.) This above all quieted them.
(avéravoev) (a) For this cause I affirm that
it is good (so “to write to them.”) Then why
do we not write the same injunctions to Jews
also? Moses discourses unto them. See
what condescension (to their weakness) !
Where it did no harm, he set him up as
teacher, and indulged them with a gratifica-
tion which hindered nothing, by permitting
Jews to hear him in regard of these matters,
even while leading away from him them of
the Gentiles. See what wisdom! He seems
to honor him, and to set him up as the author-
ity for his own people, and by this very thing
he leads away the Gentiles from him!*
“Being read in the synagogues every sabbath
day.” ‘Then why do they not learn (what is
to be learnt) out of him, for instance * *?5
Through the perversity of these men. He
shows that even these (the Jews) need observe.
no more (than these necessary things). And


time he does not rest them on the authority of the Law, but
on that of the Apostles: still the Jewish believers would be
gratified by this apparent acknowledgment of the Law), and
(with the same view) to make a greater number of e&toAat, for
which reason also he divides the one legal prahibition of
blood into the two, a70 Tay mvikT@v Kai amo TOU aisatos. The
latter, he says, though cwuatixai, are necessary to be observed
because the non-observance of this law on which the Jews
laid so much stress led to great evils—especially made it im-
possible for Jewish and Gentile believers to eat at the same
table. For in every city Moses is preached to Jews and prose-
lytes. Therefore I say it is good that we charge them by
letter to abstain from these things,” Then, giving a different
turn to the reason, ‘‘for Moses of oid times,’’ etc. he adds.
‘‘this is for them which from the Gentiles,’’ etec., as for the
Jewish believers, they have Moses to teach them. Thus again
seeming to uphold Moses, while in fact he shows, what they
might learn from Moses himself, that the Law is come to an
end for the Jews also.

* The prohibitions imposed by the council upon the Gen-
tiles were chiefly concessions to Jewish prejudice and opinion.
Abstinence from meat which had been offered in idols’ tem-
ples and from things strangled and from blood was forbidden
in the Mosaic law (Ex. xxxiv. 15; Lev. xvii. 10-14). Failure
to abstain from these would expose the Gentile converts
needlessly to the suspicions of the Jewish Christians. The
prohibition of fornication must rest upon another ground.
It isa warning against the custom among Gentiles, which
had become so prevalent as to provoke little rebuke or com-
ment. The ground assigned for requiring these abstinences
is that Moses is read every Sabbath in the synagogues of the
Jews and therefore these very points are kept prominently
before the people and therefore unless these indulgences were
abandoned, the synagogue preaching would constantly stim-
ulate in the Jews and Judeo-Christians a dislike of the Gen-
tile believers. There is less ground for the view of Chrys.
that v. 21. means that the Jewish Christians have no need of
instruction on these points because they hear the law read
every Sabbath, an explanation, however, which is adopted by
aes modern scholars as Wordsworth and Neander.—G.

5 A. B. anny. 7a €Ovy é& aod. Aca ti obv wh map avTod pavé.;
C. amny. Ta €€ avtov mavta, olov Ta €Ovn. Aca Tix. T. A. Cat.
anny. Ta e& avtov pavO. Hente we read, amnyaye ta €6vyn. Aca
Ti ovv py Ta €& a’TOD pavOavovawr, oiov (Ta EOvn?) * * *


rs


HomILty XXXIIL]


if we do not write to them, it is not that they
are bound to observe anything more, but only
that they have one to tell them. And he
does not say, Not to offend, nor to turn them
back,! which is what Paul said to the Gala-
tians, but, ‘“‘ not to trouble them:” he shows
that the point (kardépHoua) if carried is nothing
but a mere troubling. Thus he made an end
of the whole matter;2 and while he seems to
preserve the Law by adopting these rules
from it, he unbinds it by taking only these.
(c) ® There was a design of Providence in the
disputation also, that after the disputation the
doctrine might be more firm. “‘ Then pleased
it the Apostles to send chosen men of their
own company,” etc., no ordinary persons,
but the “leading men; having written”
(letters) “by them afterthis manner. To those
in Antioch,” it says, “and Syria and Cilicia,”
(v. 22, 23) where the disease had its birth.
Observe how they say nothing harsher (goprv-
kérepov) against those men, but look to one
thing only, namely, to undo (the mischief)
which has been done. For this would make
even the movers of the faction there to confess
(that they were wrong). They do not say,
The seducers, the pestilent fellows, or such-
like: though where need is, Paul does this,
as when he says, “O full of all guile” (ch.
xiii. 10): but here, the point being carried,
there was no need. And observe, they do
not put it, That certain from us ordered you
tokeep the Law, but, “Troubled you with
words, subverting your souls,”—nothing could
be more proper (kvpidrepov) than that word:
none (of the other speakers) has so spoken of
the things done by those men. ‘“ The souls,”
he says, already strongly established, these per-
sons are dvacyevatovree aS in speaking
of a building, “taking them down again:”
displacing them (uwerarifévrec) from the founda-
tion). “To whom,” he says, “we gave no
such commandment. It seemed good there-
fore to us being assembled with one accord,
to send chosen men unto you together with
our beloved Barnabas and Paul, men that
have hazarded their lives for the Name of our
Lord Jesus Christ.” (v. 25, 26.) If “beloved,”
they will not despise them, if they “have hazard-
ed their lives,” they have themselves a right to
be believed. “ We have sent,” it saith, “ Judas


L xataotpépervy, Mss. Perhaps, metraotpéWar from Gal. i. 7.

2 eféAvge 70 wav, ** untied the whole knot,”’ or perhaps ‘ took
out of the Law all its strength,’ as below Avec.

3 Perhaps the sentence, TovTo padtoTta avtovs averavoev, re-


tained above as the end of (4), may belong here, in the sense, |


“This was conclusive ; this made the Judaizers desist, if any-
thing could.” f x }

4 kadamep emt oikoSouns Ta Um’ Exeivwv yeyernuéva meTaTibervTes.
Mod. text from E. 7.8év7es, ‘* putting, as in respect of a build-
: ste: : pie) tds)
ing, the things done by those (Judaizers).’’ We have trans-
posed 7a Um’ ex yey. to its proper place. He interprets avack.
with reference to Gal. i. 6. metariberbe.


14


ones OF THE APOSTRES:


209


and Silas, who shall also tell you the same
things by word of mouth.” (v. 27.) For it was
necessary that there should be not merely the
Epistle there by itself, lest they should say
that Paul and Barnabas had suppressed 5 (the
real purport), that they said one thing instead
of another. ‘The encomium passed upon Paul
stopped their mouths. For this is the reason
why neither Paul comes alone nor Barnabas
(with him), but others also from the Church;
that he may not be suspected, seeing it was he
that advocated that doctrine: nor yet those
from Jerusalem alone. It shows that they
have a right to be believed. ‘ For it seemed
good,” say they, “to the Holy Ghost and to
us” (v. 28) : not making themselves equal (to
Him ”’)—they are not so mad. But why does
it put this (so)? Why did they add, “ And
to us,” and yet it had sufficed to say, ‘‘To the
Holy, Ghost?” The one, “To the . Holy
Ghost,” that they may not deem it to be of
man; the other, “To us,” that they may be
taught that they also themselves admit (the
Gentiles), although themselves being in cir-
cumcision. They have to speak to men
who are still weak and afraid of them:
this is the reason why this also is added.
And it shows that it is not by way of conde-
scension that they speak, neither because they
spared them, nor as considering them weak,
but the contrary ; for great was the reverence
of the teachers also." “To lay upon you no


5 ouvnpracav Ben. ifsos extorsisse: but the word is used in
the Greek of Chrysostom’s time, in the sense ‘* conceal,” for
which Schneiders. v. refers to Valesius on Harpocrat. p. 145.
Gronov. in which sense we have rendered dt above. Or per-
haps, ‘‘had wrested it’? to make it speak in their favor. To
Cntovmevov auvapragew is a logical phrase, used of one who
commits a petitio principiz. St: Chrys. however can hardly
be correctly reported here: for the letter itself would show,
if it were believed to be genuine. that Paul and Barnabas
neither ovyypracav nor adda avr’ dAAwy etmav. He may rather
be supposed to have said in substance as follows : ‘* Had Paul
and Barnabas returned alone as the bearers of an oral com-
munication, it might be suspected that they gave their own
account of the matter: had they come alone, bearing the
Epistle, its genuineness might have been called in question:
but by sending the Epistle by the hands of men of their own
and of high consideration, they left no room for doubt as to
the fact of their decision. nthe other hand, to have sent
these men alone, would have looked like putting a slight upon
Barnabas and Paul: but by sending the messengers with
them, they showed ott agcomoato. eiotv, and by the eulogy
expressed in the Epistle itself they stopped the mouths of the
gainsayers.’?

& The innovator completely mistakes the meaning of this
clause : not having the text to guide him, he supposes it to
refer to Silas and Judas,and alters thus: ‘It shows how
worthy of credit they are: not making themselves equal, ‘it
says: theyare notsomad. In fact, this is why it adds that
expression, Which have hazarded their lives, etc. And why
does it say, ‘‘ It seemed good to the Holy Ghost and to us,”
and yet it had sufficed,” etc.—Below, he has “‘* To lay upon
you no greater burden.’ This they say, because they have to
speak,’ etc. But all this belongs to édofev nucy q. d. ** You
need not fear us, neither is it of condescension that we speak,
or to spare you as being weak—quite the contrary—it seems
good to the Holy Ghost ‘‘and to us.”
7 roAAH yap Kai tov SiSacxadwy aidws Fv. It is not clear
whether this means, Great was the reverence shown by the
teachers also towards them—as in St. Peter’swomep kaxetvor—
and therefore they did not treat them as ‘‘ weak ;”’ or, great
was their reverence towards their teachers, so that had they
laid upon them a greater burden, they would have borne it.


210


THE WORKS: OF ST. (CHR®SOSTORE


[HoMILy XXXIII.


greater burden’’—they’ are ever calling it a
burden—and again, “save these necessary
things: ”’ for that was a superfluous burden.
See here a brief Epistle, with nothing more in
it (than was needed), neither arts of persuasion,
(karacxevac) nor reasonings, but simply a com-
mand: for it was the Spirit’s legislating.
‘“¢ So when they were dismissed they came to
Antioch, and having gathered the multitude
together, they delivered to them the epistle.”
(v. 30.) After the epistle, then (Judas and
Silas) also themselves exhort them by word
(v. 31): for this also was needful, that (Paul
and Barnabas) might be quit of all suspicion.
“Being prophets also themselves,’’ it says,
exhorted the brethren “ with many words.” It
shows here the right that Paul and Barnabas
have to be believed. For Paul also might
have done this, but it behooved to be done by
by these.” ‘* And after they had tarried there
a space, they were let go in peace. (v. 33.)
No * more faction. On this occasion, I
suppose, it was that they received the right
hand, as he says himself, ‘‘ They gave to me
and Barnabas right hands of fellowship.”
(Gal. ii, 9.) There he says, “They added
nothing to me.”* (ib. 6.) For they con-
firmed his view: they praised and admired it.
—It shows that even from human reasonings
it is possible to see this, not to say from the
Holy Ghost only, that they sinned a sin not
easy to be corrected. For such things need
not the Spirit.—It shows that the rest are not
necessary, but superfluous. seeing these things
are necessary. ‘‘ From which if ye keep your-
selves,” it saith, “ye shall do well.” It
shows that nothing is lacking to them, but this
is sufficient. For it might have been done
also without letters, but that there may be a law
in writing (they send this Epistle): again, that
they may obey the law (the Apostles), also
told those men (the same things), and they


1 Mss. and Edd. have this clause, avw cdtw Bdapos KaAovaer
after IIvevmatos yap jv vowobecia, and give the kai madAw to
ouvayayovres. After the clause ‘‘ For that was a superfluous
burden ’ seems to be the proper place for these sentences
from below, see note 8, zz/ra. ‘It shows that the rest are not
necessary but superfluous, seeing these things are necessary.
“From which if ye keep yourselves ye shall do well.’”’ It
shows that nothing is lacking to them, but this is sufficient.”’

? Here insert from below: ‘“‘For it might have been done
also without letters—they did this.’

3 What follows consists of notes which the redactor did not
bring to their proper places. ‘‘ No more faction—admired tt,”
see note 1, p.207. ‘* It shows—the Spirit,’’ may belong either
to the comment on kpivw éy@, or to that on *“‘ It seemed good
to the Holy Ghost and to us.’’—*' It shows that the rest—suffi-
cient,” see note!, These parts being removed, the remain-
der forms the continuation of the sentence, “ it behooved to be
done by these,”’ note 2. The concluding words kat per’ eipyvns
are the reporter’s abridgment of the text ‘‘xai [éreornpitav,
Tomnoavtes S€ xpovov ameAvOnaar| wer’ eipyyns.

* The author here assumes the identity of the two visits of
Paul to Jerusalem contained in Acts xv. and Gal. i. and ii.
This has always been the prevailing view. For a full discus-
sion of this and other views, see Gloag, Com. on the Acts ii.
80-84.—G. B.S.


did this, “ and confirmed them, and having
tarried a space were let go in peace.”

Let us not then be offended on account of the
heretics. For look, here at the very outset of
the preaching, how many offences there were :
I speak not of those which arose from them
that were without; for these were nothing :
but of the offences which were within. For
instance, first Ananias, then the “ murmur-
ing,” then Simon the sorcerer; afterwards
they that accused Peter on account of Cornel-
ius, next the famine,* lastly this very thing,
the chief of the evils. For indeed it is impos-
sible when any good thing has taken place,
that some evil should not also subsist along
with it. Let us not then be disturbed, if cer-
tain are offended, but let us thank God even
for this, because it makes us more approved.
For not tribulations only, but even tempta-
tions also render us more illustrious. A man
is no such great lover of the truth, only for
holding to it when there is none to lead him
astray from it: to hold fast to the truth when
many are drawing him away, this makes the
proved man. What then? Is this why
offences come? I am not speaking as if God
were the author of them: God forbid! but I
mean, that even out of their wickedness He
works good to us: it was never His wish that-
they should arise : “Grant to them,” He saith,
“that they may be one” (John xvii. 21): but
since offences do come, they are no hurt, to
these, but even a benefit: just as the per-
secutors unwillingly benefit the Martyrs by
dragging them to martyrdom, and yet they are
not driven to this by God; just so is it here.
Let us not look (only at this), that men are
offended : this very thing is itself a proof of
the excellence of the doctrine—that many
stimulate and counterfeit it: for it would not
be so, if it were not good. And this I will
now show, and make on all hands plain to
you. Of perfumes, the fragrant spices are
they which people adulterate and counterfeit ;
as, for instance, the amomum leaf. For be-
cause these are rare and of necessary use,
therefore there come to be spurious imitations
likewise. Nobody would care to counterfeit
any common article. The pure life gets
many a false pretender to it: no man would
care to counterfeit the man of vicious life;
no, but the man of monastic life.-—What
then shall we say to the heathen? There
comes a heathen and says, “ I wish to become
a Christian, but I know not whom to join:
there is much fighting and faction among you,
much confusion: which doctrine am I to


4 The famine is mentioned among the offences within, per-
haps because it may have led some to question the Providence
of God: see above, p. 159.


HomILy XXXIIL| THE ACTS. .OF


choose?” How shall we answer him?

“Each of you” (says he) ‘“‘asserts, ‘/ speak
the truth.’ (4) No? doubt: this is in our
favor. For if we told you to be persuaded
by arguments, you might well be perplexed :

but if we bid you believe the Scriptures, and
these are simple and true, the decision is easy
for you. If any agree with the Scriptures, he
is the Christian ; if any fight against them, he
is far from this rule. (a) “ But which am I
to believe, knowing as I do nothing at all of
the Scriptures? The others also allege the
same thing for themselves. What then (c) if
the other come, and say that the Scripture
has this, and you that it has something differ-
ent, and ye interpret the Scriptures diversely,
dragging their sense (each his own way)?”
And you then, I ask, have you no understand-
ing, no judgment? ‘And how should I be
able (to decide), says he, “I who do not
even know how to judge of your doctrines?
I wish to become a learner, and you are mak-
ing me forthwith a teacher.” If he say this,
what, say you, are we to answer him? How
shall we persuade him? Let us ask whether
all this be not mere pretence and subterfuge.
Let us ask whether he has decided (karéyrwxe)
against the heathen (that they are wrong).
- The fact? he will assuredly affirm, for of
course, if he had not so decided, he would not
have come to (enquire about) our matters:
let us ask the grounds on which he has de-
cided, for to be sure he has not settled the
matter out of hand. Clearly he will say,
““ Because (their gods) are creatures, and are
not the uncreated God.” Good. If then he
find this in the other parties (aipécecc), but
among us the contrary, what argument need
we? We all confess that Christ is God. But
let us see who fight (against this truth), and
who not. Now we, affirming Him to be God,
speak of Him things worthy of God, that He
hath power, that He is not a slave, that He is
free, that He doeth of Himself: whereas the
other says the reverse. Again I ask: if you
would learn (to be) a physician,® * * *? And


1 Mss. and Edd. transpose the parts marked a and J. The
old text, however, by retaining 7¢ ovv at the end of a,as well
as at the beginning of c, enables us to restore the order, so
that then the clause pydév dAws eidws ev tais Ipadais, no longer
disturbs the sense.

2 Edd. mavtws re épet. A. B. C. mavtws or pet. ‘In any
he will affirm the or, therefore let us ask the airtias &i as,

3 el tatpds pEeAAas pavOdave, Mod. text adds, “ Say, Do you
accept out of hand and as it chances, whatever you are told?”
The connection is: ‘‘ Apply your mind to what you hear,
whether from us or from them, and see whether of us is con-
sistent. Just as you would if you wished to learn medicine :

‘there also you would tind conflicting opinions and you w ould
exercise your judgment upon them, not accept all without ex-
amination. Doso here; and in the instance which has been
taken, you will see that we, affirming the Son to be God,
carry out our affirmation consistently ; whereas they (the
Arians) say indeed that He_is God, but in fact deny Him
the essential properties of Deity.’ ’" Edd. and all our Mss.
Yiov A€yomevy mets éradnbevouev Ke Fe
either @cov or Yidv Ocov.


wise


We must read


THE


APOSTLES: 211


yet among them are many (different) doc-
trines. For if you accept without more ado
just what you are told, this is not acting like
aman: but if you have judgment and sense,
you shall assuredly know what is good. We
affirm the Son to be God, we verify (éxa/Hei-
owev) What we affirm: but ‘they affirm indeed,
but (in fact) confess not.—But‘* to mention
(something) even plainer: those have certain
persons from whom they are called, openly
showing the name of the heresiarch himself,
and each heresy in like manner: with us, no
man has given us a name, but the faith itself.
However, this (talk of yours) is mere pre-
tence and subterfuge. For answer me: how
is it that if you would buy a cloak, though
ignorant of the art of weaving, you do not
speak such words as these—‘‘ I do not know
how to buy ; they cheat me ”—but do all you
can to learn, and so whatever else it be
that you would buy: but here you speak these
words? For at this rate, you will accept
nothing at all. For let there be one that has
no (religious) doctrine whatever: if he should
say what you say about the Christians—
“There is such a multitude of men, and they
have different doctrines; this a heathen, that
a Jew, the other a Christian: no need to
accept any doctrine whatever, for they are at
variance one with another; but I am a
learner, and do not wish to be a judge ”’°

but if you have yielded (so far as) to pro-
nounce against (katayevdoxew) one doctrine, this
pretext no longer has place for you. For
just as you were able to reject the spurious,
so here also, having come, you shall be able
to prove what is profitable. For he that has
not pronounced against any doctrine at all, may
easily say this: but he that has pronounced
against any, though he have chosen none, by
going on in the same way, will be able to see
what he ought to do. Then let us not make
pretexts and excuses, and all will be easy.
For, to show you that all this is mere excuse,
answer me this: Do you know what you
ought to do, and what to leave undone?
Then why do you not what you ought? Do
that, and by right reason seek of God, and
He will assuredly reveal it to thee. “God,”
it saith, “is no respecter of persons, but in
every nation he that feareth Him, and
worketh righteousness, is accepted with Him.”


4 Connection: I have mentioned one simple criterion : here is
another palpable and visible mark. Heretics take their names
from men, the founders of their sects, Tov acpeacapxou SnAovvTos
A. B. xadovvtos C., 7 ovowa Sav. marg. SyAouvvtes, which we
adopt. But indeed the reasons you allege are mere pretence,
etc.

5 The sentence is left unfinished : “*1t would be no wonder,”
“this would be at least consistent,’’ or the like: then et é€
eigw B. C. n&w (sic) A., nf D. Mod, text ovdé €€w- all corrupt.
The sense seems .o require, *‘If you have thought fit,” or
‘* gone so far as.’


202


THE WORKS OF ST. ‘CHRESOs ton


[Homity XXXIV.


(ch. x. 34, 35.) It cannot be that he who
hears without prejudice should not be _ per-
suaded. For just as, if there were a rule, by
which everything behooved to be put straight,
it would not need much consideration, but it
would be easy to detect the person who meas-
ures falsely (rov TApapeT pourra Aafeiv), so is it here.
“Then how is it they do not see it at a
glance?”’ Many things are the cause of this :
both preconceived opinion, and human causes
(airiac), The others, say you, say the same
thing about us. How? For are we sepa-
rated from the Church? have we our heresi-
archs? Are we called after men—as one of
them has Marcion,' another Manichzus, a
third Arius, for the author and leader (of his
sect)? Whereas if we likewise do receive an
appellation from any man, we do not take them
that have been the authors of some heresy,
but men that presided over us, and governed
the Church. We have no “masters upon the


that is in heaven.” (Matt. xxiii. 9, 10.)
‘‘ And those also,” says he, “say the same.”
But there stands the name set over them,
accusing them, and stopping their mouths.—
How® is it, there have been many heathen,
and none of them asked these questions: and
among the philosophers there were these (dif-
ferences), and yet none of those holding the
right party (aipeow) was hindered (thereby) ?—
Why did not (those believers) say, when (the
others) raised these questions, ‘‘ Both these
and those are Jews: which must we believe ?”’
But they believed as they ought. Then let us
also obey the laws of God, and do all things
according to His good pieasure,’ that having
virtuously passed this life present, we may be
enabled to attain unto the good things prom-
ised to them that love Him, by the grace and
mercy of our Lord Jesus Christ, with Whom to
the Father and the Holy Ghost together, be
glory, dominion, honor, now and ever, world


earth ’’—God forbid—we have “ One Master); without end. Amen.


HOMILY )2OOrI,


ACTS: XVi-35:


“Paul also and Barnabas continued in Antioch, teach-
ing and preaching the word of the Lord, with many
others also.”


OBSERVE again their humility, how they let
others also take part in the preaching. ‘“ And
some days after Paul said unto Barnabas,
Let us go again and visit our brethren in
every city where we have preached the word
of the Lord, and see how they do. And
Barnabas determined to take with them John,
whose surname was Mark. But Paul thought
not good (jsiov see note *, p. 213) to take him
with them, who departed from them from Pam-
phylia, and went not with them to the work.
And the contention (or exasperation) was so
sharp between them, that they departed asun-
der one from the other.” (v. 36-39.) And
already indeed Luke has described to us the


1 Sav. marg. adds, ‘“‘ another, Paul of Samosata.”’

2 Ava TL moAAoL yeyovaoiy” EAAnves, Kai ovdeis kK. T. A. Mod.
text omits dca tt. The first clause seems to be corrupt, or mis-
placed: for to say that “‘there have been many heathen, and
none of them has asked these questions’? (about Christian
doctrines), would contradict all that precedes: and if it means,
There were many Greeks, and diverse schools of philosophy
among them, and yet none was deterred from the study of phi-
losophy by those differences, this would not betrue. But if
this be transposed to the following sentence, which relates to
the "EAAnves at Antioch, then Chrys. says: ‘‘ Among phi-
losophers also there were these differences, and yet) etc. How
is it that (at Antioch) many Greeks became (Christians) and
yet none of them asked these questions? Whydid they not
Say,’’ etc.


character of the Apostles,* that the one was
more tender and indulgent, but this one more
strict and austere. For the gifts are diverse
—(the gifts, I say), for that this is a gift is
manifest—but the one befitting one, the other
another set of characters, and if they change
places, harm results instead of good. (4) In
the Prophets® too we find this: diverse
minds, diverse characters: for instance, Elias
austere, Moses meek. So here Paul is more
vehement. And observe for all this, how
gentle he is. “Thought not good,” it says,
‘‘to take him with them that had departed
from them from Pamphylia.” (@) And there
seems indeed to be exasperation (capofvaudc),
but in fact the whole matter is a plan of the
Divine Providence, that each should receive
his proper place: and it behooved that they


3 Edd. have a longer peroration from F, partly followed
by D. ‘‘ And live according to His will while we are yet in
this life present, that with virtue having accomplished the re-
maining time of our life, we may be able, etc., and together
with them which have pleased Him be found worthy of honor,
by the grace and loving-kindness of His only-begotten Son,
and the All-holy and Life-giving Spirit, the One true God-
head, now and ever, world without end.’’ Amen.

4 Mss. and Edd. after tav amoatoAwy add tev Aotrav, which
we omit as evidently out of place: for ‘‘the Apostles’’ here
are Pauland Barnabas. Possibly it should be éca ray Aourorv,
“by therest of the particulars related on former occasions,”’
but 1f so, this must be placed after tv am. Td Oos.

5 The notes of this Homily have fallen into extreme confu-
sion, and we have but partially succeeded in restoring the true
order.


HomMiLty XXXIV.]


should not be upon a par, but the one should
lead, and the other be led. ‘And so Bar-
nabas took Mark, and sailed unto Cyprus ;
and Paul chose Silas, and departed, being
recommended by the brethren unto the grace
of God. And he went through Syria and
Cilicia, confirming the Churches.” (v. 39-41.)
And this also is a work of Providence. For
the Cyprians had exhibited nothing of the
like sort as they at Antioch and the rest: and
those needed the softer character, but these
needed such a character as Paul’s. “ Which!
then,” say you, ‘ did well? he that took, or he
fiat detye’’ Fy *..(¢) For just as: a general
would not choose to have a low person always
to his baggage-bearer, so neither did the
Apostle. This corrected the others, and in-
structed (Mark) himself. ‘Then did Barna-
bas ill?” say you. ‘And how is it not amiss
(arorov), that upon so small a matter there
’ should arise so great anevil?” In the first
place then, no evil did come of it, if, sufficing
each for whole nations, they were divided
the one from the other, but a great good.
And besides, they would not readily have
chosen to leave each other. But admire, I
pray you, the writer, how he does not conceal
this either. ‘‘ But at any rate,” say you, “ if
they must needs part, let it be without ex-
asperation.’’ Nay, but if nothing more, ob-
serve this, that in this too is shown what was
of man” (in the preaching of the Gospel).
For if the like behooved to be shown (even) in
what Christ did, much more here. And
besides, the contention cannot be said to be
evil, when each disputes for such objects (as
here) and with just reason. I grant you, if
the exasperation were in seeking his own, and
contending for his own honor, this might well
be (reproved): but if wishing, both the one
and the other, to instruct and teach, the
one took this way and the other that, what is
there to find fault with? For in many things
they acted upon their human judgment; for
they were not stocks or stones. And observe
how Paul impeaches (Mark), and gives the


1 Mod. text omits this question: C. for adeis has ade@eis,
‘“*he that was left, or, dismissed.’’ Part of the answer has
dropped out, *‘ Paul did well: for’’ etc. The interlocutor
rejoins: ‘‘Then if Paul did well, Barnabas did ill?”’ Here
Edd. and all our Mss. ovxodv, dyci, kaxos 0 BapvaBas; to which
mod. text adds, ““ By no means: but it is even exceedingly
absurd to imagine this. And how is it not absurd to say, that
for so small'a matter this man became evil?”’ We restore
ovKovY Kaxws 0 BapvaBas ;

2 wadtoTa ev ovv Kai évTevOev (as by other instances of
human infirmity, so by this also) detxvutTat ta avOpwruva, i. e.
we are shown what in the preaching of the Gospel proceeded
from4man : that man, as man, did his part, which part is
betokened by the ordinary characters of human nature. If
even in Christ it behooved that He should not do all as God,
but that His Human Nature should also be seen working,


much more was it necessary that the Apostles, being but men, |
should work as men, not do all by the immediate power of the |


Spirit.


Toi VAS OF THE APOSTLES:


reason. For of his exceeding humility: he
reverenced Barnabas, as having been partner
with him in so great works, and being with
him: but still he did not so reverence him, as
to overlook (what was necessary). Now which
of them advised best, it is not for us to pro-
nounce: but thus far (we may affirm), that it
was a great arrangement of Providence, if
these * were to be vouchsafed a second visita-
tion, but those were not to be visited even
once.*

(a) “ Teaching and preaching the word of
the Lord.” (v. 35.) They® did not simply
tarry in Antioch, but taught. What did they
“teach,” and what “preach” (evangelize) ?
They both (taught) those that were already
believers, and (evangelized) those that were not
yetsuch. ‘“‘ And some days after,” etc. (v. 36.)
For. because there were offences without num-
ber, their presence was needed. (d@) “ How
they do,” he says. And this he did not know:
naturally. See him ever alert, solicitous, not
bearing to sit idle, though he underwent
dangers without end. Do you mark, it was
not of cowardice that he came to Antioch?
He acts just as a physician does in the case
of the sick. And the need of visiting them
he showed by saying, “ In which we preached
the word. And Barnabas determined,” etc.
(v. 37-40.) (So) Barnabas® “departed, and
went not with (him).” (8) The point to be
considered, is not that they differed in their
opinions, but that they accommodated them-
selves the one to the other (seeing), that thus
it was a greater good their being parted :‘ and


3 This refers to 7étov in the sense ‘‘he begged,” as he says
below, in the beginning of the Recapitulation, xatro ovx edec
ag.ovy avTov EXoVTA KaTHYOPELY META TAUTA.

4 If this sentence be in its place, something is wanting for
connection: e. g. (It was a great otxovouta) for the more
extended preaching of the word: since on Barnabas’s plan
these ‘‘at Cyprus’’ were to have a second visitation, but those
‘“in Asia’? not even once. But it may be suspected that this
part is altogether misplaced : and that the odroc are the breth-
ren ‘‘in the cities where we have preached,” and éxetvor the
people of Macedonia,” etc. See end of Recap. where Chrys.
says, had it not been for this parting, the word would not
have been carried into Macedonia.

* Chrys. has treated the dissension of Paul and Barnabas
with discrimination, without, however, placing quite the
emphasis upon yétov—‘* he thought good not to’’—*‘ he deter-
mined not to’’—and upon tév amogtavta—‘‘ who had fallen
away from—apostatized from,’'—which those terms seem to
require. The conduct of Mark in returning to Jerusalem from
Pamphylia (Acts xiii. 13) was clearly regarded as reprehens-
ible by Paul, apparently as an example of fickleness in the
service of Christ. It is not strange that Barnabas, Mark’s
cousin (Col. iv. 10) should have been more lenient in his
judgment of his conduct. It is certain that this difference
of opinion regarding Mark did not lead to any estrangement
of Paul and Mark, for in his imprisonment the apostle speaks
of Mark as a trusted fellow-worker (Col. iv. 10; 2 Tim. iv.
11).—G. B.S.

5 The method of the derangement here is, that there being
five portions, these were taken alternately, in the order 1, 3, 5,
and then 2, 4.

® So Edd. and all our Mss. aréotn an’ avtav o BapvaBas:
which may mean, ‘‘ And so the same may now be said of
Barnabas, viz. that he departed (from Paul), etc. The same
word aréoty is applied to Barnabas below, p. 216.

7 gvyxaréBnoav adA7jAots oUTw meiCov ayaboy elvat TO XwpLo-
Ojvac. The meaning is below. that they parted xatTa
gcuveowv. Mod. text “‘aovyxar. add, idecv, The point required


as


214
the matter took a pretext from this What
then? did they withdraw in enmity? God


forbid! Infact you see after this Barnabas
receiving many encomiums from Paul in the
Epistles. There was “sharp contention,” it
says, not enmity nor quarrelling. The con-
tention availed so far as to part them. “ And
Barnabas took Mark,” etc. And with rea-
son: for what each supposed to be profitabie,
he did not forego! thereafter, because of the
fellowship with the other. Nay, it seems to
me that the parting took place advisedly
(kara civeow), and that they said one to another,
*“ As I wish not, and thou wishest, therefore,
that we may not fight, let us distribute the
places.” So that in fact they did this, al-
together yielding each to the other: for Bar-
nabas wished Paul’s plan to stand, therefore
withdrew; on the other hand, Paul wished the
other’s plan to stand, therefore he withdrew.
Would to God we too made such separations,
as to go forth for preaching. A wonderful
man this is; and exceedingly great! To
Mark this contest was exceedingly beneficial.
For the awe inspired by Paul converted him,
while the kindness of Barnabas caused that
he was not left behind: so that they contend
indeed, but the gain comes to one and the
same end. For indeed, seeing Paul choosing
to leave him, he would be exceedingly awed,
and would condemn himself, and seeing Bar-
nabas so taking his part, he would love him
exceedingly : and so the disciple was corrected
by the contention of the teachers: so far was
he from being offended thereby. For if in-
deed they did this with a view to their own
honor, he might well be offended: but if for
his salvation, and they contend for one and
the same object, to show that he who honored
him * * * had well determined,? what is
there amiss (arorov) in it?

(e) “ But Paul,” it says, “departed, having
chosen Silas, and being commended to the
grace of God.” What is this? They prayed
it says: they besought God. See on all occa-
sions how the prayer of the brethren can do
great things. And now he journeyed by land,


>
wishing even by his journeying to benefit


is to see that,’’ etc. Then, Ovrw wp. a. YEYovE TO Xwp. “ Thus
their being parted became a greater good,’ etc.—Kai mpodaouy
€k TOVTOV TO Tpayua EAaBe, i. e. ‘* They saw that it was best to
part, viz.: that so the word would be more extensively
presence, and this difference gave a pretext for so doing.”
de means that the contention was oixovouia (see the Recap.),
the object being, partly this which is here mentioned, partly a
lesson to Mark.

* Edd. and Mss. ov mpooyxaro, against the sense of the pas-
sage, whence (Ecum. omits the negative, not much improving
it. The Catena has preserved the true reading, ov mpo7xato.
See instances of confusion the other way in Mr. Field’s Index
to Hom. in Matt. s. v. mpocinue.

2 wate SetEar Tov Tinyoavta avTov Kad@s BeBovAevmevov. The
sense requires Tov Tim. avTov Kal Tov wy TLLHoaVTa KaAa@s Bef. Or
the like: *‘ that both Barnabas and Paul had taken the course
which was for his (Mark's) own good,”


THE WORKS OF ST. CHRY¥YSOstGz


|


[HomMILy XXXIV.


those who saw (rote dpavrac) him. For when
indeed they were in haste they sailed, but now
notso. (c) “And he went through Syria and
Cilicia, confirming the Churches. Then came
he to Derbe and Lystra.” (v. 41.) Mark the
wisdom of Paul: he does not go to other cities
before he has visited them which had re-
ceived the Word. For it is folly to run at
random. ‘This let us also do: let us teach the
first in the first place, that these may not be-
come an hindrance to them that are to come
after.

‘And, behold a certain disciple was there,
named Timotheus, the son of a certain wo-
man, which was a Jewess, and believed; but
his father was a Greek: which was well re-
ported of by the brethren that were at Lystra
and Iconium. Him would Paul have to go
forth with him; and took and circumcised
him because of the Jews which were in those
quarters ; for they knew all that his father was
a Greek.” (ch. xvi. 1-3.) It is indeed amaz-
ing, the wisdom of Paul! He that has had so
many battles about circumcision, he that
moved all things to this end, and did not give
over until he had carried his point, now that
the decree is made sure, circumcises the dis-
ciple. He not only does not forbid others,
but himself does this thing. (4) “Him,” it
says, “he would have to go forth with him.”
And the wonder is this, that he even took him
unto him. ‘“ Because of the Jews,” it says,
‘‘which were in those parts:” for they would
not endure to hear the word from one uncir-
cumcised. (a) Nothing could be wiser. So
that in all things he looked to what was profit-
able: he did nothing upon his own preference
(xpoagper). (¢) And what (then)? Mark the
success: he circumcised, that he might take
away circumcision: for he preached the de-
crees of the Apostles. ‘And as they went
through the cities, they delivered them the de-
crees for to keep, that were ordained of the
Apostles and elders which were at Jerusalem.
And so were the Churches established in the
faith, and increased in number daily.” (v. 4,
5.) Dost thou mark fighting, and by fighting,
edification? Not warred upon by others, but
themselves doing contrary things, so they edi-
fied the Church! They introduced a decree
not to circumcise, and he circumcises! ‘“ And
so were the Churches,” it says, “ established
in the faith,” and in multitude: “ increased,”
it says, “in number daily.” Then he does
not continue to tarry with these, as having
come to visit them: but how? he goes fur-


3 ore Kai eryyeto avtov. The meaning seems to be, (but the
confusion into which the text has fallen, leaves it very uncer-
tain), ‘* The wonder is that he took Timothy, being as he was
the son of a heathen father, and uncircumcised.”


HomMILy XXXIV.]


ity AGIs OF THE “-APOSPLES:


215


ther. ‘Now when they had gone throughout
Phrygia and the region of Galatia, and were
forbidden of the Holy Ghost to preach the
word in Asia,” (v. 6.) having left Phrygia
and Galatia, they hastened into the interior.
For, it says, “ After they were come to Mysia,
they assayed to go into Bithynia: but the
Spirit suffered them not.” (v. 7.) Wherefore
they were forbidden, he does not say, but that
they were “forbidden,” he does say, teaching
us to obey and not ask questions, and showing
that they did many things as men. “And the
Spirit,” it says, “suffered them not: but hav-
ing passed by Mysia they came down to
Troas.” (v. 8.) ‘And a vision appeared to
Paul in the night; There stood a man of
Macedonia, and prayed him, saying, Come
over into Macedonia, and help us.” (v. 9.)
Why a vision, and not the Holy Ghost? be-
cause He forbade the other. He would even
in this way draw them over: since to the
saints also He appeared in a dream, and in
the beginning (Paul) himself saw a vision, “ a
man coming in and laying his hands upon
him.” (ch. ix. 12.) In? this manner also
Christ appears to him, saying, ‘“ Thou must
stand before Czesar.” Then for this reason
also He draws him thither, that the preaching
may be extended. This is why he was for-
bidden to tarry long in the other cities, Christ
urging him on. For these were to enjoy the
benefit of John for a long time, and perhaps
did not extremely need him (Paul), but thither
he behooved to go. And now he crosses over
and goes forth. “And after he had seen
the vision, immediately we endeavored to go
into Macedonia, assuredly gathering that the
Lord had called us for to preach the Gospel
unto them.” (v. 10.) Then the writer men-
tions also the places, as relating a history, and
showing where he made a stay (namely), in
the greater cities, but passed by the rest.
-‘ Therefore loosing from Troas, we came with
a straight course to Samothracia, and the next
day to Neapolis; and from thence to Philippi,
which is the chief city of that part of Macedo-
nia, and a colony.” (v. 11,12.) It is a high
distinction for a city, the being a colony.
“‘And in this city we were tarrying certain
days.” But let us look over again what has
been said.


(Recapitulation.) ‘And after some days,


1 Ore éxetvo éxwAvoev. Mod. text cat wn tro Iv. ro A.
€xeAevoev; But see the Recap. where the question is explained,
viz., How is it that when they were to be kept from preach-
ing, the Holy Ghost spoke to them, but here a vision, and that
in a dream, is all ?

2 In the Mss. this sentence is placed before ‘‘ And now he
<rosses over,” etc. v. 10o.—‘In this manner: ”’ 1. e. in a night-
vision or dream: the allusion is to xxiii. rr, ‘* the Lord stood
by him,’’ confused with xxvii. 23, ‘‘the Angel of the Lord.’


Paul said,”.-etc. (ch. xv. 36.) He put to
Barnabas a necessity for their going abroad,
saying ‘‘ Let us visit the cities in which we
preached the word.” “But Paul begged,”
etc. (v. 38.) And yet no need for him to
beg, who had to make an accusation presently.
This*® happens even in the case where God
and men are the parties: the man requests,
God is wroth. For. instance, when He saith,
“Tf her father had spit in her face ” (Num. xii.
14): and again, “Let me alone, and in Mine
anger I will blot out this people.” (Ex. xxxii.
2.) And Samuel when he mourns for Saul.
(1 Sam. xv. 35.) For by both, great good is
done. ‘Thus also here: the one is wroth, the
other not so. The same happens also in mat-
ters where we are concerned. And the sharp
contention with good reason, that Mark may
receive a lesson, and the affair may not seem
mere stage-playing. For it is not to be
thought that he* who bids, ‘“ Let not the sun
go down upon your wrath,” (Eph. iv. 26)
would have been wroth because of such a
matter as this: nor that he who on all occa-
sions gave way would not have given way
here, he who so greatly loved Paul that before
this he sought him in Tarsus, and brought
him to the Apostles, and undertook the alms
in common with him, and in common the
business relating to the decree, But they
take themselves so as to instruct and make
perfect by their separation them that need the
teaching which was to come from them. And
he rebukes others indeed, but bids do good to
all men. As in fact he does elsewhere, say-
ing, “ But ye, be not weary in well-doing.”


3 i.e. just displeasure on the one side; lenity, compassion,
intercession, etc. on the other. Thus God is wroth with
Miriam, Moses pleads for her, and so in the other cases.

4 Mod. text omits this clause relating to St. Paul, as in the
old text it is incomplete, the remainder of the sentence
(‘‘ would not have been wroth,” etc.) having been transposed
to the end of what relates to Barnabas, after ‘‘ relating to the
decree.’’—Below, adda AapBavovow éavtovs, may perhaps be
éavTots, SC. Tovs Seomevous below, i. e. choose their spheres of
action where each was most needed. But the context rather
seems to require this sense: ‘ There 1s no animosity between
them, but they take their parts in this dispute for the good of
those who, as Mark, need the instruction which was to be
derived from the gentleness of Barnabas, and the severity of
Paul's character. Paul indeed is stern, but his object is to do
good : as 2 Thess. iii. 143, where (comp. the context) rebuking,
and enjoining severity to be shown to the disorderly, he says,
‘“ And be not weary in well-doing.’’ We have changed the
order of the two sentences, ‘“‘ And he rebukes,”’ etc. and, ‘* As
he does elsewhere,’’ etc.—TovrTo wat €v TH ouvnbeta rocodmer,
i.e. this putting on a show of anger, to do good to one whom
we would correct: or perhaps, of altercation, as when, for
instance, father and mother take opposite parts, the one for
punishing, the other for sparing an erring child—ovvay-
avaxtyoar Tw IlavAw. Ben. txdignati esse in Paulum. But
whether it means this, or ‘‘to have had indignation together
with Paul,” there is nothing to show: nor is it clear what is
the reference of the following sentences ; unless it be, But he
would not allow these persons who were indignant along
with, or at, him, to retain this feeling: he takes them apart,
makes them see the thing inits right light, and so departs in
peace, ‘‘being commended by the brethren to the grace of
God,’’ with the prayers of concord and charity. Great is the
power of such prayer. (See the former comment on this verse,
p. 214.)—Kavu tmép meyadou agtois, xav avagios ys. Perhaps it
should be 7, ‘‘ Whether it be on behalf of a great man (as
Paul), or whether the person be unworthy,”’ etc.


216


THE .WORKS:.OF ST. 'CHEVSOS?TORe


[Homity XXXIV.


(2 Thess. iii. 13.) This we also do in our
common practice. Here it seems to me that
others also were alike displeased with Paul.
And thereupon taking them also apart, he
does all, and exhorts and admonishes. Much
can concord do, much can charity. Though
it be for a great matter thou askest; though
thou be unworthy, thou shalt be heard for thy
purpose of heart : fear not. ae
“He went,” it says, “through ” thé cities
“And, behold, there was a disciple, by
name Timothy, who had a good report of the
brethren which were in Lystra and Iconium.”
(v. 41; xvi. 1.) Great was the grace of Timo-
thy. When Barnabas departed (azéory), he
finds another, equivalent to him. Of him he
saith, “ Remembering thy tears and thy un-
feigned faith, which dwelt first in thy grand-
mother Lois, and in thy mother Eunice.”
(2 Tim. i, 5.) His father continued to be a
Gentile,! and therefore it was that (Timothy)
was not circumcised. (a) Observe the Law
already broken. Or if not so, I suppose he
was born after the preaching of the Gospel :
but this is perhaps not so. (¢) He was
about to make hima bishop, and it was not
meet that he should be uncircumcised. (e)
And this was nota small matter, seeing it
offended after so long a time :* (4) “ for from
a child,’ he says, “ thou hast known the
Holy Scriptures.” (ib. iii, 15.) (d) “And
as they went through the cities, they delivered
them the decrees for to keep.” (v. 4.) For
until then, there was no_ need for the Gentiles
to keep any such. The beginning of the
abrogation was the Gentiles’ not keeping
these things, and being none the worse for it:
nor having any inferiority in respect of faith :
anon, of their own will they abandoned the
Law. Ga) Since therefore he was about to
preach, that he might not smite the Jews a


1 So in Gen. Serm. ix. text iv. 695. D. Chrys. infers from this
passage with 2 Tim. i. 5, that the father euewev €v ty ageBeta
Kai ov weTeBaddAeto, Hom.i. in 2 Tin. p. 660, E. *‘‘ Because of
his father who was a Gentile, and because of the Jews he took
and circumcised him. Do you mark how the Law began to be
dissolved, in the taking place of these mixed marriages? '’ (so
here opa 75yn Tov vouwov Avowevov.) In the Mss. al] this is ex-
tremely confused by transpositions (the method; 1, 4: 2, 5:
3, 6) and misplacing of the porous of sacred text (where these
are given). Thus here, ‘‘ And therefore because of the Jews
which were in those parts he circumcised him. Ov« jv
€umepttomos.’’—Mod. text ‘‘ thy mother, Eunice. .And he took
and circumcised him. And wherefore, he himself goes on to
say: Because of the Jews, etc. For this reason then he is
circumcised. Or also because of his father : for he continued
to be a Greek. So then he was not circumcised. Observe the
Law already broken. But some think he was born,’ etc. He
is commenting on the fact, that Timothy was uncircumcised :
viz., because his father was a heathen. Here then was a
devout man, who from a child had known the Holy Scriptures,
and yet continued uncircumcised. So that in these mixed
marriages we see the Law already broken, independently of
the Gospel. It may be indeed that he was born after the con-
version of his mother to the faith, and therefore she was not
anxious to circumcise him. But this (he adds) is not likely.

2 For Timothy from a child had been brought up religiously
as a Jew, yet now it was an offence that he should continue
uncircumcised.


double blow, he circumcised Timothy. And
yet he was but half (a Jew by birth),? his
father being a Greek: but yet, because that
was a great point carried in the cause of the
Gentiles, he did not care for this: for the
Word must needs be disseminated : therefore
also he with his own hands circumcised him.*
‘* And so were the churches established in
the faith.’ Do you mark here also how
from going counter (to his own object) a
great good results? ‘“ And increased in num-
ber daily.” (v. 5.) Do you observe, that the
circumcising not only did no harm, but was
even of the greatest service? “ And a vision
appeared unto Paul in the night.” (v. 9.)
Not now by Angels, as to Philip, as to Cornel-
lius, but how? By a vision it is now shown
to him: in more human sort, not now as
before (i. e., v. 6, 7) in more divine manner.
For where the compliance is more easy, it is
done in more human sort; but where great
force was needed, there in more divine, For
since he was but urged to preach, to this end it
is Shown him in a dream: but to forbear preach-
ing, he could not readily endure: to this end
the Holy Ghost reveals it to him. Thus also
it was then with Peter, “ Arise, go down.”
(ch. x. 20.) For of course the Holy Spirit did
not work what was otherwise easy: but (here)
even a dream sufficed him. And to Joseph
also, as being readily moved to compliance,
the appearance is in a dream, but to the rest
in waking vision. (Matt. 1. 20; ii. 13, 19.)
Thus to Cornelius, and to Paul himself.
‘And lo, aman of Macedonia,” etc. and not
simply enjoining, but ‘ beseeching,” and
from the very persons in need of (spiritual)
cure, | (ch, x. 34 ix. 13;)), (yAssuredlyiaather
ing,” it says, “that the Lord had called us.”
(v. 10), that is, inferring, both from the cir-
cumstance that Paul saw it and none other,
and from the having been “forbidden by the
Spirit,” and from their being on the borders ;
from all these they gathered. ‘“‘ Therefore
loosing from Troas, we came with a straight
course,” etc. (v. 11.) That is, even the voy-


3 Therefore he might have been exempt by the Apostles’
decree. St. Paul, however, having carried his point in secur-
ing the immunity of the Gentile converts, did not care to
insist upon this in behalf of Timothy.

* Our author correctly apprehends the ground on which
Paul circumcised Timothy—an_ act which has often been
thought to be inconsistent with his steadfast resistance to the
imposition of the Jewish law. It is noticeable that he did not
allow Titus to be circumcised (Gal. ii. 3) when the Jewish-
Christian faction desired it. The two cases are materially
different in the following particulars : (1) Titus was a Gentile ;
Timothy was born of a Jewish mother. (2) The circumcision
of Titus was demanded by the Judaizers; that of Timothy
was performed for prudential reasons asa concession to un-
believing Jews in order that Paul might the better win them
to Christ. (3) The question of circumcising Titus was a doc-
trinal question which was not the case in the instance before
us. Meyer well says: ‘‘Paul acted according to the princi-
ple of wise and conciliatory accommodation, not out of conces—
sion to the Judaistic dogma of the necessity of circumcision
for obtaining the Messianic salvation.’’—G. B.S.


HoMILy XXXIV.]


THE VACTS) OFTHE APOSTLES.


217


age made this manifest: for there was no tar-
diness. It became the very root of Macedo-
nia It was not always in the way of “ sharp
contention” that the Holy Spirit wrought:
but this so rapid progress (of the Word) was
a token that the thing was more than human.
And yet it is not said that Barnabas was ex-
asperated, but, ‘“‘ Between them there arose a
sharp contention.” (v. 39.) If the one was
not exasperated neither was the other.
Knowing this, let us not merely pick out
(éx2éyouer) these things, but let us learn and be
taught by them: for they were not written
without a purpose. It is a great evil to be
ignorant of the Scriptures: from the things
we ought to get good from, we get evil.
Thus also medicines of healing virtue, often,
from the ignorance of those who use them,
ruin and destroy: and arms which are meant
to protect, are themselves the cause of death,
unless one know howto put them on. But
the reason is, that we seek everything rather
than what is good for ourselves. And in the
case of a house, we seek what is good for it,
and we would not endure to see it decaying
with age, or tottering, or hurt by storms: but
for our soul we make no account: nay, even
should we see its foundations rotting, or the
fabric and the roof, we make no account of it.
Again, if we possess brute creatures, we seek
what is good for them: we call in both horse-
feeders and horse-doctors, and all besides: 2
we attend to their housing, and charge those
who are entrusted with them, that they may
not drive them at random or carelessly, nor
take them out by night at unseasonable hours,
nor sell away their provender; and there are
many laws laid down by us for the good of
the brute creatures: but for that of our soul,
there is no account taken. But why speak I
of brute creatures which are useful to us?
There are many who keep small birds (or
“ sparrows”) ‘which are useful for nothing
except that they simply amuse, and there are
many laws even about them, and nothing is


1A. B. C. Cat. cis avrnv thy pigav tis Maxedovias éyevero
(Cat. éyévovto). Ovx« aei (Cat., ovx av et) kata mapofvcpov
evnpynoe To Iv. 70 "A. The former sentence may possibly
mean, that Philippi became the root of the Churches in Mace-
donia. But it is more probable that the text is mutilated here,
and that Chrys. speaks of the parting of Paul and Barnabas,
as having become the very root or cause of the extension of
the Gospel (into Macedonia and Greece). In the next sen-
tence, the reading of Cat. may perhaps deserve the preference.
‘Not, if (they had parted) in a state of exasperation, would
the Holy Ghost have (thus) wrought.’’-—Mod. text ‘‘ And
besides, even the voyage showed this: for there was no long
_ time ere they arrive at the very root of Macedonia (ev ets
. ... Mapayivovrar). So that the sharp contention is providen-
tially ordered to be for the best. or (otherwise) the Holy
Ghost would not have wrought, Macedonia would not have
received the Word. But this so rapid propreser etc.

2 kai mavta kadovmev. Mod. text substitutes the proverbial
expression, kat mavtTa caAwy xivovmev, ‘we put every rope in
motion,’ which is hardly suitable here, and not at all neces-
sary.
every one else who can help us.”


‘““We call to our aid horse-feeders, and doctors, and |


neglected or without order, and we take care
for everything rather than for our own selves.
Thus we make our selves more worthless than
all. And if indeed a person abusively call
us “ dog,” we are annoyed: but while we are
opprobrious to ourselves, not in word, but in
deed, and do not even bestow as much care
on our soul as on dogs, we think it no great
harm. Do you see how all is full of dark-
ness? How many are careful about their
dogs, that they may not be filled with more
than the proper food, that so they may be
keen and fit for hunting, being set on by
famine and hunger: but for themselves they
have no care to avoid luxury: and the brute
creatures indeed they teach to exercise philos-
ophy, while they let themselves sink down
into the savageness of the brutes. The thing
is ariddle. ‘“‘ And where are your philosophic
brutes?” There are such; or, say, do you
not take it to be philosophy, when a dog
gnawed with hunger, after having hunted and
caught his prey, abstains from the food ; and
though he sees his meal ready before him,
and with hunger urging him on, yet waits for
his master? Be ashamed of yourselves :
teach your bellies to be as philosophic. You
have no excuse. When you have been able
to implant such philosophic selfcommand in
an irrational nature, which neither speaks nor
hears reason, shall you not much more be
able to implant it in yourself? For that it
is the effect of man’s care, not of nature is
plain : since otherwise all dogs ought to have
this habit. Do you then become as dogs.
For it is you that compel me to fetch my
examples thence: for indeed they should be
drawn from heavenly things; but since if
I speak of those, you say, “ Those are (too)
great,” therefore I speak nothing of heavenly
things: again, if I speak of Paul, you say,
“ He was an Apostle:” therefore neither do I
mention Paul: if again I speak of a man, you
say, ‘That person could do it:” therefore I
do not mention a man even, but a brute
creature; a creature too, that has not this
habit by nature, lest you should say that it
effected this by nature, and not (which is the
fact) from choice: and what is wonderful,
choice not self-acquired, but (the result of) your
care. Thecreature does not give a thought
to the fatigue, the wear and tear it has under-
gone in running down the prey, not a thought
to this, that by its own proper toil it has made
the capture: but casting away all these
regards, it observes the command of its mas-
ter, and shows itself superior to the cravings
of appetite. ‘‘ True; because it looks to be
praised, it looks to get a greater meal.” Say
then to yourself, that the dog through hope of


218 THE. WORKS OF
future pleasure, despises that which is pres-
ent: while you do not choose for hope of
future good things to despise those which are
present; but he indeed knows, that, if he
tastes of that food at the wrong time and
against his master’s will, he will both be
deprived of that, and not eet even that which
was apportioned to him, but receive blows
instead of food: whereas you cannot even
perceive this, and that which he has learnt by
dint of custom, you do not succeed in acquir-


ing even from reason. Let us imitate the
dogs. The same thing hawks also and eagles


are said to do: what the dogs do with regard
to hares! and deer, the same do those with
regard to birds; and these too act from a
philosophy learnt from men. These facts are
enough to condemn us, these enough to con-
vict us. To mention another thing :—they
that are skilled in breaking horses, shall take
them, wild, fierce, kicking, biting, and in
a short time so discipline them, that though
the teacher be not there, it is a luxury to ride
them, their paces are so thoroughly well-
ordered: but the paces of the soul may be
all disordered, and none cares for it: it
bounds, and kicks, and its rider? is dragged
along the ground like a child, and makes a
most disgraceful figure, and yet no one puts
curbs on her, and leg-ties, and bits, nor mounts
upon her the skilful rider—Christ, I mean.
And therefore it is that all is turned upside
down. For when you both teach dogs to
master the craving of the belly, and tame
the fury in a lion, and the unruliness of
horses, and teach the birds to speak plainly,
how inconsistent must it not be—to implant
achievements of reason in natures that are
without reason, and to import the passions
of creatures without reason into natures
endowed with reason? There is no excuse
for us, none. All who have succeeded (in
mastering their passions) will accuse us, both
believers and unbelievers: for even unbeliev-
ers have so succeeded ; yea, and wild beasts,
and dogs, not men only: and we shall accuse
our own selves, since we succeed, when we
will, but when we are slothful, we are dragged
away. For indeed many even of those who
live a very wicked life, have oftentimes
changed themselves when they wished. But
the cause is, as I said, that we go about seek-
ing for what is good for other things, not
what is good for ourselves. If you build a
splendid house, you know what is good for the
house, not what is good for youself: if you


1 Our Mss. have aAdywr-
adopt.

* kal ovpetat yamat katamep madiov, Kat aaxnmover pupia-
this cannot be meant for the horse, but for the rider. Perhaps
«at ovdels, Kav OVpeTaL K T. A,


Savile (from N.?) Aay@v, which we


ST... CHERYSGS1 err [Homiry XXXIV.


take a beautiful garment, you know what is
good for the body, not for yourself: and if
you get a good horse, it is so likewise. None
makes it his mark how his soul shall be beau-
tiful; and yet, when that is beautiful, there is
no need of any of those things: as, if that be
not beautiful, there is no good of them. For
like as in the case of a bride, though there be
chambers hung with tapestry wrought with
gold, though there be choirs of the fairest and
most beautiful women, though there be roses
and garlands, though there be a comely bride-
groom, and the maidservants and female
friends, and everybody about them be hand-
some, yet, if the bride herself be full of
deformity, there is no good of all those; as
on the other hand if she were beautiful,
neither would there be any loss arising from
(the want of) those, nay just the contrary ; for
in the case of an ugly bride, those would
make her look all the uglier, while in the
other case, the beautiful would look all the
more beautiful: just so, the soul, when she is
beautiful, not only needs none of those
adjuncts, but they even cast a shade over her
beauty. For we shall see the philosopher
shine, not so much when in wealth, as in pov-
erty. For in the former case many will
impute it to his riches, that he is not superior —
to riches:* but when he lives with poverty
for his mate, and shines through all, and will
not let himself be compelled to do anything
base, then none claims shares with him in the
crown of philosophy. Let us then make our
soul beauteous, if at least we would fain be
rich. What profit is it, when your mules
indeed are white and plump and in good
condition, but you who are drawn by them
are lean and scurvy and ill-favored? What
is the gain, when your carpets indeed are
soft and beautiful, full of rich embroidery and
art, and your soul goes clad in rags, or even
naked and foul? What the gain, when the


horse indeed has his paces beautifully
ordered, more like dancing than stepping,
while the rider, together with his choral4


train and adorned with more than _ bridal
ornaments, is more crooked than the lame,


3 kat To but Sav. Marg. xat T® PH KPELTTOVA XpHLATwY eivat:
some slight emendation is necessary, but it is not clear whether
it should be, cat un Tt#.... ‘Sand not to his being above
wealth:” i. e. good in spite of his riches: or «at 7 ree
with some verb supplied, i. e. ‘‘and make ita reproach to him
that (though a good man) he is not above riches,” seeing he
does not abandon his wealth.—Mod. text cat to py evden
XPNKaTwY elvac

4 MaAAov ETA THS Topelas Kal KOT Hw KEKOOMNMEVOS vue
6 8 émuxad. «x. tT. A. The passage is corrupt: perhaps, as in the
Translation, it should be paddAov 7 vupdixw, but this as a
description of the horse is evidently out of place. For zop.,
we read Xopetas as in mod. text (which has xat meta THs Xopetas
KOTLW KEK, 7 vupdix@.) Then transposing this, we read o de
émxad., wera THS xXop., Kal.—Below, B. C. av oxoAtagn. A. and
mod. text doxwdcagn—alluding to the game of leaping on
greased bladders or skins, wzctos salire per utres ; which does
not suit Tov ywdwr,


HomILy XXXV.]


and has no more command over hands and
feet than drunkards and madmen? Tell me
now, if some one were to give you a beautiful
horse, and to distort your body, what would
be the profit?) Now you have your soul dis-
torted, and care you not forit? Let us at
length, I beseech you, have a care for our
own selves. Do not let us make our own
selves more worthless than all beside. If any-
one insult us with words, we are annoyed and


“And on the sabbath we went out of the city by a
river side, where prayer was wont (Chrys. “ was
thought likely”) to be made; and we sat down, and
spake unto the women which resorted thither.
And a certain woman named Lydia, a seller of
purple, of the city of Thyatira, which worshipped
God, heard us: whose heart the Lord opened,
that she attended unto the things which were
spoken of Paul.”


SEE again Paul judaizing. “ Where’ it was
thought,” it says, both from the time and
from the place, “that prayer would be.—Out
of the city, by a river side:” for it is not to
be supposed that they prayed only where
there was a synagogue; they also prayed out
of synagogue, but then for this purpose they
set apart, as it were, a certain place, because
as Jews they were more corporeal—and, ‘“ on
the sabbath-day,” when it was likely that a
multitude would come together.* “And we
sat down, and spake to the women which
resorted thither.’ Mark again the freedom
from all pride. ‘ And acertain woman:’’ a
woman and she of low condition, from her
trade too: but mark (in her) a woman of
elevated mind (g:2éco¢0v), In the first place,
the fact of God’s calling her bears testimony
to her: “And when she was baptized,” it


1 Mss. and Edd. place od év. mpocevyy elvar after amd tov
torov, so that it reads, ‘* See Paul again judaizing both from
the time and from the place.’’ Chrys. here explains the
€vou.igero (in the sense ‘‘ was thought ’’): viz. St. Paul expected
to find a congregation assembled for prayer, both because the
place was set apart for that purpose, and because it was the
sabbath.

* Two variations of text occur in v. 13, which materially
affect the meaning. Modern critics read mvAns St. moAews—
‘they went outside the gate ’’ and évouigouev instead of évout¢-
ero —*‘ where we supposed there was a place of prayer.’’ (So
B.C. x. R.V., Tischendorf, Westcott and Hort.) If the read-
ing €voutcero is retained, it more probably means; ‘‘ where a
place of prayer was wont to be”’ rather than (as Chrys.)
‘“*where, it was thought, that prayer would be.’’ The
ampooevxac were places of prayer situated often in the open air,
and chosen in the neighborhood of streams on account of the
custom of washing the hands before prayer. They served the
purposes of synagogues in places where they did not exist.—


Hs ._o..


THEO AGTS OF THE APOSTLES.


219


vexed: but insulting ourselves as we do by
our deeds, we do not give a thought to it.
Let us, though late, come at last to our
senses, that we may be enabled by having
much care for our soul, and laying hold upon
virtue, to obtain eternal good things, through
the grace and mercy of our Lord Jesus Christ,
with Whom to the Father, together with the
Holy Spirit, be glory, might, honor, now and
evermore, world without end. Amen.


Fl © Mel TSX ii MOV:


ACTS XVI. 13,


14.


says, “she and her household ’”’—mark how he
persuaded all of them—‘‘she besought us,
saying, If ye have judged me to be faithful to
the Lord, come into my house, and abide
there. And she constrained us?” (v. 15):
then look at her wisdom, how she importunes
(dvowrei), the Apostles how full of humility her
words are, how full of wisdom. “If ye have
judged me faithful,” she says. Nothing could
be more persuasive. Who would not have
been softened by these words? She did not
request (or, “claim”’) did not entreat simply :
but she left them to decide, and (yet) exceed-
ingly forced them: “ And she constrained us,”’
it says, by those words. And again in a
different way: for see how she straightway
bears fruit, and accounts it a great gain. “If
ye have judged me,” that is, That ye did
judge me is manifest, by your delivering to
me such (holy) mysteries (i. e. sacraments,
see p. 225, note *): and she did not dare to
invite them before this. But why was there
any unwillingness on the part of Paul and
those with them, that they should need to be
constrained? It was either by way of calling
her to greater earnestness of desire, or be-
cause Christ had said, ‘‘ Enquire who is wor-
thy,-and there abide.” (Luke x. 8.) (It was
not that they were unwilling), but they did it
for a purpose.2—‘‘ And it came to pass,’ it
says, “‘as we went to prayer, a certain damsel
possessed with a spirit of divination met us,t


2 GAN’ avtovs abjnKe Kuplous elvat, kat. Mod. text, ov« adixe
kK. €,, aAAa Kal.

3 "AdAa bi oikovoulav eroiovy, B. Cat. * their seeming reluc-
tance was ‘economy.’”’ A. C., "Oda di otx. em. Mod. text,
"Qore ravta i oix. er.

+ Most critical editions read in v. 16. mv¥@wva st. mvU@wvos
(following A. B.C. &). In this case the word is in apposition
with mvevaa and has the force of an adjective, ‘“‘ having a
Pythonic spirit,’ in allusion to the serpent which was said to
have guarded Delphi and to have been slain by Apollo.
From this feat the God was called Pythius, and in his temple
the priestess was called ‘tthe Pythian,’’ as being inspired by
Apollo. Hence the term became equivalent to a éatnovov


220 THE WORKS ‘OF


which brought her masters much gain by
soothsaying: the same followed Paul and us,
and cried, saying, These men are the servants
of the most high God, which show unto us the
way of salvation.” (v. 16, 17.) What may
be the reason that both the demon spoke
these words, and Paul forbade him? Both
the one acted maliciously, and the other
wisely: the demon wished in fact to make
himself credible.’ For if Paul had admitted
his testimony, he would have deceived many
of the believers, as being received by him:
therefore he endures to speak what made
against himself, that he may establish what
made for himself: and so the demon himself
uses accommodation (cvyxarafacer) In order to
destruction. At first then, Paul would not
admit it, but scorned it, not wishing to cast
himself all at once upon miracles; but when
it continued to do this, and pointed to their
work (kai 70 épyov édeixvy) ‘‘ who preach unto us
the way of salvation,” then he commanded it
to.,,come) out: «For (it: says, “ Panlivbeing
grieved, turned and said to the spirit, I com-
mand thee in the name of Jesus Christ to
come out of her. And he came out the same
hour. (a) 7 And when her masters saw that
the hope of their gains was gone, they caught
Pauleand ‘Silas.’ ) (vi 18; /x9.).(@) sotthen
Paul did all, both miracles and teaching, but
of the dangers Silas also is partaker. And
why says it, “ But Paul being grieved?” It
means, he saw through the malice of the
demon, as he saith, “‘ For we are not ignorant
of his deyices.”’ (2 Cor. ii. 11.) (6) “ And when
her masters saw that the hope of their gains
was gone.” Everywhere money the cause
of evils. O that heathen cruelty ! ! they wished
the girl to be still a demoniac, that they might
make money byhem sil hey ‘caught Paul and
Silas,” it says, “and dragged them into the
marketplace unto the rulers, and brought
them unto the magistrates, saying, These
men, being Jews, do exceedingly trouble our
city!” (v. 20): by doing what? Then why
did you not drag ‘them (hither) before this ?
“Being Jews:” “the name was in bad odor.
‘** And teach customs, which are not lawful for


mavtixov. In later times the power of the ventriloquist was
attributed to such a Pythonic spirit (as by Plutarch) and the
LXX. render the word JS by éyyaotpiuvOo0s in accordance
with this view.
power of ventriloquism which the people attributed to a
mvevua TU9wva, The apostle did not share this opinion but
treated the case as one of demoniacal possession.—G. B. S.

1B. and Cat. €BovAeto Aoirov eet reren éavtov (B, avrov)
Troveiv. The other Mss. €SovAeto (€BovAeveto A. C.) yap un a€,
avTov movety » wished to make him (Paul) not credible. That
the former is the true FeAGInE is shown by what follows: wa
OTYOH Ta UTEp EavTOD . , to gain credit with the believers in
order to deceive fhe ‘aiterwards. In the next clause, we
read with Cat. and Sav. Ta xa@ éavtov, our Mss. éavtovs. and
so the other Edd.

2 The scribe has Araya the parts in the order 1, 3, 5:
See p. 213, note >


2, 4, 6.


ST. ‘CHRYSGSTGiE


Meyer Maintains that this damsel had the |


[HomILy XXXYV.


us to receive, neither to observe, being
Romans.” (v. 21.) They made a charge of
treason of it (cic Kafociwow iyayov). (e) “Why
did they not say, Because they cast out the
demon, they were guilty of impiety against
God? For this was a defeat to them: but
instead of that, they have recourse to a charge
of treason (éri xafociwow) : like the Jews when
they said, “We have no king but Cesar:
whoso maketh himself a king speaketh against
Cesar.” (ohn xix. rayengey (2) “Amc
multitude rose up together against them: and
the magistrates rent off their clothes, and
commanded to beat them.” (v. 22.) O the
irrational conduct! They did not examine,
did not allow them to speak. And yet, such
a miracle having taken place, ye ought to
have worshipped them, ought to have held
them as saviors and benefactors. For if
money was what ye wished, why, having found
so great wealth, did ye not run to it? This
makes you more famous, the having power to
cast out demons than the obeying them. Lo,
even miracles, and yet love of money was
mightier. (f) ‘And when they had laid
many stripes upon them, they cast them into
prison.”—great was their eee
the. jailer to. “keep: them..safely “4@eaee)
‘““ who, having received such a charge, thrust
them into the inner prison, and made their
feet fast: im the stocks.”. (v.24, “Observe.
he also again thrust them into the “inner”
prison: and this too was done providentially,
because ® there was to be a great miracle.*


(Recapitulation.) “Out of the city.” (v. 13.)
The place was convenient for hearing the
word, aloof from troubles and dangers. (6)
“On the sabbath.” As there was no work
going on, they were more attentive to what
was spoken. (@) “And a certain woman,
named Lydia, a seller of purple” (v. 14):
observe how ‘the writer of the history is not
ashamed of the occupations (of the converts ) :
(c) moreover neither was this city of the Phil-
ippilans a great one. Having learnt these
things, let us also be ashamed of no man.
Peter abides with a tanner (ch. ix. 43): (Paul)


| with a woman who was a seller of purple, and


a foreigner. Where is pride? ‘ Whose heart
the Lord opened.” Therefore we need God,


3 Edd. have ’Evecdy yap, and join this sentence with the fol-
lowing. The compiler of the Catena perceived that the Re-
capitulation begins with the next sentence. which he therefore
gives to v. 13, though he repeats it wrongly under v. 24,—
Mod. text, inserts the ’AAA’ iéwuev x. 7. A. before Tvvn, ¢.,
Pappunetal ts:

This is the first recorded instance of the persecution of
Citiciies by the Roman power. Hitherto the persecutions
have proceeded from the Jews and here it is inflicted upon
the Christians because they are considered to be Jews who
were now under special disfavor, paving been shortly before
banished from Rome by Claudius. =G. B.S!


IHomity XXXV.] ADS De 2 On DS OW ee


THE


APOS PLES. 227


to open the heart: but God opens the hearts
that are willing : : for there are hardened hearts
to be seen! “So that she attended to the
things which were spoken of Paul.” The
opening, then, was God’s work, the attending
was hers: so that it was both God’s doing
and man’s. And she was baptized (v. 15),
and receives the Apostles with such earnest-
ness of entreaty; with more than that used by
Abraham. And she speaks of no other token
than that whereby she was saved (Gen. xviii.
3): she says not, “If ye have judged me” a
great, a devout woman; but what? “ faithful
to the Lord:” if to the Lord, much more to
you. “If ye have judged me:” if ye do not
doubt it. And she says not, Abide with me,
but, “Come into my house and abide :” with
great earnestness (she says it). Indeed a
faithful woman!—‘A certain damsel pos-
sessed with a spirit of Python.” (v. 16.)
Say, what is this demon? The god, as they
call him, Python: from the place he is so
called. Do you mark that Apollo also is a
demon? And (the demon) wished to bring
them into temptation: (therefore) to provoke
them, “the same followed Paul and us, and
cried, saying, These men are the servants of
the most high God, which show unto us the
way of salvation,” (v. 17.) O thou accursed,
thou execrable one! if then thou knowest that
it is ‘‘ His way of salvation” that “‘they show,”
why dost thou not come out freely? But just
what Simon wished, when he said, “‘ Give me,
that on whomsoever I lay my hands, he may
receive the Holy Ghost” (ch. viii. 19), the
same did this demon: since he saw them
becoming famous, here also he plays the hyp-
ocrite: by this means he thought to be allowed
to remain in the body, if he should preach the
same things. But if Christ, “receive not
testimony from man,” (John v. 34), meaning
John, much less from a demon. “ Praise is
not comely in the mouth of a sinner” (Ecclus.
xv. 9), much less from a demon. For? that
they preach is not of men, but of the Holy
Ghost. Because they did not act in a ae
of boasting. ‘And Paul being grieved.” etc.
By their clamor and shouting ‘they aneit 5
alarm them (the magistrates) : saying, “ These
men do exceedingly trouble our city.” (v.
18-20.) What sayest thou? Dost thou
believe the demon? Why not here also? He
saith, They are “servants of the most high
God; thou sayest, ‘“Fhey exceedingly
trouble our city:” he saith, ‘‘They show us


1 Here mod. text. ‘‘ But let us look over again what has
been said. ‘A woman, "it says, ‘a seller of purple,’”’ etc.
? Mss. and Edd. 70 yap xypvttew ovk avOpwrwy adda
*Eret ov adagovixas € emrotouv Bowyv TES K. T. A.
emendation. We read ovx« for otv. ‘‘ They did not catch at
praise, least of all from a demon: for they were no braggarts,
knowing that the power to preach was not of men,”’ etc.


IIv.
The passage needs


9


the way of salvation;”’ thou sayest, “They
teach customs ips are not lawful for us to
receive.” (v. 21.) Observe, how they do not
attend even to We demon, but look only to
one thing, their covetousness. But observe
them (Paul and Silas), how they do not an-
swer, nor plead for themselves; (4) ‘For
when,” saith he, “I am weak, then am I
strong. My grace is sufficient for thee, for
My strength is made perfect m weakness”
(2 Cor. xil. 9): so that by reason of their
gentleness also they should be admired. (a)
“And the magistrates,” etc., ‘charging the
jailer to keep them safely OAV Deve that they
may be the means * of a greater miracle. (c)
The stricter the custody, the greater the mir-
acle. It was probably from the wish to cut
short the disturbance, that the magistrates did
these things; because they saw the crowd
urgent, and wished to stay their passion at
the instant, therefore they inflicted the stripes :
at the same time it was their wish to hear the
matter, and that was why they cast them into
prison and g gave charge “to keep them safely.’
And, it says, “he “made them fast in the
stocks” (v. 24), (ro giAov) as we should say,
the zervum (vépSov).

What tears do not these things call for!
(Think) what they suffer, while we (live) in
luxury, we in theatres, we perishing and
drowning (in dissolute living), seeking always
idle amusement, not enduring to suffer pain
for Christ, not even as far as words, not even
as far as talk. These things I beseech you
let us ever call to mind, what things they
suffered, what things they endured, how undis-
mayed they were, how unoffended. They
were doing God’s work, and suffered these
things ! They did not say, Why do we preach
this, "and God does not take our part? But
even this was a benefit to them, even apart?


from the truth, in the thing itself; it made
them more vigorous, stronger, intrepid.
“Tribulation worketh endurance.” (Rom. v.


4.) Then let us not seek loose and dissolute
living. For as in the one case the good is
twofold, that the sufferers are made strong,
and that the rewards are great; so in the
other the evil is twofold, that such are ren-
dered more enervated, and that it is to no


3 iva petCovos Bavuatos aitior yevwyTat. B. Cat. Sav. marg
The other Mss. read iva peigovos agcor Oavu. y., ‘* They forbear
to answer, so as to become worthy of more admiration.’’
Hence this clause has been transposed. We refer it to v. 23
‘¢The magistrates give order for their safe custody, thereby
becoming the means of a greater miracle.”’

4 B.C., Kai xwpis Tis aAnderas, ev QUT@ ™]? mpaypart. A. and
mod. text, cat x. THs Bondelas avTw. To. rp., “even without the
Divine succour, even though that had been withheld, yet their
sufferings were ipso facto a benefit.’’ But this alteration is
not necessary. ‘Even apart from the Truth which they
preached,—irrespectively of the fact that they were preachers
of the Truth—their sufferings were a benefit. Even though
they were deceived, and not preachers of the Truth, they
gained by suffering : it made them strong,” etc.


922
222


THE WORKS OF ‘ST: CHRYSOS1@m


[HomiLty XXXV.


good, but only evil. For nothing can be
more worthless than a man who passes all his
time in idleness and luxury. For the man
untried, as the saying is, is also unapproved ;
unapproved not only in the contests, but also
in everything else. Idleness is a_ useless
thing, and in luxury itself nothing is so un-
suited to the end proposed as the leading a
luxurious life: for it palls with satiety, so
that neither the enjoyment of the viands is so
great, nor the enjoyment of relaxation, but all
becomes vapid, and runs to waste.

Then let us not seek after this. For if we
will consider which has the pleasanter life, he
that is toiled and hardworked, or he that lives
in luxury, we shall find it to be the former.
For in the first place, the bodily senses are
neither clear nor sound, but dull (yaiva:) and
languid ; and when those are not right, even of
health there is plainly no enjoyment. Which
is the useful horse, the pampered or the
exercised ? which the serviceable ship, that
which sails, or that which lies idle? which the
best water, the running or the stagnant?
which the best iron, that which is much used,
or that which does no work? does not the
one shine bright as silver, while the other
becomes all over rusty, useless, and even
losing some of its own substance? The like
happens also to the soul as the consequence
of idleness: a kind of rust spreads over it,
and corrodes both its brightness and every-
thing else. How then shall one rub off this
rust? With the whetstone of tribulations: so
shall one make the soul useful and fit for all
things. Else, how, I ask, will she be able to
cut off the passions, with her edge turned
(avaxAeonc) and bending like lead? How
shall she wound the devil?—And then to
whom can such an one be other than a dis-
gusting spectacle—a man cultivating obesity,
dragging himself along like a seal? I speak
not this of those who are naturally of this
habit, but of those who by luxurious living
have brought their bodies into such a condi-
tion, of those who are naturally of a spare
habit. The sun has risen, has shot forth his
bright beams on all sides, and roused up each
person to his work: the husbandman goes forth
with his spade, the smith with his hammer,
and each artisan with his several instruments,
and you will find each handling his proper
tools ; the woman also takes either her distaff
or her webs: while he, like the swine, imme-
diately at the first dawn goes forth to feed his
belly, seeking how he may provide sumptuous


“


1 As no “secondly” follows this ‘‘ first,’ the scribes have
supplied the seeming deficiency: thus N. (Sav. marg.) mp@tov
LEV OTL TO TM@ma aveTLTHSELOY TpdS TaVTA Kal EKVEVEUPLTMEVOV EGTL*
devtepov d€ ort kai—. Mod. text Ip. wév yap tov rovovTov 70 gana
avuTO EkAvTOV Kal TETAGONKOs: ErELTA Kai—.


fare. And yet it is only for brute beasts to
be feeding from morning to night; and for
them, because their only use is to be
slaughtered. Nay, even of the beasts, those
which carry burdens and admit of being
worked, go forth to their work while it is yet
night. But this man, rising from his bed,
when the (noon-tide) sun has filled the
market-place, and people are tired of their
several works, then this man gets up, stretch-
ing himself out just as if he were indeed
a hog in fattening, having wasted the fairest
part of the day in darkness. Then he sits
there for a long time on his bed, often unable
even to lift himself up from the last evening’s
debauch, and having wasted (still) more time
in this (listlessness), proceeds to adorn him-
self, and issues forth, a spectacle of unseem-
liness, with nothing human about him, but
with all the appearance of a beast with a
human shape: his eyes rheumy from the
effect of wine,” * * * while the miserable
soul, just like the lame, is unable to rise,
bearing about its bulk of flesh, like an
elephant. <Then' he comes. — and, “sits; in
(various) places, and says and does such
things, that it were better for him to be still
sleeping than to be awake. If it chance that
evil tidings be announced, he shows himself -
weaker than any girl; if good, more silly than
any child; on his face there is a perpetual
yawn. Heis a mark for all that would do
harm, if not for all men, at least for all evil
passions; and wrath easily excites such a
man, and lust, and envy, and all other
passions. All flatter him, all pay court to
him, rendering his soul weaker than it is
already: and each day he goes on and on,
adding to his disease. If he chance to fall
into any difficulty of business, he becomes dust
and ashes,* and his silken garments are of
no help to him. We have not said all this
without a purpose, but to teach you, that none
of you should live idly and at random. For
idleness and luxury are not conducive to work,
to good reputation, to enjoyment.* For who
will not condemn such a man? Family,
friends, kinsfolk (will say), He is indeed a
very encumbrance of the ground. Such a
man as this has come into the world to no
purpose: or rather, not to no purpose, but to
ill purpose against his own person, to his own
ruin, and to the hurt of others. But that this
is more pleasant—let us look to this; for this
is the question. Well then, what can be less


2 Mod. text, ‘‘his eyes watery, his mouth smelling of wine.”
It is evident that Chrys. is very imperfectly reported here.

3 réppa Kat Kkovis y(verat. Unless there be an hiatus here, the
meaning is, he has no more solidity in him than so much ashes
and dust.

4 Mod. text, mpos Sdéav povov, mpos ynoovny: ‘‘ but only to
vainglory, to pleasure.”


HoMILy XXXVI.]


Tee Aors,; OF. THE APOSTLES,


223


pleasant than (the condition of) a man who
has nothing to do; what more wretched and
miserable? Is it not worse than all the fetters
in the world, to be always gaping and yawn-
ing, as one sits in the market-place, look-
ing at the passers by? For the soul, as its
nature is to be always on the move, cannot
endure to be at rest. God has made it a
creature of action: to work is of its very
nature ; to be idle is against its nature. For
let us not judge of these things from those
who are diseased, but let us put the thing itself
to the proof of fact. Nothing is more hurt-
ful than leisure, and having nothing to do: in-
deed therefore hath God laid on us a necessity
of working: for idleness hurts everything.
Even to the members of the body, inaction is
a mischief. Both eye, if it perform not its
work, and mouth, and belly, and every mem-
ber that one could mention, falls into the


HOMILY


worst state of disease: but none so much as
the soul. But as inaction is an evil, so is
activity in things that ought to be let alone.
For just as it is with the teeth, if one eats not,
one receives hurt to them, and if one eats
things unfitting, it jars them, and sets them on
edge :} so it is here; both if the soul be inac-
tive, and if inactive in wrong things, it loses its
proper force. ‘Then let us eschew both alike ;
both inaction, and the activity which is worse
than inaction. And what may that be? Covet-
ousness,* anger, envyings, and the other
passions. As regards these, let us make it
our object to be inactive, in order that we may
obtain the good things promised to us, through
the grace and mercy of our Lord Jesus Christ,
with Whom to the Father, together with the
Holy Spirit, be glory, might, honor, now
and ever, world without end. Amen.


XK AW I.


ACTS eXVA. 25; 26:


** And at midnight Paul and Silas prayed, and sang
praises unto God: and the prisoners heard them.
And suddenly there was a great earthquake, so
that the foundations of the prison were shaken,
and immediately all the doors were opened, and
every one’s bands were loosed.”


Wuat could equal these souls? These
men had been scourged, had received many
stripes, they had been misused, were in peril
of their lives, were thrust into the inner
prison, and set fast in the stocks: and for all
this they did not suffer themselves to sleep,
but kept vigil all the night. Do you mark
what a blessing tribulation is? But we, in®
our soft beds, with none to be afraid of,
pass the whole night in sleep. But belike
this is why they kept vigil, because they
were in this condition. Not the tyranny
of sleep could overpower them, not the
smart of pain could bow them, not the fear
of evil cast them into helpless dejection :
no, these were the very things that made
them wakeful; and they were even filled
with exceeding delight. ‘At midnight,”
it says, ‘‘ and the prisoners listened to them :”


‘had been fled.”


it was so strange and surprising! ‘ And
suddenly there was a great earthquake, so
that the foundations of the prison were |
shaken, and immediately all the doors were |
opened, and every one’s bands were loosed.
And the keeper of the prison awaking out |


|of his sleep, and seeing the prison doors


open, drew out his sword, and would have
killed himself, supposing that the prisoners
(v. 27.) There was an
earthquake, that the keeper should be roused
from sleep, and the doors flew open, that
he should wonder at what had happened: but
these things the prisoners saw not: otherwise
they would all have fled: * but the keeper
of the prison was about to slay himself,
thinking the prisoners were escaped. ‘“ But
Paul cried with a loud voice, saying, Do
thyself no harm: for we are all here.” (v.
28.) (6) “Then he called for lights, and
sprang in, and came trembling, and fell
down before Paul and Silas; and brought
them out, and said, Sirs, what must I do


1 ovet avtous Bpvxew kai wmodiay (r. Ouwéiav), In Jer. xxxi.
(Gr. xxxviii.) 29, the phrase is od0vtes tov Téxvwv yuwdiagay and
so Hippocrat. uses the verb. aiuwéitav, But as Ed. Par. Ben. 2,
remarks, the passage of Jer. is sometimes cited with wpwhiacav;
Synops. Athanas. t. ii. 167. /stdor. Pelus. iv. Ep. 4.

2 Here, Edd. before Par. Ben. 2, adopt the amplified perora-
tion of D. F. ‘*‘ Covetings, wrath, envyings, strifes, grudgings,
emulations, and all the other passions. In these we ought to
aim at being inactive, and with all earnestness to do the work
of the virtues, that we may attain,” etc,

3 Mod. text ynuets Sé ovdé év amadois x. 7. A. but Sav. justly


| rejects ovdé, and even Ben. omits it in the Latin.


* The explanation of Chrys. that Paul and Silas could not
have known that the doors were open, else they would have
escaped, is clearly out of harmony with the narrative. The


| unwillingness of Paul (v. 37) to go forth from the prison with-


out an explicit vindication from the authorities who had im-
prisoned him without just cause, shows that he was not bent
upon an escape. This would be all the more true in view of
the miraculous interposition in their behalf.—G. B. S.


to be saved?” (v. 29-30.) Do you mark
how the wonder overpowered him? (a) He
wondered more at Paul’s kindness; he was
amazed at his manly boldness, that he had
not escaped when he had it in his power,
that he hindered him from killing himself.
(c) “And they said, believe on the Lord
Jesus Christ, and thou shalt be saved, and
thy house. And they spake unto him the word
of the Lord, and to all that were in his house.”
(v. 31, 32) and (so) immediately gave proof
of their kindness towards him. And_ he
took them the same hour of the night and
washed their stripes; and was_ baptized,
he and all his, straightway.” (v. 33.) He
washed them, and was_ himself baptized,
he and his house. “And when he _ had
brought them into his house, he set meat
before them, and rejoiced, believing in
God with all his house. And when it was
day, the magistrates sent the sergeants,
saying, Let those men go.” (v.34, 35.) It
is likely the magistrates had learnt what had
happened, and did not dare of themselves
to dismiss them. ‘‘And the keeper of the
prison told these words to Paul, saying,
the magistrates have sent to let you go:
now therefore depart, and go in peace. But
Paul said unto them, they have beaten us
openly uncondemned, being Romans, and
have cast us into prison; and now do they
thrust as out privily? nay verily; but let
them come themselves and fetch us out.
And the sergeants told these words unto the
magistrates: and they feared, when they
heard that they were Romans. And_ they
came and besought them, and brought them
out, and desired them to depart out of the
city. And they went out of the prison, and
entered into the house of Lydia: and when
they had seen the brethren, they comforted
them, and departed.” (v. 36-40.) Even?
upon the declaration of the magistrates Paul
does not go out, but for the sake both of
Lydia and the rest he puts them in fear:
that they may not be supposed to have come


1 j.e. “ The miracle amazed him. but he was more aston-
ished at Paul’s boldness, was more moved to admiration by his
kindness.” But besides the transposition marked by the let-
ters, the clauses of (@) may perhaps be better re-arranged
thus: ‘He more marvelled at Paul's boldness, in not escap-
ing etc., he was amazed at his kindness in hindering,”’ etc.

2 The report seems to be defective, but the meaning may
be, that in taking this high tone with the magistrates the Apos-
tle was not influenced by personal feelings; but acted thus
for the assurance of Lydia and the other believers, by letting
it be seen that they were not set at liberty upon their own
request. In the recapitulation another consideration is men-
tioned, viz. in respect of the jailer.—Mod. text ‘perhaps
for the sake of Lydia and the other brethren : or also putting
them in fear that they may not, etc., and that they may set
the others also in aposture of boldness.’’ Then, TptrAodr,
ayarnrol, «. tT. A. the third point being cat Syuoagia. We reject
this kat though all our Mss. haveit. We have also trans-
ferred the ayamnroi, which is out of place here to the begin-
ning of the recapitulation.


THE WORKS OF ST. 'CHRYS0stGr.


|HoMILy XXXVI,


out upon their own request, that they may
set the rest in a posture of boldness. The
impeachment was twofold: that “being
Romans,” and “uncondemned,” they had
openly cast them into prison. You see
that in many things they took their measures
as men.


(Recapitulation) “And at midnight,” etc.
(v. 25.) Let us compare, beloved, with
that night these nights of ours, with their
revellings, their drunkenness, and wanton


excesses, with their sleep which might as
well be death, their watchings which are
worse than sleep. For while some sleep


without sense or feeling, others lie awake
to pitiable and wretched purpose, plotting
deceits, anxiously thinking about money,
studying how they may be revenged upon
those who do them wrong, meditating enmity,
reckoning up the abusive words spoken during
the day: thus do they rake up the smoulder-
ing embers of wrath, doing things intolerable.s
Mark how Peter slept. (ch. xii. 6.) Both
there, it was wisely ordered (that he should
be asleep); for the Angel came to him,
and it behooved that none should see what
happened ; and on the other hand it was
well ordered here (that Paul should be-
awake), in order that the keeper of the
prison might be prevented from killing him-
self. ‘And suddenly there was a great
earthquake.” (v, 26.) And why did no
other miracle take place? Because this
was, of all others, the thing sufficient for
his conversion, seeing he was personally in
danger: for it is not so much miracles that
overpower us, as the things which issue in
our own deliverance. That the earthquake
should not seem to have come of itself, there
was this concurrent circumstance, bearing
witness to it: ‘‘the doors were opened, and
all their bonds were loosed.” And it appears
in the night-time; for the Apostles did
not work for display, but for men’s salvation
“And the keeper of the prison,” etc. (v. 27.)
The keeper was not an evil-disposed man
that he ‘‘ thrust them into the inner prison,”
(v. 24) was because of his “ having received
such a command,” not of himself. The man#


3 7a ahopynta épyagouevor. perhaps, ‘tin imagination wreak-
ing upon their enemies an intolerable revenge.”

4 Mod. text *‘And why did not Paul shout before this?
The man was all ina tumult of perturbation, and would not
have received (what was said). Therefore whenhe saw him
about to kill himself, he is beforehand with him, and shouts
saying, ‘* We are all here.’”’ Therefore also, ‘‘ Having asked,”’
it says, ‘‘ for lights, he sprang in, and fell before Paul and
Silas.’”’ The keeper falls at the feet of the prisoner. And he
brings them out, and says, ‘‘Sirs,’’ etc. But the question, Aca
Tl wn mpd TovTov; evidently cannot be meant for éBdoycgev o
IlavAos. The meaning is, ‘‘ Why did he not sooner ask,
‘What shall I do tobe saved ?’ bserve, his first impulse is
to kill himself—such was the tumult of his thoughts. Sud-


HomiLty XXXVI_]


ete cena OE TEE AP Oe tL Es.


bo
bo


Ue


was all in a tumult of perturbation. ‘What
shall I do to be saved?” he asks. Why
not before this? Paul shouted, until he saw,
and is beforehand with him saying, ‘We
are all here. And having called for lights,”
it says, “he sprang in, and fell down at
the feet” of the prisoner; he, the prison-
keeper, saying, “Sirs, what must I do to be
saved?” (v. 28- 30.) Why, what had they said ?
Observe, he does not, on finding himself
safe, think all is well; he is overcome with
awe at the miraculous power.

Do you mark’ what happened in the
former case, and what here? There a girl
was released from a spirit, and they cast
them into prison, because they had lib-
erated her from the spirit. Here, they
did but show the doors standing open, and
it opened the doors of his heart, it loosed two
sorts of chains; that (prisoner)* kindled
the (true) light; for the light in his heart
was shining. ‘“ And he sprang in, and fell
before them ;’’ and he does not ask, How is
this? What is this? but straightway he
says, ‘‘ What must I do to be saved?” What
then answers Paul? “Believe on the Lord
Jesus Christ, and thou shalt be saved, thou
and thine house.” (v. 31.) For this above
all, wins men: that one’s house also should
be saved. ‘And they spake the word to him,
and to all that were in his house. And
he took them the same hour of the night,
and washed their stripes,” etc. (v. 32, 33),
washed them and was washed: .those he
washed from their stripes, himself was washed
from his sins: he fed and was fed.* “ And
rejoiced,” it says: although there was nothing
but words only and good hopes: “having
believed in God with all his house (v. 34):
this was the token of his having believed —
that he was released of all. What worse than


denly awaked, he sees the doors open, and supposes the pris-
oners were escaped. Therefore Paul shouted to him, to re-
assure him on that point, until he could satisfy himself with
his own eyes: as, it says, ‘He called for lights,’ for that pur-
pose : and then indeed, relieved of that fears he is overcome
with awe : and falls down at the feet of his prisoner saying,
‘What shallI do to be saved?’ Why, what had they said ?
Nothing more: but the religious awe now seizes him: for he
does not think all is right and no need. to trouble himself any
further, because he finds himself safe from the temporal dan-
ger. ” For this is the meaning of opa avrov ovk, ererdyn Steow dn,
emt TOUTW OTEpyorTa, aAAG THY SUVauLW exmAayevTa: Not as Ben.
vide illum non ab hoc diligere quod servatus esset, sed quod de
virtute obstupesceret.

1 This is the sequel to what was said above: “It is not so
much miracles that overpower or convince us (aipet), as the
sense of benefits received.’’ For, they saw the miracle of
dispossession wrought upon the girl, and they cast the doers
of it into prison : whereas here the jailer sees but the doors
-open (the prisoners safe, the Apostle’s manliness in not escap-
ing, and their kindness to himself), and he is converted. The
doors were open, and the doorof his heart (like Lydia’s) was
opened: the prisoner’s chains were loosed, and worse chains
were loosed from himself: he called for a light, but the true
light was lighted in his own heart.

2 WWev éxetvos To bas. Edd. (from D. F.) éxetvo.

3 €@peWe kal etpady. probably meaning the Holy Eucharist
immediately after the baptism. So above p. 219, Togavta
sMuoTypta, in the case of Lydia.


15


a jailer, what more ruthless, more savage?
He entertained them with great honor. Not,
because he was safe, he made merry, but,
having believed God. (a) “ Believe on the
Lord,” said the Apostle: therefore it is that
the writer here says, “ Having believed.tA—(¢)
Now therefore,” it says, “ depart, and go in
peace” (v. 36): that is, in safety, fearing
no man. (4) “But Paul said unto them”
(v. 37): that he may not seem to be receiving
his liberty as one condemned, and as one
that has done wrong: therefore it is that he
says, ‘‘Having openly beaten us uncon-
demned,” etc.—that it may not be matter
of grace on their part. (e) And _ besides,
they wish the jailer himself to be out of
danger, that he may not be called to account
for this afterwards. And they do not say,
“Having beaten us,” who have wrought
miracles: for they (the magistrates) did not
even heed these: but, that which was most
effectual to shake their minds, “ uncondemned,
and being Romans.” (¢) Observe how
diversely grace manages things: how Peter
went out, how Paul, though both were
Apostlesay ““ihey: feared,” ¢(val'38) - it) says
because the men were Romans, not because
they had unjustly cast them into prison,*
“And besought them to depart out of the
city”. (v. 39): begged them as a favor.
And they went to the house of Lydia, and
having confirmed her, so departed. For it
was not right to leave their hostess in distress
and anxiety. But they went out, not in
compliance with the request of those rulers,
but hasting to the preaching : the city having
been sufficiently benefited by the miracle:
for it was fit they should not be there any
longer. For in the absence of them that
wrought it, the miracle appeared greater,
itself crying out more loudly: the faith of the
jailer was a voice in itself. What equal to
this? He is put in bonds, and looses, being
bound: looses a twofold bond: him that
bound him, he looses by being bound. These
are indeed works of (supernatural) grace.

(7) Let us constantly bear in ‘mind this
jailer, ® not the miracle: how, prisoner as he
that he may not seem to be


(Here
6: asin


4 Edd. ‘* Having believed,
liberated,” etc., as if this (4) were said of the jailer.
again the method of the derangement is 1, 2, 4;
Pp. 213, note 5, 220, note 2).

* In two respects the treatment of Paul and Silas at Philippi
was unjust. It was contrary to natural justice to punish them
“ uncondemned’’—without a fairand impartial trial. Moreover
the Lex Valeria (254 U. C.) forbade the punishment of Roman
citizens with whips and rods. It was this last violation of
law which, upon reflection, the magistrates wished to hush up.
Hence their eager desire that Paul and Silas go free forthwith.
an accusation against them-


3,5:


Every hour of detention was
selves.—G. B. S.


5 All our Mss. SeopnodvAaxos, but Savile deruwrov, adopted
by Ben. We retain the old reading—Mod. text ‘‘ What say
the heathen? how being a prisoner,’ etc. Then: ‘Kat
tiva, bynoi, recePnvac expnv, 7 prapov «.7.A. And what man


(say they) was (more) to be persuaded than, etc. Moreover,


226 LHEUWORES “OK


ST. CHRYSOST OR


[Homiry XXXVI.


was (the Apostle), persuaded his jailer.
say the heathen? “And of what things,” say
they, ‘“‘was such a man as this to be per-
suaded—a vile, wretched creature, of no
understanding, full of all that is bad and noth-
ing else, and easily brought over to anything?
For these, say they, are the things, a tanner, a
purple-seller, an eunuch, slaves, and women
believed.” This is what they say, What
then will they be able to say, when we produce
the men of rank and station, the centurion,
the proconsul, those from that time to the
present, the rulers themselves, the emperors?
But for my part, I speak of something else,
greater than this: let us look to. these very
persons of no consideration. ‘And where is
the wonder?” say you. Why, this, I say, is
a wonder. For, if a person be persuaded
about any common things, it is no wonder:
but if resurrection, a kingdom of heaven, a
life of philosophic self-command, be the sub-
jects, and, discoursing of these to persons of
mean consideration, one persuades them, it
will be more wonderful than if one persuaded
wise men. For when there is no danger at-
tending the things of which one persuades
people, then (the objector) might with some
plausibility allege want of sense on their part :
but when (the preacher) says—to the slave, as
you will have it—“If thou be persuaded by
me, it is at thy peril, thou wilt have all men for
thine enemies, thou must die, thou must suffer
evils without number,” and yet for all this,
convinces that man’s soul, there can be no
more talk here of want of sense. Since, if
indeed the doctrines contained what was
pleasant, one might fairly enough say this: but
if, what the philosohers would never have
chosen to learn, this the slave does learn,
then is the wonder greater. And, if you will,
let us bring before us the tanner himself, and
see what were the subjects on which Peter
conversed with him: or if you will, this same
jailer. What then said Paul to him? “ That
Christ rose again,” say you; “that there is a
resurrection of the dead, and a kingdom: and


he had no difficulty in persuading him, a man


=


they allege this also: for who but a tanner tis yap 7
Bupoevs) .. . . believed ?’’—We take tiva to be acc. plur. sc.
é0yuaTa. The heathen objection is this, You may see by the


character of the first converts, such as this jailer, what is the
character of the doctrines: ‘‘ Since what doctrines behooved
(a man like this) to be persuaded of?’ St. Chrys. says, ‘‘ Let
us bear in mind this jailer—not to dwell upon the miracle, but
to consider how his prisoner persuaded him: how he induced
a man like this not only to receive the doctrines, but to sub-
mit to the self-denying rule of the Gospel. The heathen raise
a prejudice against the Gospel from the very fact, that such
men as these were converted. What, say they, must be the
teaching to be received by a wretched creature like this jailer ?
The doctrines were well matched with their first converts,
tanner, purple-seller, eunuch,”’ etc. (Soin the remarkable
argument on this same subject in the Morale of How. vii. zz
1 Cor. p. 62, E. “but it is objected: Those who were con-
vinced by them were slaves, women, nurses, eunuchs:’’
whence itseems, as here, that the case of the eunuch, Acts
Vill, Was made a reproach, as if he must needs be a person of
inferior understanding).


|
What


easily led to anything.” How? Said he
nothing about the mode of life; that he must
be temperate, that he must be superior to
money, that he must not be unmerciful, that he
must impart of his good things to others ?
For it cannot be said, that the being persuaded
to these things also was from the want of
power of mind ; no, to be brought to all this
required a great soul. For be it so, that as
far as the doctrines went, they were rendered
more apt to receive these by their want of
intelligence: but to accept such a virtuous,
self-denying rule of life, how could that be
owing to any defect of understanding? So
that the less understanding the person may
have, if nevertheless he is persuaded to
things, to which even philosophers were
unable to persuade their fellow-philosophers,
the greater the wonder—when women and
slaves are persuaded of these truths, and prove
it by their actions, of which same truths the
Platos and all the rest of them were never
able to persuade any man. And why say I,
“any man?” Say rather, not themselves
even: on the contrary, that money is not to be
despised, Plato persuaded (his disciples) by
getting, as he did, such an abundance of
property, and golden rings, and goblets; and
that the honor to be had from the many is
not to be despised, this Socrates himself
shows, for all that he may philosophize without
end on this point: for in everything he did,
he had an eye to fame. And if you were
conversant with his discourses, I might go at
great length into this subject, and show what
a deal of insincerity (cipwveiav) there was in
them,—if at least we may believe what his
disciple says of him,—and how that all his
writings have their ground-work in vainglory.
But, leaving them, let us direct the discourse
to our own selves. For besides the things
that have been said, there is this also to be
added, that men were persuaded of these
things to their own peril. Be not thou
therefore shameless, but let us think over
that night, the stocks, and the hymns of praise.
This let us also do, and we shall open for
ourselves—not a prison, but—heaven. If we
pray, we shall be able even to open heaven.
Elias both shut and opened heaven by prayer.
(James v. 17.) There is a prison in heaven
also. ‘‘ Whatsoever,” He saith, “ ye shall bind
on earth, shall be bound in heaven.” (Matt.
xvi. 19.) Let us pray by night, and we shall
loose these bonds. For that prayers loose
sins, let that widow convince.us, let that
friend convince us, who at that untimely
hour of the night persists and knocks (Luke
xi. 5): let Cornelius convince us, for, “thy
prayers,” it says, “and thine alms are come up
before God.” (ch. x. 4.) Let Paul convince


HoMILyY XXXVI.]


us, who says, ‘“ Now she that is a widow
indeed and desolate, trusteth in God, and con-
tinueth in supplications night and day.”
(1 Tim. v. 5.) If he speaks thus of a widow,
a weak woman, much more would he of men.
I have both before discoursed to you on
this, and now repeat it: let us arouse ourselves
during the night: though thou make not
many prayers, make one with watchfulness,
and it is enough, I ask no more: and if not
at midnight, at any rate at the first dawn.
Show that the night is not only for the body,
but also for the soul: do not suffer it to pass
idly, but make this return to thy Master: nay
rather (the benefit) itself returns to thee.
Say, if we fall into any difficult strait, to whom
do we not make request? and if we soon
obtain our request, we breathe freely again.
What a boon were it for thee, to have a friend
to go to with thy request, who shall be ready
to take it as a kindness, and to be obliged to
thee for thy asking? What a boon, not to have


to go about and seek one to ask of, but to find |


one ready? to have no need of others through
whom thou mayest solicit? What could be
greater than this? Since here is One who
then does most, when we make not our
requests of others than Himself: just as a
sincere friend then most complains of us for
not trusting in his friendship, when we ask of
others to make request to him. Thus also let
use act. +: “ Bat what,’ you will ask,. “if I
should have offended Him?” Cease to give
offence, and weep, and so draw near to Him,
and thou wilt quickly render Him propitious
as to thy former sins. Say only, I have
offended : say it from thy soul and with a sin-
cere mind, andall things are remitted to thee.
Thou dost not so much desire thy sins to be for-
given, as He desires to forgive thee thy sins.
In proof that thou dost not so desire it, con-
sider that thou hast no mind either to practice
vigils, or to give thy money freely: but He,
that He might forgive our sins, spared not His
Only-begotten and True Son, the partner of
His throne. Seest thou how He more desires
to forgive thee thy sins (than thou to be for-
given)? Then let us not be slothful, nor
put off this any longer. He is merciful and
good: only let us give Him an opportunity.
And (even) this (He seeks), only that we
may not become unprofitable, since even
without this He could have freed us from
them: but like as we (with the same view)
devise and arrange many things for our
servants to do,so does He in the matter of
our salvation. ‘Let us anticipate His face


1 oUTw Kai nuetss which mod. text needlessly expands into:
‘*(Thus also we) act in the case of those who ask of us: we
then most oblige them, when they approach us by themselves
not by others.’


TEE Ret} OF THE AVOSTLEs, 227


9


with thanksgiving.” (Ps. xcv. 2. “Let us
come before His presence.” E. V.), since He
is good and kind. But if thou call not upon
Him, what will He do? Thou dost not choose
to say, Forgive; thou wilt not say it from thy
heart, but with thy mouth only. What is it,
to call in truth? (To call) with purpose of
heart, with earnestness, with a sincere mind;
just as men say of perfumes, “ This is genuine,
and has nothing spurious,” so here. He who
truly calls on Him, he who truly prays to
Him, continually attends to it, and desists
not, until he obtain (his request): but he who
does itin a merely formal manner (dagocwoipuevoc),
and even this only by way of fulfilling a law,
does not call in truth. Whosoever thou art,
say not only, ‘‘I am a sinner,” but be earnest
also to rid thyself of this character; say not
this only, but also grieve. If thou grievest,
thou art in earnest : if thou art not in earnest,
thou grievest not: if thou grievest not, thou
triflest. What sort of man is he who shall
say, “I am sick,” and not to do all to be
freed from his sickness? A mighty weapon
is Prayer. ‘“Ifye,” saith the Lord, “know how
to give good gifts to your children, how much
more your Father?” (Luke xi. 13.) Then
wherefore art thou unwilling to approach
Him? He loves thee, He is of more power
than all besides. Both willing is He and able,
what is there to hinder? Nothing. But then,
on our part, let us draw near with faith, draw
near, offering the gifts that He desires, for-
getfulness of wrongs, kindness, meekness.
Though thou be a sinner, with boldness shalt
thou ask of Him forgiveness of thy sins, if
thou canst show that this has been done by
thyself: but though thou be righteous, and
possess not this virtue of forgetfulness of
injuries, thou art none the better for it. It
cannot be that a man who has forgiven his
neighbor should not obtain perfect forgive-
ness: for God is beyond comparison more
merciful than we. What sayest thou? If
thou sayest, “I have been wronged, I have
subdued my anger, I have endured the onset
of wrath because of Thy command, and dost
Thou not forgive ?? Full surely He will for-
give: and this is plaintoall, Therefore let us
purge our soul from all resentment. This is
sufficient for us, in order that we may be
heard; and let us pray with watching and
much perseverance, that having enjoyed His
bountiful mercy, we may be found worthy of
the good things promised, through the grace
and mercy of our Lord Jesus Christ, with
Whom to the Father, together with the Holy
Spirit, be glory, might, honor, now and ever,
world without end. Amen.


2 «at ov ovx adins ; Mod. text, ovx adjoet Kat adres; “ will


not He also forgive ?”


THE .WORKS OF


HOMILY


ST. CHRYSOSTORE [Homity XXXVII.


XR Ville


EMS) ROWAN 5 5 34.


“ Now when they had passed through Amphipolis and
Apollonia, they came to Thessalonica, where was
a synagogue of the Jews: and Paul, as his manner
was, went in unto them, and three sabbath days
reasoned with them out of the Scriptures, opening
and alleging that Christ must needs have suffered,
and risen again from the dead; and that this
Jesus, whom I preach unto you, is Christ.”


AGAIN they haste past the small cities, and
press on to the greater ones, since from those
the word was to flow asfrom a fountain into
the neighboring cities. “And Paul, as _ his
manner was, went into the synagogue of the
Jews.” Although he had said, ‘We turn to
the Gentiles” (ch. xiii. 46), he did not leave
these alone: such was the longing affection
he had towards them. For hear him saying,
“ Brethren, my heart’s desire and prayer to
God for Israel is, that they might be saved”
(Rom. x. 1): and, “I wished myself accursed
from, Christ for my) brethren,” 77Gb.) 1x. 132)
But he did this’ because of God’s promise
and the glory: and this, that it might not be
a cause of offence to the Géntiles. ‘‘ Open-
ing,” it says, “from the Scriptures, he rea-
soned with them for three sabbaths, putting
before them that the Christ must suffer.” Do
thou mark how before all other things he
preaches the Passion: so little were they
ashamed of it, knowing it to be the cause of
salvation. ‘“ And some of them believed, and
consorted with Paul and Silas; and of the
devout Greeks a great multitude, and of the
chief women not a few.” (v. 4.) The writer
mentions only the sum and substance of the
discoursing: he is not given to redundancy,
and does not on every occasion report the
sermons. ‘“ But the Jews which believed not
(the best texts omit “which believed not”),
moved with envy, took unto them certain
lewd fellows of the baser sort, and gathered a
company, and set all the city on an uproar,
and assaulted the house of Jason, and sought
to bring them out to the people. And when


1 This seems meant to refer to the sequel of the passage cited,
Rom. ix. 4. ‘* who are Israelites, to whom pertaineth the adop-
tion and fhe glory ...and the pr omises :’’ then tovto Erotet Te-
fers to €BovdAouny, indicativ ely Livishear ” but cai tovTo (mod.
text Omits Touro), ‘* And this solicitude he showed for the sake
of the Gentiles also, to whom the unbelief of the Jews might
be a stumbling-block :’’—unless «ai todro refers to v. 3, the
discourse of Christ’s death and resurrection—that the Cross
might not be an offence to the devout Greeks.


|they found them not, they drew Jason and


certain brethren unto the rulers of the city,
crying, These that have turned the world
upside down are come hither also; whom
Jason hath received : and these all do contrary
to the decrees of Czesar, saying that there is
another king, one Jesus.” (v. 5-7.) Oh!
what an accusation! again they get up a


charge of treason against them, “ saying, there
is another king (one) Jesus. And _ they
troubled the people and the rulers of the city,
when they heard these things. And when
they had taken security of Jason, and of the
other, they let them go.” (v. 8, 9.) A man
worthy to be admired, that he put himself into
danger, and sent them away from it. “ And
the brethren immediately sent away Paul and
Silas by night unto Berea: who coming
thither went into the synagogue of the Jews.
These were more noble,” it says, “than they
of Thessalonica: more noble,” e. more
gentle (érceckéorepor) (in their behavior) :

that they received the word with all read-
iness,” and this not inconsiderately, but with
a strictness wherein” was no passion, ‘‘ search-
ing the Scriptures whether these things were
so.” (v. 10, 112)” “Therefore many-or them
believed ; also of honorable women which
were Greeks, and of men, not a few. But
when the Jews of Thessalonica had knowl-
edge that the word of God was preached of
Paul at Berea, they came thither also, and
stirred up the people. And then immediately
the brethren sent away Paul to go as it were
to the sea: but Silas and Timotheus abode
there still.” (v. 12-14.) See how he at one
time gives way, at another presses on, and in
many things takes his measures upon human
considerations. “And they that conducted
Paul brought him unto Athens: and receiving
a commandment unto Silas and Timotheus for
to come to him with speed, they departed.”


2 weta axptBelas evda mavtos ovK Hv. It is not easy to see
what else this can mean. Below in the Recapitulation ov p¥un
ovdé CnAw.—Mod. text ‘‘With exactness they explored the
Scriptures—for this is the meaning of avexprvov—wishing from
them to derive assurance rather concerning the Passion: for
they had already believed.” The last statement, like some
other additions in the mod, text, seems to be borrowed from
the Catena (Ammonius) whence it is adopted also by


| CEcumenius: but this was certainly not Chrysostom’s mean-
| ing.


HoMILy: XXXVII.]


Rie ACTS: OF. THE -APOSELES.


229


(v. 15.) But let us look again at what has
been said.


(Recapitulation.) “Three sabbath-days,”
it says, being the time when they had
leisure from work, ‘he reasoned with them,
opening out of the Scriptures” (v. 2): for so
used Christ also to do: as on many occasions
we find Him reasoning from the Scriptures,
and not on all occasions (urging men) by
miracles. Because to this! indeed they stood
in a posture of hostility, calling them
deceivers and jugglers ; but he that persuades
men by reasons from the Scriptures, is not
liable to this imputation. And on many
occasions we find (Paul) to have convinced
men simply by force of teaching: and in
Antioch “the whole city was gathered to-
gether” (ch. xiii. 44): so? great a thing is
this also, for indeed this itself is no small
miracle, nay, it is even a very great one.
And that they might not think that they did
it all by their own strength, but rather that
God permitted it,? two things resulted,
namely, ‘‘Some of them were persuaded,”
ele. «| (c)) + Andy sot, devout Greeks :a., sreat
multitude, and of the chief women not a
few:” * but those others did the contrary:
“the Jews moved with envy,” etc. (v. 4, 5)
(6) and, from the fact that the being called
was itself a matter of God’s fore-ordering,
(a) they neither thought great things of them-
selves as if the triumph were their own, nor


1 @pos TouTo, i. e. the working of miracles. Not only it did
not win them: they set themselves against it, taxing the doers
of the miracles with imposture and magical art, etc —Mod.
text ‘‘ For because to Him (vovrov, Christ) they were opposed,
and slandered Him that He was a deceiver and juggler, there-
fore it is that He also reasons from the Scriptures. For he
that attempts .to persuade by miracles alone may well be sus-
pected : but he that persuades from the Scriptures,” etc.

2 A. B. ottw wéya Tt Kal ToUTO egTL Kai TO wav. C. omits this:
we place it after isxvoay in the next sentence, where mod.
text has it. This thought is brought out more fully below, p.
230. The persuading men by telling them that which even with
miracles was hard to believe—a Messiah crucified !—was
itself a miracle.

3 add’ Oo @eds cuvexwpnoer, if not corrupt, must mean “but
that God permitted all: i. e. that all depended on God’s per-
mission, not on their strength,—4évo eyevero, i. e. some believed
v. 4.,others opposed, v. 5. The sense is confused in the Mss.
and Edd. by the transposition of the sentences marked cand
a. Inc, verse 2is substituted for v. 4, which we restore. In
6, we read to te (A. B. 76 Te) oikovouiay eivat Kai To Kadetobar
for kai t® kad. The meaning is, And so by reason of the fact
that 7d KaActovtar is itself oikovouta—that is of God’s ordering,
according to His own pleasure, who are called and who not—
the preachers are not left either to think too much of them-
selves when they succeed, ws avtoi ka@eAovtes, nor to be terri-
fied by failure ws, vrevdvvo, as if they were responsible for
men’s unbelief.—Mod. text, ‘‘And that they may not think
that they did it all by their own strength, God suffers them to
be driven away (€Aavveo¥ar). For two things came of this:
they neither etc. nor etc. So (much) was even the being
called a matter of God’s ordering. ‘And of the devout
Greeks,’ ” etc.

* The ‘‘ devout Greeks ’’ would include such as were Jewish
proselytes and such as were worshippers of the true God and
attended the synagogue services, without being connected
with Judaism. The‘ first women’ were probably female pros-
elytes to Judaism. These heard the Apostle with interest, but
the more ardent and fanatical Jews. reinforced by the baser
element—the loungers from the market place, made a tumult
of opposition.—G. B. S.


were terrified as being responsible (for all),
But how comes it that he said, “That we
should go unto the heathen, and they unto
the circumcision” (Gal. ii. 9), and yet dis-
coursed to the Jews? (a) He did this as a
thing over and above. (%) For* he did
other things also more than he was obliged.
For instance, Christ ordained that they
should “live by the Gospel” (1 Cor. ix. 14;
i. 17), but our Apostle did it not: Christ
sent him not to baptize, yet he did baptize.
Mark how he was equal to all. Peter to the
circumcision, he to the Gentiles, to the
greater part. (a) Since if it was necessary
for him to discourse to Jews, how said he
again: “For He that wrought effectually in
him toward the circumcision, the same was
mighty also in me toward the Gentiles”
(Gal. ii. 8)? In the same way as those
Apostles also had intercourse with the
Gentiles, though they had been set apart for
the circumcision, so likewise did our Apostle.
The more part of his work indeed was with
the Gentiles: still he did not neglect the
Jews either, that they might not seem to be
severed from them. And how was it, you
will ask, that he entered in the first place into
the synagogues, as if this were his leading
object? True; but he persuaded the Gen-
tiles through the Jews, and from the things
which he discoursed of to the Jews. And he
knew, that this was most suitable for the
Gentiles, and most conducive to belief.
Therefore he says: “Inasmuch as I am the
“Apostle of the Gentiles.” (Rom. xi. 13.) And
his Epistles too all fight against the Jews.—
That the Christ,” he says, ‘must needs have
suffered.” (v. 3.) If there was a necessity
for His suffering, there was assuredly a
necessity for His rising again: for the
former® was far more wonderful than the
latter. For if He gave Him up to death
Who had done no wrong, much rather did
He raise Him up again. “But the Jews
which believed not took unto them certain of
the baser sort, and set all the city on an up-
roar (v. 5): so that the Gentiles were more
in number. The Jews thought not them-
selves enough to raise the disturbance: for
because they had no reasonable pretext, they
ever effect such purposes by means of uproar,
and by taking to themselves base men.
“And when they found them not,” it says,
“they haled Jason and certain brethren.”


4 Between the Exposition and the Moral, the original
editor or transcriber has thrown together a set of disconnected
notes. These are here inserted in what seems to be their
proper connection. In the Mss. and Edd. the parts lie in the
order as shown by the letters a, 8 prefixed.

5 Weadopt the reading of B. éxetvo, ‘“‘the suffering;”’
tovrov, ‘*‘the rising again.”’ The others, éexeivov, tovto: re-
| versing Chrysostom’s meaning.


230 THE WORKS OF


ST. CHRYSOST ORE


[HomMILty XXXVII.


(v. 6.) O the tyranny! dragged them with-
out any cause out of their houses. ‘“ These
all,” say they, “do contrary to the decrees of
Cesar” (v. 7): for since they spoke nothing
contrary to what had been decreed, nor made
any commotion in the city, they bring them
under a different charge: “‘saying that there
is another king, one Jesus.* And _ they
troubled the people,” etc. (v. 8.) And what
are ye afraid of, seeing He is dead? (@)
“And when they had taken security,” etc.
(v. 9.) See how by giving security Jason
sent Paul away: so that he gave his life (to
the hazard) for him.t (a) “ And brethren,”
etc. (v. ro.) See how the persecutions in
every case extend the preaching. “ Now
these,”’ it says, ‘‘ were more noble than those
inv Ehessalonica” (vi 12): is:e.)) they Wawere
not (men) practising base things, but some!
were convinced, and the others (who were
not), did nothing (of that sort). (8) ‘“ Daily,”
it says, “searching the Scriptures whether
these things were so:” not merely upon a
sudden impetus or (burst of) zeal. ‘‘ More
mople wat says: 1...) in) point wom wintue:
(a), “Therefore: many. of ‘thems’? ete: (Cv.
12.) And here again are Greeks. (3) “ But
when the Jews of Thessalonica,” etc. (v. 13),
because there were lewd persons there. And
yet that city was greater. But itis no wonder
in the greater city the people were worse:
nay, of course to the greater city there go the
worse men, where the occasions of disturb-
ances are many. And as in the body,
where the disease is more violent for having?
more matter and fuel, just so is it here.
(zc) But look, I beg you, how their fleeing
was providentially ordered, not from coward-
ice: otherwise they would have ceased to
preach, and would not have exasperated them
still more. But from this (flight) two things
resulted: both the rage of those (Jews) was
quenched, and the preaching spread. But in
terms befitting their disorderly’ conduct, he
says, ‘“‘Agitating the multitude.” (3) Just


* The accusation is artfully made. They are accused of the
crimeen mayestatis—treason against Cesar. The Jews knew
well that to accuse them of disturbing their worship or oppos-
ing their opinions would produce no effect. To arouse the
Roman feeling against them it was necessary to prevent their
teaching concerning the Kingship of Jesus so as to make it
seem to the rulers of this free city as a treasonable doctrine
against the Roman state.—G. B. S.

+“ When they had taken security ’’—AdBovres Td ikavov, a
legal term—satisfactionem accipere, it is doubtful if, as Chrys.
supposes, Jason became surety in person. The surety was
more probably a deposit of money and had for its object the
guaranty that the peace should be kept,and nothing done con-
trary to the Emperor and the state.—G. B. S.

_ 1 Mod. text mistaking the meaning, has: ‘‘ But they
indeed were persuaded, but these do just the contrary, mak-
ing an uproar among them.”’

2 Edd. xa@arep yap év cwpart, bray vocos XaAreTwrepa 7,
mAeiova Exec THY VAnY Kal Thy tpodyv. Neander, der herd.
Chysost. t. i. p. 2. note, corrects the passage thus, cadamep yap
€v owmaTe 1 vOTOS YaheTwTépa, OTav TA. Exor THY VAnv. But A.
C. preserve the true reading éyovga.


what was done at Iconium—that they may
have the additional condemnation of destroy-
ing others besides themselves. (ch. xiv. 2,
19.) This is what Paul says of them:
‘‘ Forbidding to preach to the Gentiles, to fill
up their sins alway, for the wrath is come
upon them to the uttermost.” (1 Thess. ii.
16.) Why’) did ‘hey mee sstaye © for’ af iar
Lystra, ch. xiv. 19, 21) there, where he
was stoned, he nevertheless stayed a
long time, much more here. Why? (The
Lord) did not wish them to be always
doing signs; for this is itself a_ sign,
not less than the working of signs—that being
persecuted, they overcame without signs. So
that just as now He prevails without signs, so
was it on many occasions His will to prevail
then. Consequently neither did the Apostles
run after signs: as in fact he says himself,
“We preach Christ crucified ” (1 Cor. i. 23)—
to them that crave signs, to them that crave
wisdom, we give that which cannot even after
signs persuade, and yet we do persuade! So
that this was a mighty sign. See then, how
when the preaching is extended, they are not
ina hurry to run after signs.? For it was
right that thenceforth the believers should
be mighty signs to the rest. Howbeit, by
retreating and advancing they did _ these
things. (a) ‘And immediately,” it says,
‘“the brethren’ sent. away’) Paul’ (2 9x4a)
Here now they send Paul alone: for it was
for him they feared, lest he should suffer
some harm, the head and front of all being
in fact none other than he. (@) ‘“‘ They sent
him away,” it says, “as it were to the sea:”
that it might not be easy for them to seize
him. For* at present they could not have
done much by themselves ; and with him they
accomplished and achieved many _ things.
For the present, it says, they wished to rescue
him. («) So far is it from being the case,
that (supernatural) Grace worked all alike on
all occasions: on the contrary, it left them to
take their measures upon human judgment,
(only) stirring them up and rousing them out
of sleep, and making them to take pains. 4
Thus, observe, it brought them safe only as
far as Philippi, but no more after that.
“And receiving,” it says, “a commandment
unto Silas and Timotheus for to come to him


3 Of the Edd. Savile alone has adopted the true reading ras
ov Taxyéws EmLTPEXOVGL Tots oHmelois, preserved by B. The
other Mss. and Edd. omit ov.

4 Here again Savile (with B.) has the true reading ov7w yap ,
the rest ovTw.

5 Here (because it seems unsuitable to refer this to xapts, i.
e. supernatural grace, or special miraculous interposition,)
B. substitutes, aAd’ iva metpay AaBwor, Stavigta@oay avTovs Kat
Suwrvigovoav Kai eis wépimvay éuBadAovoav, emoler avTOUS Kai
avipwmiva macxev, **but in order that they may get expe-
rience, rousing and waking. and making them take pains, (the
Lord) made them to suffer (or be affected) after the manner
of men.’’—Below, for ‘*‘ Philippi’’ the same has ‘‘ Athens.”’


HomiLty XXXVII.]


Poe ACTS OF “THE APOSELES: 231


with all speed, they departed.” (v. 15.) For
though he was a Paul, nevertheless he needed
them. <And with good reason are they urged
by God to go into Macedonia, for there lay
Greece moreover bright (before them). (ch.
Xvi. 9.)

See what zeal the rest of the disciples
showed with respect to their leaders: not as it
is now with us, who are separated and di-
vided into great and small: some of us ex-
alted, while others are envious: for this is the
reason why those are envious, because we are
puffed up, because we will not endure to be
put upon a par with them. The reason why
there is harmony in the body, is because
there is no puffing up: and there is no puffing
up, because the members are of necessity
made to stand in need of each other, and the
head has need of the feet. And God has
made this to be the case with us, and, for all
that, we will not endure it: although even
without this, there ought to be love among us.
Hear ye not how they that are without accuse
us when they say, “Needs make friend-
ships?” The laity have need of us; and we
again exist for them. Since teacher or ruler
would not exist, if there were not persons to
be taught, nor would he perform his part, for
it would not be possible. As the land has
need of the husbandman, and the husband-
man of the land, so is it here. What reward
is there for the teacher to receive, when he
has none to produce that he has taught? and
what for the taught, who have not had the
benefit of the best teaching? So that we
need each other alike in turn, both the gov-
erned, them that govern,' and leaders, them
that obey: for rulers are for the sake of many.
Since no one is sufficient to do anything by
himself alone, whether need be to ordain
(yerporovioar), or to examine men’s counsels and
opinions, but they become more honorable by
assembly and numbers. For instance, the
poor need givers, the givers again need re-
ceivers. « Considering one another,” he says
“to provoke unto love and to good works.”
(Heb. x. 24.) On this account the assembly
of the whole Church has more power: and
what each cannot do by himself singly, he is
able to do when joined with the rest. There-
fore most necessary are the prayers offered up,
here, for the world, for the Church, from the
one end of the earth to the other, for peace,
for those who are in adversities. And Paul
shows this when he says, “That for the gift
bestowed upon us by the means of many per-
sons thanks may be given by many on our be-


1 Mss. kal apyovtes apxouerwv, kal ynyovmevoe (mod, text
Hyovmevos) vryxkowv. A change is necessary in one or other
clause, and we read apxovTwv apxouevor.


half” (2 Cor. i. 11); that is, that He might
confer the favor on many. And often he asks
for their prayers. See also what God says
with regard to the Ninevites: ‘And shall not
I spare that city, wherein dwell more than
six score thousand persons?” (Jonah iv. 11.)
For if, “ where two or three,” He says, “are
gathered together in My Name ” (Matt. xviii.
20), they prevail much, how much more, being
many? And yet thou mayest prevail, though
thou be but one; yet not equally so. For why
art thou but one? Why dost thou not make
many? Why dost thou not become the
maker of love? Why dost thou not create
(karacxevdterc) friendship? Thou lackest the
chief excellence of virtue. For as men’s be-
ing bad by agreement together more provokes
God ; so for men to be good by unanimity de-
lights Him more. “Thou shalt not follow a
multitude,” Mésays, “to do evil.” (Ex. cau
2.) “ They are all gone out of the way, they


are together become unprofitable ” (Rom. lil.


12), and have become as it were men singing
in concert in their wickedness. Make for
thyself friends in preference to domestics,
and all besides. If the peacemaker is a
son of God, how much niore he who makes
friends also? (Matt. v. 9.) If he who recon-
ciles only is called a son of God, of what
shall not he be worthy, who makes friends of
those who are reconciled? Let us engage
ourselves in this trade, let us make those who
are enemies to each other friends, and those
who are not indeed enemies, but are not
friends, them let us bring together, and before
all, our own selves. For as he who is at en-
mity in his house, and has differences with
his wife, carries no authority when reconcil-
ing others, but will be told, “ Physician, heal
thyself” (Luke iv. 23), so will a man be told
in this case. What then is the enmity that is
in us? That of the soul against the body,
that of vice against virtue. This enmity let
us put an end to, this war let us take away,
and then being in peace we shall also address
others with much boldness of speech, our
conscience not accusing us. Anger fights
against gentleness, love of money against con-
tempt of it, envy against goodness of heart.
Let us make an end of this war, let us over-
throw these enemies, let us set up these
trophies, let us establish peace in our own
city. We have within us a city and a civil
polity, and citizens and aliens many: but let
us banish the aliens, that our own people may
not be ruined. Let no foreigne nor spurious
doctrine enter in, no carnal desire. See we
not that, if any enemy has been caught in a
city; He Vis judged as a spy? Then let us
not only banish aliens, but let us drive out


232


|
enemies also. If we see one, let us deliver up
to the ruler, (that is), to conscience (ra v4),
that imagination which is indeed an alien, a
barbarian, albeit tricked out with the garb of a
citizen. For there are within us many im-
aginations of this kind, which are by nature
indeed enemies, but are clad in sheep’s skins.
Just as the Persians, when they have put off
the tiara, and the drawers, and the barbarian
shoes, and put on the other dress which is
usual with us, and have shorn themselves
close, and converse in our own tongue, con-
ceal war under their outward garb: but once
apply the tortures (8acdvove or “ tests”), and
thou bringest to light what is hidden : so here,
examine ‘(or “put to the test,”) by torture
again and again such an imagination as this,
and thou wilt quickly see that its spirit is
that of a stranger. But to show you also by
way of example the sort of spies which the
devil sends into us to spy out what is in us,
come let us strip one of them, and examine it
strictly at the tribunal: and if you please, let
us bring forward some of those which were
detected by Paul. ‘“ Which things,” he says,
“have indeed a show of wisdom in _ will-
worship, and humility, and neglecting of the


THE. WORKS (OF. ST.) CHRYSCsTOxr


body: not in any honor to the satisfying of
the flesh.” (Col. il. 23.) The devil wished to
bring in Judaism: now if he had introduced it


[HomiLty XXXVIII.


in its own form, he would not have carried
his point. Accordingly, mark how he brought
it about. ‘You must neglect the body,” he
says: “this is (the true) philosophy, not to
admit of meats, but to guard against them:
this is humility.” And now again in our own
times, in the case of the heretics, he wished to
bring us down to the creature. See then how
he dressed up his deceit. Had he said,
‘“Worship a creature,” he would have been
detected: but what says he? “ God” (viz.
the Son and the Holy Ghost), he says, “is a
created being.” But let us lay bare for the
decision of the judges the meaning of the
Apostolic writings: there let us bring him:
themselves will acknowledge both the preach-
ing and the language. Many make gains
rg that they may have wherewith to give to the
poor,” unjust gains: this too is a wicked im-
agination. But let us undress it, let us con-
viet it, that we may not be taken by it, but
that having escaped all the devices of the
devil, and holding to the sound doctrines
with strictness, we may be able both to pass
in safety through this life present, and to ob-
tain the good things promised, through the
grace and mercy of our Lord Jesus Christ,
with Whom to. the Father, together with the
Holy Ghost, be glory, might, honor, now and
ever, world without end. Amen.


HOM Lisveeee ae iiine


ACTS eevilit


“TJow while Paul waited for them at Athens, his spirit |


was stirred in him, when he saw the city wholly
given to idolatry. Therefore disputed he in the
synagogue with the Jews, and with the devout
persons, and in the market daily with them that
met with him.”’


OBSERVE how he meets with greater trials
among the Jews than among the Gentiles.
Thus in Athens he undergoes nothing of this
kind; the thing goes as far as ridicule, and
there an end: and yet he did make some con-
verts : whereas among the Jews he underwent
many perils ; so much greater was their hostil-
ity against him.—“ His spirit,” it says, “ was
roused within him when he saw the city all
full of idols.” Nowhere else were so many ob-
jects! of worship to be seen. But again “‘he
disputed with the Jews in the synagogue, and
in the market daily with them that met with


1 The old text has wetpagpots, perhaps for ceBagpovs. Mod.


text, TooavTa eldwaAa,


TOs) ty,


him. Then certain of the philosophers of
the Stoics and Epicureans encountered him.”
(v. 18.) It is a wonder the philosophers did
not laugh him to scorn, speaking in the way
he did. ‘And some said, What does this
babbler mean to say?” insolently, on the
instant:7—this is far from philosophy.
‘“* Other some said, He seemeth to be a setter
forth of strange gods,’’ from the preaching,
because he had no arrogance. They did not
understand, nor comprehend the subjects he
was speaking of—how should they? affirming


2? Old text, ovtws adtod pbeyyoumevou UBpraoTiKws evtews (comp.
Recapitulation) MaKpav TovTO iAogodias’ amo TOV KNPUYHATOS.
ore ovdeva TUpov elxev. Hence Mod. text, ovde arennonoav aro
TOU Knp., eimovtes: Makpov TOUTO Pia. "Oru ov8. 7. eixev' aAAws b&
O7L oVK Evoovv k. 7. A. The insertion of the texts removes some
of the difficulties. Perhaps azo tod kyp. is opposed to ev@ews ~
the one sort straightway exnressed their disdain, with a super-
cilious, ‘‘ What does this ome2oAdyos mean to say ?”’ the other
sort did listen, and condescended to comment on the matter of
the preaching, having heard 1t—arro TOU «np. (as in the phrase
amo TOU decmvov)—saying, ‘He seemeth,”’ etc. Of these Chrys.
may have said, ote ovdeva Tudov etxov, Opp. to UBpiotikws. But
all the Mss. have eixev, and so we have rendered it.


Homity XXXVIII.|


Pires Or - TELE. APOSTLES.


233


as they did, some of them, that God is a
body ; others, that pleasure is the (true) hap-
piness.? “Of strange gods, because he
preached unto them Jesus and the Resurrec-
tion :” for in fact they supposed ‘* Anastasis”
(the Resurrection) to be some deity, being ac-
customed to worship female divinities also.*
“ And having taken him, they brought him to
the Areopagus’”’ (v. 19)—not to punish, but
in order to learn*—‘to the Areopagus”
where the trials for murder were held. Thus
observe, in hope of learning (they ask him),
saying, “ May we know what is this new doc-
trine spoken of by thee? For thou bringest
certain strange matters to our ears”’ (Vv. 20):
everywhere novelty is the charge: “we would
fain know therefore, what these things may
mean.” It was acity of talkers, that city of
theirs. ‘For all the Athenians and strangers
which were there spent their time in nothing
else, but either to tell, or to hear some new
thing. Then Paul stood in the midst of
Mars hill, and «said; Ye men of Athens, :I
look upon you as being in all things” (v. 21,
22)—he puts it by way of encomium; (the
word) does not seem to mean anything offen-
sive—devowaimovectépovc, ‘that is, evsaBeorépove,
“more religiously disposed. For as I passed
by, and beheld your devotions, I found an
altar with his inscription, TO AN UN-
KNOWN GOD. What therefore ye igno-
rantly worship, this declare I unto you.” (v.
23.)—‘ On which was inscribed, To an Un-
known God.” The Athenians, namely, as on
many occasions they had received gods from
foreign parts also—for instance, the temple of
Minerva, Pan, and others from different coun-
tries—being afraid that there might be some
other god not yet known to them, but wor-
shipped elsewhere, for more assurance, for-
sooth, erected an altar to that god also: and
as the god was not known, it was inscribed,
‘To an Unknown God.” This God then, he


2 Here the Mss. have the text v. 18, and v. 19, 20 after
‘** female divinities also.”’

* The view of Chrys. that the Greeks supposed Paul to des-
ignate by the Anastasis some goddess, has been shared by
many more recent interpreters, but seems very improbable.
The apostle could hardly have spoken so abstractly of the res-
utrection as to give rise to such a misapprehension. Paul
doubtless spoke of Jesus’ own resurrection and of its relation
to that of believers (vid. 1 Cor. xv.), although in the text the
absence of avrod permits us to find only the idea of the general
resurrection exfressed.—G. B.S.

2 Mss. and Edd. ovx wore madety, aAX’ Wate KoAacar. But
this cannot be Chrysostom’s meaning : for in the opening of
the Hom. he remarks, that there was nothing of persecution
here (comp. the opening of Hom. xxxix.), and in the Recapit-
ulation, that the Athenians at this time were under Roman
Law. Also in the following sentence, he explains that their
questions were prompted by the hope of learning, “Opa yovr
(i. e. to show that this was their meaning) kai ev €Amidc Tov wa-
verv. In the Recapitulation indeed, he says, they brought
him @s xatamAn fortes, but this is a different thing from wore
koAagat. Therefore we have transposed the order of the
words. The clause évda ai dovixai dikac (and in the Recapitu-
lation évda tas d. 6, édixagov, which we retain from B.), seems
to pe meant to show that they did not bring him there for
tria


tells them, is: Christ; or rather, the God of
all.— ‘‘ Him declare I unto you.’ Observe
how he shows that they had already received
Him, and “it is nothing strange,” says he,
“nothing new that I introduce to you.” All
along, this was what they had been saying :
“What is this new doctrine spoken of by
thee? For thou bringest certain strange mat-
ters to our ears.” Immediately therefore he
removes this surmise of theirs: and then says,
“God that made the world and all things
therein, He being Lord of heaven and earth ”
—for, that they may not imagine Him to be
one of many, he presently sets them right on
this point; adding, ‘“ dwelleth not in temples
made with hands” (v. 24), “neither is wor-
shipped with men’s hands, as though he
needed anything ”—do you observe how, little
by little, he brings in the philosophy? how he
ridicules the heathen error? ‘seeing it is He
that giveth to all life, and breath, and all
things; and hath made of one blood all nations
of men for to dwell on all the face of the
earth.” Thisis peculiar to God. Look, then,
whether these things may not be predicated
of the Son also. “ Being Lord,” he saith,
‘of heaven and earth ’—which they accounted
to be God’s. Both the creation he declares to
be His work, and mankind also.2 “ Having
determined,” he says, “‘ the times * assigned to
them, and the bounds of their habitation,”
(v. 25, 26), “‘that they should seek the Lord,
if haply they might feel after Him, and find
Him, though He be not far from every one of
us: for in Him we live, and move, and have
our being : as certain also of your own poets
have said. For we are also His offspring.”
(v. 27, 28.) This is said by Aratus the poet.
Observe how he draws his arguments from
things done by themselves, and from sayings
of their own. ‘ Forasmuch then as we are
the offspring of God, we ought not to think
that the Godhead is like unto gold, or silver,


+ The principal points to be noted for the interpretation of
v. 23 are as follows: (1) Pausanias (a. D. 174) and Philostratus
(A. D. 244) testify to the existence at Athens of altars with the
inscription: ayveotw veo. (2) ‘““Upon important occasions,
when the reference to a god known by name was wanting, as
in public calamities of which no definite god could be assigned
as the author, in order to honor or propitiate the god con-
cerned by sacrifice, without lighting on a wrong one, altars
were erected which were destined and designated ayvwoTw
véo.’’ (Meyer.) (3) By these inscriptions the Athenians
referred to no particular divinities, but to supposed benefac-
tors or avengers to whom they, in their religious system, could
attach no name. (4) No reference is to be found in these
inscriptions to the God of the Jews. The true text: 6 ot»
ayvoourTes EVoEBELTE, TOUTO EyW KaTayyeAwW VEL (instead of the
masculine ov—rtovrov of the cursives and the T. R.) does not
require the supposition of such a reference. They acknowl-
edged an unknown—lying beyond their pantheon. Paul
declares what this is : the true God as revealed in Jesus Christ.
They would only partially and gradually understand his fult
meaning.—G. B. S.

3 poorer. E. V. ‘‘ before appointed ”’ (mpozez).

4 Edd. xat tynv Snucovpyiav édyAwoe Kar Tovs avOpwrovs
Comp. Recapitulation. whence it appears that he means
“ Both heaven and earth, and mankind also were created, not
| generated or emanated.”


234


or stone, graven by art.” (v. 29.) And yet
for this reason we ought.1 By no means: for
surely we are not like (to such), nor are these
souls of ours. “And imagination of man.”
How so? * * But some person might say,
““We do not think this.’’ But it was to the
many that he was addressing himself, not now
to Philosophy. How then did they think so
unworthily of Him? Again, putting it upon
their ignorance, he says, “ Now the times of
ignorance God overlooked.” Having? agi-
tated their minds by the fear, he then adds
this: and yet he says, “but now he com-
mandeth all men everywhere to repent.”
(v. 30.) ‘‘ Because He hath appointed a day,
in the which He will judge the world in right-
eousness by that man whom He hath or-
dained ; whereof He hath given assurance unto
all men, in that He hath raised Him from the
dead.” (v. 31.) But let us look over again
what has been said.


(Recapitulation.) (4) “‘ And while Paul wait-
ed,” etc. (v. 16.) It is providentially ordered
that against his will he stays there, while wait-
ing for those others. (@) ‘“ His spirit,” it says,
“within him” xapwfivero. It does not mean
there anger or exasperation: just as elsewhere
it says, “ There was rapofveuic between them.”
(ch. XV. 30.) (c) Then what is zapweivero? Was
roused: for the gift is far removed from anger


1 Kai pv dca TovTo OdetAomev. Mod. text inserts a dyaiv, to
make this an interlocution, in the sense, ‘‘ Nay but for this
reason, viz., being His offspring, we ought to think of Him as
in the likeness of man.’’ But this cannot be Chrysostom’s
meaning. Perhaps Chrys. said, ovéé todo, viz., after the fol-
lowing sentence, so that the sense will be, *‘ We ought not to
think the Godhead like unto gold, etc., the graven work of
man’s art. By no means: for certainly we ourselves, our
souls, are not like unto such. Nay, more, we ought not to
think even this, that the Godhead is like unto aught that
man’s imagination can conceive, as the Apostle adds, kat
€vbupnoews avOpurrov To Oeiov eixar duo.ov.’’? (See the Recapit-
ulation.) He proceeds: ti Syrore; i. e. Why having said
xapaymware tTéxvns does he add kai evOup_. ovOp.2 The answer,
not expressed here, is, ‘‘ Because neither is it subject to any
other human conception,’ (étavota, Recapitulation). Then,
the old text has, ovx éott mpos didocodiav: mas obv mad TO
<Sntovpmevov: ToUs mev ov xpov. x. T. A. Here we insert from the
Recapitulation a sentence, which, where it stands, is super-


fluous (p. 236, note ®): “AAA’ eimo. av tis, OV TovTO voutgoner.
"AAAG pds TOUS TOAAOVS O Adyos HY avTw, and then, ovKeTt (SO We
correct ovx é€ott) mpos diAdogogiav. i. e. ‘* Philosophers may


say, We donot so think of the Godhead. But he is not deal-
ing with Philosophy, but mpos Tovs moAAovs. ws otv ovx evpor ;
or the like; IlaAcv 70 Gnrovmevov. Again coming to the ques-
tion in hand (An ‘Unknown’ God, Whom ye ‘ignorantly
worship, he says). Now the times of ignorance,’’ etc.—Mod.
text. ‘‘ Why did he not immediately come (€otn) to Philos-
ophy, and say, God is incorporeal by nature, invisible and
without form? Because it seemed superfluous at present to
say these things to men who had not yet (uy7w om. E.) learned
that there is but one God. Therefore leaving those matters,
he addresses himself (toratac) to the matter in hand, and says,
Now the times,”’ etc.

2 Old text inserts here the whole of v. 30, 31, then, catrouyé
Pyow, Wpioev HM. avagTHoas avTOY EK vVexpov. Kataceioas av’Tov
Thv Stavolay Tw hoBw, ToTE emayer ToVTO. It appears from the
Recapitulation that cat. to d. refers to the preceding verses,
being explained by detEas avaroAoyntovs. and émayet TovTO to
the first clause of v. 30, the overlooking of the times of igno-
rance. We have arranged the matter accordingly.—Mod. text,
v. 30, 31. ‘See, having agitated their minds by saying, ‘ He
hath appointed a day,’ and terrified them, then he seasonably
adds this, ‘Having raised Him from the dead.’’’ Which is
clearly not Chrysostom’s meaning.


THE WORKS OF ST. CHRY¥sOST@aF


[HomILy XXXVIII.


and exasperation. He could not bear it, but
pined away.® “He reasoned therefore in
the synagogue,” etc. (v. 17.) Observe him
again reasoning with Jews. By ‘“ devout per-
sons”: he means the proselytes. For the Jews
were dispersed everywhere before (mod. text
‘* since ’”’) Christ’s coming, the Law indeed be-
ing henceforth, so to say, in process of disso-
lution, but at the same time (the dispersed
Jews) teaching men religion.* But those pre-
vailed nothing, save only that they got wit-
nesses of their own calamities. (e) ‘And
certain philosophers,” etc. (v. 18.) How
came they to be willing to confer with him?
(They did it) when they saw others reasoning,
and the man having repute (in the encounter).
And observe straightway with overbearing inso-
lence, ‘‘some said, What would this babbler
say? For the natural man receiveth not the
things of the Spirit.” (a Cor. ii, 14.) Other
some, He seemeth to be a setter-forth of
strange deities: damoviev, for so they called
their gods. “And having taken him, they
brought him,” etc. (v. 19.) (@) The Atheni-
ans no longer enjoyed their own laws, but were
become subject to the Romans. (g) (Then) why
did they hale him to the Areopagus? Meaning
to overawe him—(the place) where they held
the trials for bloodshed. ‘‘May we know,
what is this new doctrine spoken of by thee?
For thou bringest certain strange things to our
ears; we would fain know therefore what
these things mean. For all the Athenians and
strangers which were there spent their time in
nothing else, but either to tell, or to hear some
new thing.” <(v. 20,) 2.) “Here\ thegthme
noted is, that though ever occupied only in this
telling and hearing, yet they thought those
things strange—things which they had never
heard. “Then Paul standing in the midst of
the Areopagus said, Ye men of Athens, I look
upon you as being in all things more relig-
iously disposed” (v. 22): (f) for the cities
were full of gods (daiudvwr, al. ciddAwv): (2) this is
why he says deiodamovectépove. ‘For as I
passed by and viewed the objects of your wor-


3 ovK Edhepev, add’ etyKeTo. The latter word seems incon-
gruous, unless there be a reference to what St. Paul says of
the state of his mind while waiting at Athens, in 1 Thess. ii. r.
q. d. this is not the state of feeling in which one is apt to give
way to anger and irritation.

4° Gua ev TOU vouov Avopevou dyaiv AotTor, aya de dudacKovTes
evoeBetay Tovs av@pwmovs. i.e. ** of which dispersion the conse-
quence was indeed a breaking down, it may be said, of the
Law (by intermarriages, etc.), but withal a spreading of the
true religion among men.’’ Mod. text, having mistakenly
changed mpd to ama, inserts e€ execvov *‘ from that time” before
Tov vouovj. and also omits @yaiv Aourov, which the innovator
did not understand.—AAQ’ ovdév iaxvoay (mod. text, exepdavav)
éxetvot. But those Jews, for all their success in spreading
their religion, availed nothing, save that they got (more) wit-
nesses (“aptupias perhaps should be maprupas) of their own
proper calamities (when the wrath came upon them to the
uttermost), i. e. they prepared the way for the Gospel, but for
themselves they availed nothing, but only to increase the
number of those who should bear witness to the truth of God’s
juagment upon them for their unbelief.


HomiLty XXXVIII.]


te ies! SOL, LAE APOSTLES,


235


ship—he does not say simply rote daiuovac (the
demons, or deities), but paves the way for his
discourse : “I beheld an altar,” etc. (v. 23.)
This is why he says, “ I look upon you as being
more religiously disposed,” viz. because of
the altar. ‘God,’”’ he says, ‘that made the
world.” (v. 24.) He uttered one word, by
which he has subverted all the (doctrines) of
the philosophers. For the Epicureans affirm
all to be fortuitously formed and (by con-
course) of atoms, the Stoics held it to be body
and fire (ézxipwow). “The world and all
that is therein.”” Do you mark the concise-
ness, and in conciseness, clearness? Mark
what were the things that were strange
to them: that God made the world! Things
which now any of the most ordinary _per-


sons know, these the Athenians and the
wise men of the Athenians knew not.
“Seeing He is Lord of heaven and earth:”


for if He made them, it is clear that He is
Lord. Observe what he affirms to be the note
of Deity—creation. Which attribute the Son
alsohath. Forthe Prophets everywhere affirm
this, that to create is God’s prerogative. Not
as those affirm! that another is,Maker but not
Lord, assuming that matter “is uncreated.
Here now he covertly affirms and establishes
his own, while he overthrows their doctrine.”
“ Dwelleth not in temples made with hands.”
For He does indeed dwell in temples, yet not
in such, but in man’s soul. He overthrows
the corporeal worship. What then? Did He
not dwell in the temple at Jerusalem? No,
indeed: but He wrought therein. ‘ Neither is
worshipped by men’s hands.” (v. 25.) How
then was He worshipped by men’s hands
among the Jews? Not by hands, but by the
understanding. “As though He needed any-
thing: ” since even those (acts of worship) He
did not in this sort seek, “as having need.
Shall I eat,” saith He, “ the flesh of bulls, or
arink’- te “blood cf “goats? ”?” (Ps. #1. ‘"r3!)
Neither is this enough—the having need of
naught—which he has affirmed: for though
this is Divine, yet a further attribute must be
added. ‘Seeing it is He that giveth unto all,
life and breath and all things.” Two proofs
of Godhead: Himself to have need of naught,
and to supply all things to all men. Produce
here Plato (and) all that he has philosophized


1 This, as it stands seems to be meant rather for the
Manichzeans than the heathen philosophers, to whom, he has
just before said, the very notion of creation was strange. But
the whole exposition is most inadequately given, through the
carelessness or incompetency of the reporter. To be reterred
to the heathen, it should be a@AAov pév elvat kvpov (as Jupiter)
ov mountyy S€ and this is favored, perhaps, by the unnecessary
zyv 6€ (omitted by A. B.) as remaining from ov woumrny dé
ayévyntov vAnv vroTidertes.

2 °Evravda Aourov aivtypatwdas elre TO avTov Kai EaTHTE—I. eC.
in speaking of God, he at the same time hints at the coequal
Godhead of the Son: for He also is Creator and Lord. See
Pp. 233 in the comments on v. 23, and v. 25, 26.


about God, all that Epicurus has: and all is
but trifling to this! ‘ Giveth,” he says, “ life
and breath.” Lo, he makes Him the Creator
of the soul also, not its begetter. See again
how he overthrows the doctrine about matter.
“And made,” he says, “of one blood every
nation of men to dwell upon all the face of
the earth.” (v. 26.) These things are better
than the former: and what an impeachment
both of the atoms and of matter, that (cre-
ation) is not a partial (work), nor the soul
of man either.’ But this, which those say,
is not to be Creator.—But by the mind
and understanding He is worshipped.—“ It is
He: thats giveth,’ etc. He not the partial
(uepercoi JSaimovec) deities. ‘ And all things.” It
is “ He,” he saith—How man also came into
being.2—First he showed that ‘ He dwelleth
not,” etc., and then declared® that He “is not
worshipped as though He had need of aught.”
If God,‘ He made all: but if He made not,
He is not God. Gods that made not heaven
and earth, let them perish. He introduces
much greater doctrines, though as yet he does
not mention the great doctrines; but he dis-
coursed to them as unto children. And these
were much greater than those. Creation,
Lordship, the having need of naught, author-
ship of all good—these he has declared. But®
how is He worshipped? say. It is not yet the
proper time. What equal to this sublimity ?
Marvellous is this also—of one, to have made
so many: but also, having made, Himself
sustains them (ovyxpare?) in being, “ giving life
and breath and all things. (4) And hath
determined the times appointed, and the bounds
of their habitation, that they should seek God,
if haply they might feel after Him and find
Him.” (v. 27.) (@) It means either this, that
He did not compel them to go about and seek
God, but according to the bounds ® of their
habitation: (¢) or this, that He determined


3 OTe ovK EoTe mepLKy, OVdE WuxH TOV avipwrov. ‘* This is very
obscure, and seems remote from the matterin hand. Hales
ap. Sav. thinks it has come into the text from some other
place. I should rather think the passage either mutilated or
corrupt.” Ben. ‘‘ There is nothing either obscure or corrupt
in the passage.”’ Ep. Par. The meaning seems to be, As the
whole creation is the work of One God, not peptx@s but 70
kadvoAov, so are all mankind, universally, His work; the soul
too, as well as the body.

4 This and the following sentences seem to be fragments
belonging to the preceding exposition. But the whole is too
confused and mangled to admit of any satisfactory restora-


tion.

5 Ila>s Kat av@pwros yéyove. Or (see note 7.) ‘“*How He
(the Son) became man’’—as belonging to some other place ;
e. g. after ovdérw Ta wéyada elwev. Or this may be put in the
place of mas Gepameverar, note ®. Mod. text. ** Having before
shown, how the heaven was made, then he declared,” etc.

8 amedyvato: aoove, To undévos SetcAar, OrEep arehyvato.

7 This also may be part of the argument against the Arians,
which Chrys. seems to have brought into his exposition. See
note ?,

8 This is clearly out of place.
yeyove (note 5.) belongs here.

* Kara tas opodecias. Perhaps Chrys. may have read xara
Tas op. in his copy of the Acts: as Cod. Bezz and S. Irenzus,
KaTa THY Opovertav,


Perhaps 7s Kat avdpwros


236


THE WORKS OF ST: CHEYSOST OR:


[HomiLty XXXVIIL


their seeking God, yet not determined this (to
be done) continually, but (determined) certain
appointed times (when they should do so):

showing? now, that not having sought they had
found : “for since, having sought, they had not
found, he shows that God was now as manifest,
as though He were in the midst of them pal-
pably (Wy tadduevoc). (e) “Though He be not
far,” he saith, “ from every one of us,” but is
near to all. See again the power (or, “ what
it is to be God,”) of God. What saith he?
Not only He gave “life and breath and all
things,” but, as the sum and substance of all,
He brought us to the knowledge of Himself,
by giving us these things by which we are able
to find and to apprehend Him. But we did
not wish to find Him, albeit close at hand.
“Though He be not far from every one of
us.” Why look now, He is near to all, to
every one all the world over! What can be
greater than this? See how he makes clear
riddance of the parcel deities (rove pepuxovc) }
What say I, “afar off?” He is so near, that
without Him we live not: “for in Him we live
and move and have our being.” (v. 28.) “In
him ;”’ to put it by way of corporeal similitude,
even as it is impossible to be ignorant of the
air which is diffused on every side around us,


and” isnot Vian! irom “every “One “Of “us~”
nay ‘rather; whiehy is “im “us. (2) For
it was not so that there was a_ heaven


in one place, in another none, nor yet (a
heaven) at one time, at another none. So
that both at every “time” and at every
“bound ” it was possible to find Him. He so
ordered things, that neither by place nor by
time were men hindered. For of course even
this, if nothing else, of itself was a help to
them—that the heaven is in every place, that
it stands in all time. (/) See how (he de-
clares) His Providence, and His upholding
power (cvyxparyoww); the existence of all things
from Him, (from Him) their working (70 évepyeiv),
(from Him their preservation) that they perish
not. And he does not say, “ Through Him,”
but, what was nearer than this, “In him.”—
That poet said nothing equal to this, ‘“‘ For we
are His offspring.” He, however, spake it of
Jupiter, but Paul takes it of the Creator, not
meaning the same being as he, God forbid!
but meaning what is properly ‘predicated of
God : just as he spoke of the altar with refer-
ence to Him, not to the being whom they wor-
shipped. As much as to. say, “ For certain
things are said and done with reference to this
(true God), but ye know not that they are with


1 Mod. text SpOuing, tbe sense; ‘‘ And thishe says. showing
that not even now had they, having sought, found : although
He was as plain to be found as anything would be that was
(set) in the midst to be handled.”


reference to Him.” For say, of whom would
it be properly said, “To an Unknown God?”
Of the Creator, or of the demon? Mani-
festly of the Creator: because Him they knew
not, but the other they knew. Again, that all
things are filled (with the presence)—of God?
or of Jupiter—a wretch of a man, a detest-
able impostor! But Paul said it not in the
same sense as he, God forbid! but with quite
a different meaning. For he says we are
God’s offspring, i. e. God’s own, ? His nearest
neighbors as it were. For lest, when he says,
‘“‘ Being the offspring of God” (v. 29), they
should again say, Thou bringest certain
strange things to our ears,* he produces the
poet. He does not say, ‘Ye ought not to
think the Godhead like to gold or silver,” ye
accursed and execrable: but in more lowly
sort he says, “We ought not.” For what
(says he)?* God is above this? No, he does
not say this either: but for the present this—
“We ought not to think the Godhead like unto
such,” for nothing is so opposite to men.
‘“‘But we do not affirm the Godhead to be like
unto this, for who would say that?”? Mark®
how he has introduced the incorporeal (nature
of God) when he said, “In Him,” etc., for the
mind, when it surmises body, at the same time
implies the notion of distance. (Speaking) to
the many he says, “ We ought not to think the
Godhead like unto gold, or silver, or stone,
the shaping of art,’’® for if we are not like to
those as regards the soul, much more God (is
not like to such). So far, he withdraws them
from the notion. But neither is the Godhead,
he would say, subjected to any other human
conception. For‘ if that which art or thought

2 Old text: Tovteari, oixelous, eyyuTaTovs wWaTEp TapoiKous
kat yeitovas Orav Aéyn - So Cat. The two last words are out of
place ; we insert them with the text-words after "Iva yap py.
The sense is: He does not mean, with the heathen poet, that


mankind came from God by generation or emanation: but
that we are very near to Him.


8’ Here Mss. and Edd, have ovdéy yap ovtws avOpwrots
evavTiov, as if it meant, ‘‘nothing so goes against men as
strangeness.’’ We place it in what seemsa more suitable


connection : ‘‘ We ought not to think,” etc. for so far from
‘“the Godhead ”’ being ‘‘ like unto such,” nothing i is So much
the reverse of like unto men, who ‘‘are his offspring.”

4 ri yap; Umép ToUTO Oecos; ovde TodTO: GAAG Téws toute: A. B.
C., Té yap 70 UEp TOUTO Beds: ovde K. tT. A. Cat. om. tt yap 70, and
adda Tews TouTo. Mod. text, add’ vmep TodTo. Ti Sai To Umép
TOUTO; @eds: aAA’ ovde TovT0, evepyelas yap eat. Ovoma: akAa
TEWS TOUTO.

5 Possibly the connection may be, “ He is not ee.
himself to the notions of philosophers, (supra, note }, p. 23
for them he insinuated 10 acwmartov by the “Ev aire Caper, ae
intimate presence of Deity, the denial of body by the denial
of dtaotnua which is necessarily implied in the notion of body.
But he speaks to the many, and puts it to them in this way,
We, being in respect of the soul, akin to God, ought not to
think,’ etec.—Mod. text omits mpds Tovs ToAAovs.

8 Here the Mss. and Edd. have the sentence add’ eimou av
Tis—o Adyos av7@, which we have transferred above, p. 234,
note l, In the next sentence, €i yap NMELS OVUK EOMEV OMoOLOL
exetvots TO Kata Wux7yv, A. B. C. omit the negative, which Cat.
and mod. text retain.

7 Et yap Texyn 7H dtavora edpe, A. B.C. but Cat. om, el yap;
mod. text 7 yap Texvn 77 6. edpe. Ata TovTO oTws eimev: A. also
has this last clause, which is unknown to B. C. Cat. In the
translation we assume the reading to be, Ei vp orep 7 7. i 6.
etpe—dra TOUTO ovTws ** TEXY. 7 ev@, a.’’—o7ep otv 7 T. 7 6. a. Evpe,
TOUTO o @eds, Kal €v ALSw ovelia veov.


HomiLty XXXVIII_] tee AGES: OF


THE APOSTLES. 237


has found—this is why he says it thus, “* of art
or imagination of man” —if that, then, which
human art or thought has found, is God, then
even in the stone (is) God’s essence.—How
comes it then, if “in Him we live,” that we
do not find Him? The charge is twofold,
both that they did not find Him, and that they
found such as these. The (human) under-
standing in itself is not at all to be relied
upon.—But when he has agitated their soul by
showing them to be without excuse, see what
he says: “ The times of ignorance God over-
looked, but now commands all men every-
where torepent.” (v.30.) Whatthen? Are
none of these men to be punished? None of
them that are willing to repent. He says it of
these men, not of the departed, but of them
whom He commands to repent. He does not
call you to account, he would say. He does
not say, Took no notice (rapeidev) ; does not
say, Permitted: but, Ye were ignorant.
“ Overlooked,” i. e. does not demand punish-
ment as of men that deserve punishment. Ye
were ignorant. And he does not say, Ye wil-
fully did evil; but this he showed by what he
said above.'—“ All men everywhere to repent:”
again he hints at the whole world. Observe
how he takes them off from the parcel deities!
‘** Because He has appointed a day, in the
which He will judge the world in righteous-
ness by that Man whom He hath ordained,
whereof He hath given assurance to all men,
in that He raised Him from the dead.”
(v. 31.) Observe how he again declares the
Passion. Observe the terror again: for, that
the judgment is true, is clear from the raising
Him up: for it is alleged in proof of that.
That all he has been saying is true, is clear
from the fact that He rose again. For He
did give” this “assurance to all men,” His
rising from the dead: this (i. e. judgment),
also is henceforth certain.

These words were spoken indeed to the
Athenians: but it were seasonable that
one should say to us also, “that all men
everywhere must repent, because he hath
appointed a day, in the which He will judge the
world.” See how he brings Him in as Judge
also: Him, both provident for the world, and


merciful and forgiving and powerful and
wise, and, in a word possessing all the
attributes of a Creator. “ Having given


assurance, to all,men,” i. €. He has given
proof in the rising (of Jesus) from the dead.*


“that they should seek the Lord . . . being,
But mod. text refers


1 i.e. in v. 27.
as He is, not far from every one of us.”’
it Ro the following clause, by adding etrwyr.

2 lace yap tavtny mapetye mioTLW, i. e. God; but C. and mod.
text mapetxov, as if it meant ** the Apostles gave assurance of
Christ’ S resurrection,’’ overlooking the miotw mapacywv of the
texts

3 Mod. text ‘The things spoken have given proof of His
rising from the dead.’


Let us repent then: for we must assuredly be
judged. If Christ rose not, we shall not be
judged: but if he rose, we shall without
doubt be judged. ‘For to this end,” it is
said, “did He also die, that he might be
Lord both of the dead and living.” (Rom.
xiv. 9.) ‘For we shall all stand before the
judgment seat of Christ, that every one may
receive according to that he hath done.”
(Rom. xiv. ro, and 2 Cor. v. 10.) Do not im-
agine that these are but words. Lo! he intro-
duced also the subject of the resurrection of
all men ; for in no other way can the world be
judged. And that, “In that He hath raised


Him from the dead,” relates to the body: for
that was dead, that had fallen. Among the
Greeks, as their notions of Creation, so like-


wise of the Judgment, are children’s fancies,
ravings of drunken men. But let us, who
know these things accurately, do something
that is to the purpose: let us be made friends
unto God. How long shall we be at enmity
with Him? How long shall we entertain
dislike towards Him? “God forbid!” you
will say: “*Why do you say such things?”
I would wish not to say the things I say, if
ye did not do the things ye do: but as things
are, what is the use now in keeping silence
from words, when the plain evidence of
deeds so cries aloud? How then, how shall
we love Him? I have told you thousands of
ways, thousands of times: but I will speak
it also now. One way I seem to myself to
have discovered, a very great and admirable
vay. Namely,* after acknowledging to Him
our general obligations,—what none shall
be able to express (I mean), what has been
done for each of us in his own person, of
these also let us bethink ourselves, because
these are of great force: let each one of
us reckon them up with himself, and make
diligent search, and as it were in a book let
him have the benefits of God written down ;
for instance, if at any time having fallen into
dangers he has escaped the hands of his
enemies; if ever having gone out on a
journey at an untimely hour, he has escaped
danger; if ever, having had an encounter
with wicked men, he has got the better of
them ; or if ever, having fallen into sickness,
he has recovered when all had given him
over: for this avails much for attaching us
to God. For if that Mordecai, when the
services done by him were brought to the


4A. B.C, meta yap Tatra KadodArcas eidévac auto. The sense
would be satisfied by peta ro Tas Kad, cidévat avT@ Xapitas.
Mod. text. ‘‘ Together with the reckoning up of what God
has done for us in common (benefits), so many that none is
able even to number them, and giving Him thanks for all
these, let us all bethink us of what has been done for each one
of us, and reckon them up day by day. Since then these,”’
etc.


238


THE WORKS OF ST.:CHRYSOSPOR


[HomILY XXXVIII.


king’s remembrance, found them to be so
available, that he in return rose to that
height of splendor (Esther vi. 2-11): much
more we, if we call to mind, and make diligent
enquiry of these two points, what sins we
have committed against God, and what good
He has done to us, shall thus both be
thankful, and give Him freely all that is
ours. But no one gives a thought to any
of these things: but just as regarding our
sins we say that we are sinners, while we
do not enquire into them specifically, so
with regard to God’s benefits (we say), that
God has done us good, and do not specifically
enquire, where, and in how great number,
and at what time. But from this time forth
let us be very exact in our reckoning. For
if any one can recall even those things which
happened long ago, let him reckon up all
accurately, as one who will find a great
treasure. This is also profitable to us in
keeping us from despair. For when we see
that he has often protected us, we shall not
despair, nor suppose that we are cast off:
but we shall take it as a strong pledge of His
care for us, when we bethink us how, though
we have sinned, we are not punished, but
even enjoy protection from Him. Let me
now tell you a case, which I heard from a
certain person, in which was a child, and it
happened on a time that he was in the
country with his mother, being not yet fifteen
years old. Just then there came a bad air,
in consequence of which a fever attacked
them both, for in fact it was the autumn
season. It happened that the mother suc-
ceeded in getting into the town before (they
could stop her); but the boy, when the
physicians on the spot’ ordered him, with the
fever burning within him, to gargle his throat,
resisted, having forsooth his own wise view
of the matter, and thinking he should be
better able to quench the fire, if he took
nothing whatever, therefore, in his unseason-
able spirit of opposition, boy-like, he would
take nothing. But when he came into the
town, his tongue was paralyzed, and he was
for a long time speechless, so that he could
pronounce nothing articulately; however,
he could read indeed, and attended masters
for a long time, but? that was all, and there


was nothing to mark his progress. So all
his hopes (in life) were cut off, and_ his
mother was full of grief: and though the
physicians suggested many plans, and many
others did so too, yet nobody was able to do
him any good, until the merciful God loosed
the string of his tongue (cf. Mark vii. 35), and
then he recovered, and was restored to his for-
mer readiness and distinctness of speech. His
mother also related, that when a very little
child, he had an affection in the nose, which
they calla polypus: and then too the physi-
cians had given him over and his father cursed
him (for the father was then living), and
(even) his mother prayed for him to die ;3
and all was full of distress. But he on a
sudden having coughed, owing to the collection
of mucus, by the force of the breath expelled
the creature (70 6ypiov) from his nostrils, and
all the danger was. removed. But this evil
having been extinguished, an acrid and viscid
running from the eyes formed such a thick
gathering of the humors (rac Ajuac), that it
was like a skin drawn over the pupil, and
what was. worse, it threatened blindness,
and everybody said this would be the issue.
But from this disease also was he quickly
freed ,by the grace of God. So far what I
have heard from others: now I will tell.
you what I myself know. Once on a time
a suspicion of tyrants was raised in our city—
at that time I was but a youth—and all the
soldiers being set to watch without the city
as it chanced, they were making strict
inquisition after books of sorcery and magic.
And the person who had written the book,
had flung it unbound (axaracxévacrov) into the
river, and was taken, and when asked for
it, was not able to give it up, but was carried
all around the city in bonds: when, however,
the evidence being brought home to him, he
had suffered punishment, just then it chanced
that I, wishing to go to the Martyrs’ Church,
was returning through the gardens by the
riverside in company with another person.
He, seeing the book floating on the water
at first thought it was a linen cloth, but
when he got near, perceived it was a book,
so he went down, and took it up. I how-
ever called shares in the booty, and Jaughed
about it. But let us see, says he, what in


1 Tay iatpov Tov exec. Mod. text omits Tov, and adds every,
kat: ‘* the physicians ordering him to stay there.’”? The Mss.,
except A. which has preserved the true reading elpéato, have
njpéato, whence Erasm. Ben. c@pit gargarizare—just what
the boy refused todo. He would not take the gargle, nor any
other medicine or food.—For oBévyvtat we restore with mod.
text oBevvivar.—ws Sntev dirogopayv either as above, or ‘to
show his strength of mind forsooth.’’—tmép dtAoverkias, B.
dtAotintas. (Erasmus’ translation is altogether wide of the
sense.)

2 amAws 6€ (kai mod. text.) aonua. Meaning perhaps, “ be-
ing speechless, he read and heard, but could not give tokens
of understanding what he learned.”


3 Mss. kal 6 ratnp avT® KaTnpaTo, Kal TEAEUTHTAL NUXETO Kal H
mnTnp* eT. yap érvxe Gwv oO matnp av7ov. Mod. text, ‘* His
mother prayed for him to die, and his father cursed him, for
he was yet living.”

4 rvyov amAaoTws ntovvTwv: meaning perhaps, in earnest,
not for form’s sake. The occasion of this strictness was doubt-
less the affair of Theodorus the Sicilian, see t. i. 343 B. and
470 D. (IIpo d€ka tovTwy ét@v édAwoav emi Tupavyide TiVvES
«.7. A.) For the history of the treasonable and magical prac-
tices against Valens at Antioch, in which Theodorus was
implicated, and of the severities exercised in consequence of
that attempt, see Ammianus Marcell. xxix. init. Comp. Zosi-
mus iv. 13, 3, Sozomen vi. 35, Socrates iv. 1g.


HoMILy XXXIX.]


fee ACs (OF THE APOSTLES, 239


the world it is. So he turns back a part of
the page, and finds the contents to be magic.
At that very moment it chanced that a sol-
dier came by: * * * then having taken
from within, he went off. There were
we congealed with fear. For who would
have believed our story that we had picked
it up from the river, when all were at that
time, even the unsuspected, under strict
watch? And we did not dare to cast it away,
lest we should be seen, and there was a
like danger to us in tearing it to pieces.
God gave us means, and we cast it away,
and at last we were free for that time from
the extreme peril. And I might mention
numberless cases, if I hada mind to recount
all. And even these I have mentioned
for your sakes, so that, if any have other
cases, although not such as these, let him
bear them in mind constantly: for example,
if at any time a stone having been hurled,
and being about to strike thee, has not
struck thee, do thou bear this ever in thy
mind: these things produce in us_ great
affection towards God. For if on remem-
bering any men who have been the means
of saving us, we are much mortified if we be
not able to requite them, much more (should
we feel thus) with regard to God. This too
is useful in other respects. When we wish
not to be overmuch grieved, let us say: “If


of the Lord, shall not we endure evil
things?” (Job ii. ro.) And when Paul told
them from whence he had been delivered,
(2 Tim. iv. 17) the reason was that he might
put them also in mind. See too how Jacob
kept all these things in his mind: wherefore
also he said: “The Angel which redeemed
me from my youth up (Gen. xlviii. 16); and
not only that he redeemed him, but how
and for what purpose. See accordingly how
he also calls to mind the benefits he had
received in particular, ‘“ With my staff,”
he says, “I passed over Jordan.” (Gen.
Xxxil. 10.) The Jews also always remembered
the things which happened to their fore-
fathers, turning over in their minds the
things done in Egypt. Then much more
let us, bearing in mind the special mercies
which have happened to us also, how often
we have fallen into dangers and calamities,
and unless God had held his hand over
us, should long ago have perished: I say,
let us all, considering these things and
recounting them day by day, return our
united thanks all of us to God, and never
cease to glorify Him, that so we may receive
a large recompense for our thankfulness
of heart, through the grace and compassion
of His only begotten Son, with Whom to
the Father, together with the Holy Ghost,
be glory, might, honor, now and_ ever,


we have received good things at the hand! world without end. AGecu:


HOMIBY “XXXL,


ACTS XVH. 32-34. XVIII. 1.


** And when they heard of the resurrection of the dead,
some mocked: and others said, We will hear thee
again of this matter. So Paul departed from among
them. Howbeit certain men clave unto him, and be-
lieved: among the which was Dionysius the Areopa-
gite, and a woman named Damaris, and others with
them. After these things Paul departed from
Athens, and came to Corinth.”


Wuart can be the reason that, having per-
suaded (some so far as to say) that they would
hear him again, and there being no dangers,
Paul is so in haste to leave Athens? Prob-
ably he knew that he should do them no great
good; moreover he was led by the Spirit to


1 cita evdobey AaBwv amyjeu anenayy Tw Seer. It is not easy to
see what this means, unless the sense intended be, ‘‘ the sol-
dier paced backward and forward,'so that we were intercepted
between his walk and the river.’’—Mod. text, eira €. A, amyec
kat amemnyer To Séee Erasm gui hoc animtadvertens abiit, et
timere nos fecit. Ben. Hinc. vero socius. illo occultato abiit et
timore tabescebat. We must certainly
aTenayniLev.


read amemayny, or


| Corinth. 2


(6) For the Athenians, although
fond of hearing strange things, nevertheless
did not attend (to him) ; for this was not
their study, but only to be always having
something to say ; which was the cause that
made them hold off from him. But if this
was their custom, how is it that they accuse
him, “he seemeth to be a setter forth of
strange gods?” (ch. xvii. 18.) Yes, but these


2 Here in Mss. and Edd. the order is confused by the inser-
tion of the text xvii. 34; XViii. 1-3, and the transposition of the
sentence marked (a), in consequence of which the first sentence
of (c) has been misunderstood, asif it meant that St. Paul
thought it_enough merely to sow the seeds at Athens (Téws
mod. text Cat. tev Adywr), ‘because the greater part of his
life was now passed.”’ So Cat. is further betrayed into a mis-
conception of the following words éwi wév yap Népwvos éred-
ewwy, adding o IlavaAos, as if it referred to St. Paul’s martyrdom:
and so Ben. mistakes the matter. »ayor’ enim pars vite illius


Jam (evtav0a) transacta erat. Nam sub Nerore consummatus
est, as Erasm. occtsus est:’ though the opposition to the
émt wev N. in the following clause awo é€ KA., might have


obviated this misapprehension.


240


were matters they did not at all know what to
make of. Howbeit, he did convert both
Dionysius the Areopagite, and some others.
For those who were careful of (right) living,
quickly received the word; but the others not
so. It seemed to Paul sufficient to have cast
the seeds of the doctrines. (@) To Corinth
then, as I said, he was led by the Spirit, in
which city he was to abide. (¢) “And hav-
ing found a certain Jew named Aquila, of
Pontus by birth, lately come from Italy ”—
for the greater part of his life had been passed
there—‘‘ and Priscilla his wife, because that
Claudius had commanded all the Jews to de-
part from Rome.” (v. 2.) For though it was
in the reign of Nero that the war against the
Jews was consummated, yet from the time of
Claudius and thenceforward it was fanning
up, at a distance indeed,’ so that, were it but
so, they might come to their senses, and from
Rome they were now driven as common pests.
This is why it is so ordered by Providence
that Paul was led thither as a prisoner, that
he might not as a Jew be driven away, but as
acting under military custody might even be
guarded there. (Having found these,) “he
came to them, and because he was of the
same craft, he abode with them and wrought:
for by occupation they were tent-makers.”
(v. 3.) Lo, what a justification he found for
dwelling in the same house with them! For
because here, of all places, it was necessary
that he should not receive, as he himself says,
“That wherein they glory, they may be found,
even as we” (2 Cor. xi. 12), it is providen-
tially ordered that he there abides. ‘ And he
reasoned in the synagogue every sabbath, and
persuaded the Jews and the Greeks. And
when Silas and Timotheus were come from
Macedonia, Paul was straitened in the word, ?
testifying to the Jews that Jesus is the Christ.”
(v. 4,5.) ‘‘And when the Jews opposed and
blasphemed,” i. e. they tried to bear him
down (érypéafov), they set upon him—What
then does Paul? He separates from them,
and in a very awful manner: and though he
does not now say, “ It was need that the word
should be spoken unto you,” yet he darkly in-
timates it to them :—“ and when they opposed
themselves, and blasphemed, he shook his
raiment, and said unto them, Your blood be
upon your own heads; I am clean: from
henceforth I will go unto the Gentiles.” (v.
6.) “And he departed thence, and entered
into a certain man’s house, named Justus, one
that worshipped God, whose house joined


hard to the synagogue.” See how having


1 See Recapitulation, p. 230, note !.
2 A.B. C.7@ Adyw. so the best Mss. of the Acts, Gr. and
Lat. zustabat verbo.


THE WORKS OF ST. - CHRYSOS#Gir


[Homity XXXIX


again said, “ Henceforth—” for all that, he
does not neglect them ; so that it was to rouse
them that he said this, and thereupon came to
Justus, whose house was contiguous to the
synagogue, so that * even from this they might
have jealousy, from the very proximity.
‘““And Crispus, the chief ruler of the syna-
gogue, believed on the Lord with all his
house.” This also was, of all things, enough
to bring them over. “And many of the Cor-
inthians hearing believed, and were baptized.
Then spake the Lord to Paul in the night by
a vision, Be not afraid, but speak, and hold
not thy peace: for I am with thee, and no
man shall set on thee to hurt thee: for I have
much people in this city.” (v. 8-10.) See by
how many reasons He persuades him, and
how He puts last the reason which of all
others most prevailed with him, ‘‘ I have much
people in this city.” Then how was it, you
may ask, that they set upon him? And * yet,
the writer tells us, they prevailed nothing, but
brought him to the proconsul. “And he con-
tinued there a year and six months, teaching
the word of God among them. And when
Gallio was proconsul of Achaia, the Jews
made insurrection with one accord against
Paul, and brought him to the judgment-seat.”
(v. 11, 12.) Do you mark why those men
were ever contriving to give a public turn to
the misdemeanors (they accused them of)?
Thus see here: (4) “Saying, This fellow
seduceth men contrary to the law to worship
God. And when Paul was about to open
his mouth, Gallio said: If indeed it were
any wrong-doing or wicked lewdness, O ye
Jews, reason would that I should bear with
you. But if it be a question of words and
names, and of your law, look ye to it; for I
will be no judge of such matters. And he
drave them from the judgment-seat.” (v. 13-
16.) This Gallio seems to me to have been a
sensible man. (a) Thus observe, when these
had said, ‘“‘ Against the law he seduceth men
to worship God,” he “‘ cared for none of these
things: ”” and observe how he answers them:
“If indeed it were” any matter affecting the
city, ‘any wrong-doing or wicked lewdness,”
etc. (c) “ Then all the Jews® took Sosthenes
the ruler of the synagogue, and beat him
before the judgment-seat : and Gallio cared


3 A.B. C. wore Kat avo (B. om.) Tod SyAov (SHAov C.) Exery
amd THs yertTviadgews, Cat. has preserved the true reading, avo
TOUTOV SyAov.

4 This would be better transposed thus: kai pny, dyno,
Hyayov avtTov mpos Tov av@., add’ Jovder cxvoav, Mod. text,
‘“but they ovZ2y brought him,”’ etc. What follows is confused
by the transposition after Opa yovv evravéa of the part (a)
beginning with the same words.

> The Mss. have ot”EAAnves as in some copies of the Acts
and Elz., but the best authorities Gr. and Lat. simply mavzes.
We adopt oi Iovéato. from the Catena, and Chrys. evidently
understood it of the Jews.


HomILy XXXIX.]


for none of these things” (v. 17): but their
beating him he did not take as an insult to
himself. So petulant were the Jews. But let
us look over again what has been said.


(Recapitulation,) ‘“ And when they heard,”
(ch. xvii. 32) what great and lofty doctrines,
they did not even attend, but jeered at
the Resurrection! ‘‘For the natural man,”
it saith, “receiveth not the things of the
Spititatime (Or; il. 14.)h“f And..so,” it ;says,
“Paul went forth.” (v. 33.) How? Hayv-
ing persuaded some; derided by others.
“ But certain men,” it says, “clave unto him,
and believed, among whom was also Dio-
nysius the Areopagite and some others.’ ?
eae). “And, , after ginese things,” ete.
“And having found a certain Jew by name
Aquila, of Pontus by birth, lately come from
Italy, because that Claudius had ordered all
Jews to depart from Rome, he came to
them, and because he was of the same craft,
he abode with them, and wrought: for by
their occupation they were tent-makers.”
(ch. xviii. 1-3.) Being of Pontus, this Aquila
* * * 2 Observe how, not in Jerusalem, nor
near it (the crisis), was hasting to come, but
at a greater distance. And with him he
abides, and is not ashamed to abide, nay, for
this very reason he does abide, as having a
suitable lodging-place, for to him it was much
more suitable than any king’s palace. And
smile not thou, beloved, to hear (of his occu-
pation). For (it was good for him) even as
to the athlete the palzstra is more useful than
delicate carpets; so to the warrior the iron
sword (is useful), not that of gold. “ And
wrought,” though he preached. Let us be
ashamed, who though we have no preaching
to occupy us, live in idleness. “ And he dis-
puted in the synagogue every sabbath day,
and persuaded both Jews and Greeks” (v.
4): but “when they opposed and blasphemed ”’


1 Here A. B. C. insert the sentence opa tous muaTous x. T. A.
which mod. text rightly removes to the comment on v. 8, and
after it, opa m@s 0 vos KataAvetat Aourov: which unless it
means, ‘‘ See here the beginning of the judgment on the Jews,
the dissolution of their Law, and overthrow of their nation,”’
of which Chrys. speaks in this sentence, is out of place here,
and belongs to the comment on v. 18, i. e. to the beginning of
Hom. 40, which in fact opens with these words. So mod.
text understands them. ‘‘ Mark how the Law begins to be
dissolved from henceforth. For this man, being a Jew, hav-
ing after these things shorn his head in Cenchrea, goes with
Paul into Syria. Being a man of Pontus, not in Jerusalem nor
near it did he haste to come, but at a greater distance.” The
innovator’s meaning seems to have been, that he shore his
head in fulfilment of his vow, notin Jerusalem, nor near Jeru-
salem, butat a greater distance, viz. in Cenchrea.’’ But St.
‘Chrys. ishere commenting on Claudius’ edict (see above, p. 240,
on v.2): ‘‘See here the beginning of the judgmenton the
Jews: it was hasting to come, but it began notin Jerusalem,
nor in Palestine, but at a greater distance—at Rome, in this
edict of the Emperor: ov« év ‘IepomoAvmos, ovd€ mAngoiov
éomevdev €AOety aAAa faKxpoTepw.”’

2 The sentence may be completed with: ‘‘had spent the
greater part of his life at Rome,” etc. ; see above, p. 236, but
the copyist make odtos nom. to ov« éameviev EAGetv.


16


TEE ACs OF THE APOSTLES. 241


he withdrew, by this expecting to draw them
more. For wherefore having left that house
did he come to live hard by the synagogue ?
was it not for this? For it was not that he
saw any danger here. But therefore it is that
Paul having testified to them—not teaches
now, but testifies—‘ having shaken his gar-
ments,” to terrify them not by word only but
by action, “said unto them, Your blood be
upon your own heads” (v. 6): he speaks the
more vehemently as having already persuaded
many. “I,” says he, “am clean.” Then we
also are accountable for the blood of those
entrusted to us, if we neglect them. ‘ From
this time forth I will go to the Gentiles.” So
that also when he says, “ Henceforth let no
man trouble me” (Gal. vi. 17), he says it to
terrify. For not so much did the punishment
terrify, as this stung them. “ And having re-
moved thence he came into the house of one
named Justus, that worshipped God, whose
house was contiguous to the synagogue” (v.
7), and there abode, by this wishing to per-
suade them that he was in earnest (pic ra
éOvn yreiyero) to go to the Gentiles. Accord-
ingly, mark immediately the ruler of the syna-
gogue converted, and many others, when he
had done this. ‘Crispus the ruler of the
synagogue believed in the Lord, with his
whole house: and many of the Corinthians
hearing believed, and were baptized.”—(v. 8.)
“ With his whole house:”* observe the con-
verts in those times doing this with their en-
tire household. This Crispus he means where
he writes, ‘‘ I baptized none save Crispus and
Gaius.” . (a Cor: 4:24.) /This; (same)) 1)-take
to be called Sosthenes—(evidently) a believer,
insomuch that he is beaten, and is always
present with Paul.* “And the Lord said in
the night,”’ etc. Now even the number (of the
“much people’’) persuaded him, but Christ’s
claiming them for His own (moved him) more.
Yet He saysalso, “ Fear not:” for the danger


* To this clause, mod. text rightly refers the comment,
dpa Tovs TLETOVS TOTE META THS OiKLas TOUTO ToLOvUYTas OAOKANpoL,
which the original text has after cat erepor tives Of XVil. 34.

* There is no sufficient ground for the supposition of Chrys.
that the Sosthenes here mentioned was a Christian and the
same who is saluted in 1 Cor. i. 1. On the contrary, he was
the leader of the Jewish party who persecuted the ruler of the
synagogue, perhaps the successor of Crispus who had be-
come a Christian. The reading ot ‘Iovdatoc of some inferior
Mss. in v. 17 which is followed by Chrys. would easily give
rise to this misconception. The true text is most probably
mavres, meaning the officers of the governor. The representa-
tives of the Roman government, then, attacked Sosthenes, the
leader of the party which was persecuting Paul. Thus their
effort ended in failure. And so indifferent was Gallio that he
in no way interfered. Paul’s accusers were thus themselves
beaten and the whole effort at prosecution miserably failed.—
Ga Be S-

44 5€ oixetwors TOU X. mA€ov. Sed familiaritas Christi
magis. Ben. Chrys. said above, that the most powerful con-
sideration was this which is put last, “ For Ihave much peo-
ple in this city.’’ The meaning here is, That there was
‘“*much people’’ to be converted, was a cheering considera-
tion: that Christ should say, Aads wot moAvs eotiw, speaking of
them as ‘*‘ His own,”’ was the strongest inducement.


242


THE -WORKS OF ‘ST. 'CHRYSOSTON:


[HomiLy XXXIX.


was become greater now, both because more
believed, and also the ruler of the synagogue.
This was enough to rouse him. Not that he
was reproved ' as fearing; but that he should
not suffer aught ; ‘I am with thee, and none
shall set upon thee to hurt thee.’ (v. 9, 10.)
For He did not always permit them to suffer
evil, that they might not become too weak.
For nothing so grieved Paul, as men’s unbelief
and setting themselves (against the Truth):
this was worse than the dangers. Therefore
it is that (Christ) appears to him now. ‘“ And
he continued a year and six months,” etc.
(v. 11.) After the year and six months, they
set upon him. “And when Gallio was pro-
consul of Achaia,” etc. (v. 12, 13), because
they had no longer the use of their own laws.?
(c) And observe how prudent he is: for he
does not say straightway, I care not, but, “ If,”
says he, “it were a matter of wrong-doing or
wicked lewdness, O ye Jews, reason would
that I should bear with you; but if it be a
question of doctrine and words and of your
law, see ye to it, for I do not choose to be a
judge of such matters.” (v. 14,15.) (g) He
taught® them that not such are the matters
which crave a judicial sentence, but they do
all things out of order. And he does not say,
It is not my duty, but, “I do not choose,”
that they may not trouble him again. Thus
Pilate said in the case of Christ, “Take ye
Him, and judge him according to your law.”
(John xvill. 31.) But they were just like men
drunken and mad. (d@) “And he drave them
from the judgment-seat”’ (v. 16)—he effectu-
ally closed the tribunal against them. ‘“ Then
all” (the Jews) “having seized Sosthenes the
ruler of the synagogue, beat him before the
judgment-seat. And Gallio cared for none of
these things.” (v.17). (@) This thing, of all
others, set them on (to this violence)—their
persuasion that the governor would not even
let himself down (to notice it), (e) It was a
splendid victory. O the shame they were put
to! (4) For itis one thing to have come off


1 B. C. ore nreyxOn hoBovmevos H ovK HAEyXOn woTE nH (C.
unde) mabetv. A., ore ed€xXOyn Wote SE my Tabecv, (Which is meant
for emendation: ‘*‘ This was enough to rouse him when it was
spoken : but, that he should not suffer,’ etc.) Mod. text,
OTL HA. HoBovpevos, 7 ovVK HA, ev, GAN’ Hote wyde TOVTO Taber.
We read OvK ote ndAeyxOn ws hoBovmevos. wate SE mH Tartecy,
"Ey eit eta cov. The accidental omission of ov« may have
been corrected in the margin by the gloss 7 ovK 7A. But the
sense seems to be otherwise confused by transpositions. ‘It is
true, even the number, and still more Christ’s oiketwous of them,
prevailed with him. This was enough to rouse him. But
Christ begins by saying, ‘‘ Fear not,’ etc. And in fact the
danger was increased, etc. Not that Paul was reproved as
being afraid, etc.

2 From this point to the end of the Exposition all is con-
fused. To make something like connection, it has been neces-
sary to rearrange the parts, but the restoration is still unsatis-
factory.

3 Kai eddakev ort ta toradta Stkacrixyjs WHydov [ov, this we
supply,] detrav: aAAa ataktws mavta rovovatv. Mod. text edidagée
yap (W TE TOUTwY ‘ETLE(KELa Kal Exeivwy OpacTys, from_/) O7L Ta
Tov. Sux. WH. deitar.


|


victorious from a controversy, and another for
those to learn that he cared nothing for the
affair. (/) ‘And Gallio cared for none of
these things:” and yet the whole was meant
as an insult to him! But, forsooth, as if they
had received authority (they did this). Why
did he (Sosthenes), though he also had author-
ity, not beat (them)? But they were (other-
wise) trained : so that the judge should learn
which party was more reasonable. This was
no small benefit to those present—both the
reasonableness of these, and the audacity of
those. (%) * He was beaten, and said nothing.

This man let us also imitate: to them that
beat us, let us return blow for blow, by meek-
ness, by silence, by long-suffering. More
grievous these wounds, greater this blow, and
more heavy. For to show that it is not the
receiving a blow in the body that is grievous,
but the receiving it in the mind, we often
smite people, but since it is in the way of
friendship, they are even pleased: but if you
smite any indifferent person in an insolent
manner, you have pained him exceedingly,
because you have touched his heart. So let
us smite their heart. But that meekness_ in-
flicts a greater blow than fierceness, come, let
us prove, so far as that is possible, by words.


For the sure proof indeed is by acts and by -


experience: but if you will, let us also make
the enquiry by word, though indeed we have
often made it already. Now in _ insults,
nothing pains us so much, as the opinion
passed by the spectators; for it is not the
same thing to be insulted in public and in pri-
vate, but those same insults we endure even
with ease, when we suffer them in a solitary
place, and with none by to witness them, or
know of them. So true is it that it is not the
insult, as it is in itself, that mortifies us, but
the having to suffer it in the sight of all men:
since if one should do us honor in the sight of
all men, and insult us in private, we shall not-
withstanding even feel obliged to him. The
pain then is not in the nature of the insult,
but in the opinion of the beholders; that one
may not seem to be contemptible. | What
then, if this opinion should be in our favor?
Is not the man attempting to disgrace us him-
self more disgraced, when men give their
opinion in our favor? Say, whom do the by-
standers despise? Him who insults, or him
who being insulted keeps silence? Passion
indeed suggests, that they despise him who is
insulted: but let us look into it now while we
are free from that excitement, in order that


4 Here, between the parts «and /, the Mss. have two sen-
tences retained by Edd. but clearly out of place, unless they
form part of a second recapitulation: ‘' Therefore he de-
parted from Athens.’’ ‘‘ Because there was much people
theres?


Homiry XXXiX,] THA) AGIs) OF


we may not be carried away when the time
comes. Say, whom do we all condemn?
Plainly the man who insults: and if he be an
inferior, we shall say that he is even mad; if
an equal, that he is foolish; if a superior, still
we shall not approve of it. For which man, I
ask, is worthy of approval, the man who is ex-
cited, who is tossed with a tempest of passion,
who is infuriated like a wild beast, who demeans
himself in this sort against our common nature,
or he who lives in a state of calm, in a haven
of repose, and in virtuous equanimity? Is not
the one like an angel, the other not even like
aman? For the one cannot even bear his
own evils, while the other bears even those of
others also: here, the man cannot even en-
dure himself; there, he endures another too:
the one is in danger of shipwreck, the other
sails in safety, his ship wafted along the fa-
voring gales: for he has not suffered the
squall of passion to catch his sails and over-
turn the bark of his understanding: but the
breath of a soft and sweet air fanning upon it,
the breath of forbearance, wafts it with much
tranquillity into the haven of wise equanimity.
And like as when a ship is in danger of
foundering, the sailors know not what they
cast away, whether what they lay hands upon
be their own or other men’s property, but they
throw overboard all the contents without dis-
crimination, alike the precious and what is
not such: but when the storm has ceased,
then reckoning up all that they have thrown
out, they shed tears, and are not sensible of
the calm for the loss of what they have thrown
overboard: so here, when passion blows hard,
and the storm is raised, people in flinging out
their words know not how to use order or fit-
ness; but when the passion has ceased, then
recalling to mind what kind of words they
have given utterance to, they consider the
loss and feel not the quiet, when they remem-
ber the words by which they have disgraced
themselves, and sustained most grievous loss,
not as to money, but as to character for mod-
eration and gentleness. Anger is a darkness.
“The fool,” saith Scripture, “hath said in his
heart, There is no God.” (Ps. xiii. 1.) Per-
haps also of the angry man it is suitable to
say the same, that the angry man hath said,
There is no God. For, saith Scripture,
“Through the multitude of his anger he will
not-seek ” (after God).1 (Ps. x. 4.) For let
what pious thought will enter in, (passion)
‘thrusts and drives all out, flings all athwart.


abused uttered not one bitter word, do you not


for this feel more pain than you have inflicted ? |


DERE, 2vhios PLES.


243


(a) If you in your own mind do not feel more
pain than he whom you have abused, abuse
still ; (but) though there be none to call you
to account, the judgment of your conscience,
having taken you privately, shall give you a
thousand lashes, (when you think) how you
poured out a flood of railings on one so meek,
and humble, and forbearing. We are forever
saying these things, but we do not see them
exhibited in works. You, a human being, in-
sult your fellow-man? You, a servant, your
fellow-servant ? But why do I wonder at this,
when many even insult God? Let this bea
consolation to you when suffering insult. Are
you insulted? God also is insulted. Are you
reviled? God also was reviled. Are you
treated with scorn? Why, so was our Master
also. In these things He shares with us, but
not so in the contrary things. For He never
insulted another unjustly: God forbid!
He never reviled, never did a wrong. So
that we are those who share with Him, not ye.
For to endure when insulted is God’s part:
to be merely abusive, is the part of the devil.
See the two sides. “Thou hast a devil”
(John vii. 20; ib. xviii, 22), Christ was told: He
received a blow on the face from the servant
of the high-priest. ‘They who wrongfully in-
sult, are in the same class with these. For if
Peter was even called “Satan” (Matt. xvi.
23) for one word; much? more shall these
men, when they do the works of the Jews, be
called, as those were called, “children of the
devil ” (John viii. 44), because they wrought
the works of the devil. You insult; who are
you, I ask (that you do so)? Nay, rather the
reason why you insult, is this, that you are
nothing: no one that is human insults. So
that what is said in quarrels, “‘ Who are you?”
ought to be put in the contrary way: “ Insult:
for you are nothing.” Instead of that the
phrase is, “ Who are you, that you insult?”
‘““A better man than you,” is the answer.
And yet it is just the contrary : but because we


1 Ps. x. 4. ‘The wicked, through the pride of his coun-
tenance, will not,’’ etc. J


put the question amiss, therefore they answer
amiss: so that the fault is ours. For as if we
thought it was for great men to insult, there-
fore we ask, ‘“‘ Who are you, that you insult ?”
And therefore they make this answer. But,
on the contrary, we ought to say: “Do you
insult? insult still: for you are nobody:”
whereas to those who do not insult this
should be said: ‘‘ Who are you that you insult
not?—you have surpassed human nature.”


: | This is nobility, this is generosity, to speak
(6) When you are told, that he whom you)


nothing ungenerous, though a man may de-
serve to have it spoken to him. Tell me now,


2 Mss. mwoAA@ paddov otro “Iovdatot axovgovtat, oTav Ta
"Iovdaiwy moro. WoTep Kaxeivow SitaBoAov Téxva, Ererdy K. 7. A.


| We omit ‘Tovéatot.


244 THE WORKS OF


ST. ‘CHRYSGST ORE [Homiry XXXIX.


how many are there who are not worthy to be
put to death? Nevertheless, the judge does
not this in his own person, but interrogates
them ; and not this either, in his own person.
But if it is not to be suffered, that the judge,
sitting in judgment, should (in his own person)
speak with a criminal, but he does all by the
intervention of a third person, much more is
it our duty not to insult our equals in rank;
for! all the advantage we shall get of them
will be, not so much to have disgraced them,
as to be made to learn that we have disgraced
ourselves. Well then, in the case of the
wicked, this is why we must not insult (even
them) ; in the case of the good there is another
reason also because they do not deserve it:
and for a third, * because it is not right to be
abusive. But as things are, see what comes
of it; the person abused is a man, and the
person abusing is a man, and the spectators
men. What then? must the beasts come be-
tween them and settle matters? for only this
is left. For when both the wrong-doers and
those who delight in the wrong-doing are men,
the part of reconciler is left for the beasts:
for just as when the masters quarrel in a
house, there is nothing left but for the ser-
vants to reconcile them,—even if this be not
the result, for the nature of the thing demands
this,—just so is it here-—Are you abusive?
Well may you be so, for you are not even
human. Insolence seemed to be a high-born
thing; it seemed to belong to the great;
whereas it belongs rather to slaves; but to
give good words belongs to free men.
to do ill is the part of those, so to suffer ill is


1 ov yap oUTW TO vBpioat TAEOVEKTHTOMEV avTov, @s TO ddax-
Ojvac © OTe UBpicauev Eavtovs. B. and mod. text To UBp., TH 66.
The om om. by A. B.-C. Sav. is supplied by mod. text. A has
derxOjvar, Sav. dtadexOnjvar. The construction is mAeovextecy TL
TLVOS.
ure of having disgraced them; whereas all that we get, in
advance of them, is the being taught that we have disgraced
ourselves.”’

2 Kai tpitov (om. C.), ote bBprorny eivar ov ypy. This cannot
be, ‘‘ for a third reason,’ or ‘“‘in the third place,’ but seems
rather to mean ‘‘ the third party’’ spoken of in the pre-
ceding sentence. Perhaps it may mean, As the judge
does not himself arraign nor even interrogate the criminal,
but bya third person, because the judge must not seem to
be an vB8prorys, so there is need of a third person, kat tpitov dec
€is weoov eAPery OTL. . . .
is very obscure.


For as|


‘* We may think we have got something, viz. the pleas- |


But the whole scope of the argument |


the part of these.—Just as if some slave
should steal the master’s property, some old
hag,—such a thing as that is the abusive man.
And like as some detestable thief and run-
away, ® with studied purpose stealing in, looks
all around him, wishing to filch something : so
does this man, even as he, look narrowly at
all on every side, studying how to throw out
some (reproach), Or perhaps we may set him
forth by a different sort of example. Just as
if* one should steal filthy vessels out of a
house, and bring them out in the presence of
all men, the things purloined do not so dis-
grace the persons ; robbed, as they disgrace the
thief himself: just so this man, by ‘bringing
out his words in the presence of all men, Casts
disgrace not on others but on himself by the
words, in giving vent to this language, and be-
fouling both his tongue and his mind. For it
is all one, when we quarrel with bad men, as
if one for the sake of striking a man who is
immersed in putrefying filth should defile him-
self by plunging his hands into the nastiness.
Therefore, reflecting on these things, let us
flee the mischief thence accruing, and keep a
clean tongue, that being clear from all
abusiveness, we may be enabled with strict-
ness to pass through the life present, and to
attain unto the good things promised to those ©
that love Him, through the grace and mercy
of our Lord Jesus Christ, with Whom to the
Father and the Holy Ghost together be glory,
‘might, honor, now and ever, world without
end. Amen.


3 Old text : UBpioris, KAemTys KaTaparos Kai Spamerys’ Kal ws
Gv €lTroL TLs TTOVOH ELoLMV, Kabamep € exelvos av TAXOU meptBAereTat
Uderdcabar Te orovdalwy, ovTwW Kal oUTOS Tavera. TEPLOKOTEL
exBadrevy | Ti Oehkwv, Weread UBpiorys. Kat ws ay et Tus KAeTTH Ss
| KaTap. kat Spar. oToven cioLwy, mavt. TeptBA, Vd. Tt GEAWY, OVTH
Kai oUTOs Kabamep exetvos TavTamepiok. ExBadAeLy TL GrOoVdacwr.
| But it can hardly be supposed that Chrys. thus expressed him-
self. The purport seems to be this: To be abusive is to be-
have like a slave, like a foul-mouthed hag. (see p. 20c.) And
the abusive man, when he is eager to catch at something in
your life or manners, the exposure of which may disgrace
you, is like a thief who should slink into a house, and pry
about for something that he can lay hold of—nay, like one who
should purposely look about for the filthiest things he can
bring out, and whoin so doing disgraces himself more than
the owner.

4 Here again womep av etror tis, B. for Gomep av et tes, C.—
The sentence ovxt Ta vdharpebevta yoXvvE TogovTOY is incom-
plete ; viz. ‘*the owner, by the exposure of the noisomeness,
' as the stealer himself who produces it.”’


HomiLy XL.]


Pee TAGis OF (THE APOSTLES.


HOMEY 2X.


AGTS, XVII x8:


“ And Paul after this tarried there yet a good while, and
then took his leave of the brethren, and sailed
thence into Syria, and with him Priscilla and
Aquila; having shorn his head in Cenchrea: for
he had a vow.”


SEE how the Law was breaking up; see
how they were bound by conscience. This,


namely, was a Jewish custom, to shear their


heads agreeably with a vow. but then there
ought to be also a sacrifice (ch. xxi. 26),


which was not the case here.*—‘“ Having yet |


tarried:” after the beating of Sosthenes.}
For it was necessary that he should yet tarry,
and comfort them concerning these things.
“He sailed for Syria.” Why does he desire
again to come to Syria? It was there that
“ the disciples were ordered to be called Chris-
tians” (ch. xi. 26): there, that he had been
“commended to the grace of God” (xiv. 26):


there, that he had effected such things con- |


cerning the doctrine. ‘ And with him Pris-
cilla”—lo, a woman also*—“ and Aquila.”
But these he left at Ephesus. With good
reason, namely, that they should teach. For
having been with him so long time, they were


1 Edd. without stop, yrs ovK eyevero meta TO TUTTNOHVaL TOV
Swobevnv.—B. N. Cat. éyévero é7t, which is the ere of v. 18,
and explained by the following words.

* Two points are much disputed in reference to the vow
mentioned in v. 18: (1) What kind of a vow it was, whether
the Nazarite vow or some other. (2) Whether it had been
taken and whether the shaving of the head was done by Paul
or by Aquila. The majority of interpreters maintain that this


shaving of the head represented the termination of a Nazarite |
The view encounters |


vow which had been taken by Paul.
two great difficulties : (1) How can we suppose that the cham-


pion of liberty from Jewish ceremonies and_ observances |


should himself be given to their observance? (2) Luke here
places the name of the wife Priscilla first and then Aquila, and
Ketpapevos Stands next to this name. It is most naturally con-
strued with the name to which it stands nearest, especially
when this unexpected arrangement of the names of the hus-
band and wife is taken into account. It is true that the same
arrangement is found in the salutation of Paul (Rom. xvi. 3;
1 Tim. iv. 1g), but this may be due to the predominant Christian
activity of the wife; so also in v. 26, which may have been
conformed to this passage. The former consideration is the
one of chief importance. On the other side it must be ac-
knowledged that there would be less motive for mentioning a
vow of Aquila than of Paul. The vow taken was probably
akin to that of the Nazarites. It is referred to Paul by the
older interpreters by Bengel, Olshausen, Zeller, De Wette,
Lange, Hackett, Gloag, Lechler, Bleek, Ewald; to Aquila, by
- the Vulgate, Grotius, Kuinoel, Wieseler, Meyer, Conybeare
and Howson.—G. B. S.


2 [Sov kat yuvy - transposed from after the sentence, ‘‘ For |


having been—custom as Jews.’’ Mod. text adds, 70 igor


SONS = ‘ ;
avépact movovaa Kat didacKxovcea.


was, ‘‘and mentioned before her husband.’’ See Serm. in


But perhaps the comment |


|


tllud Salutate Prise. et Aquil. tom. ili. p. 176. B. where he |


comments on this position of the names, and adds that ‘‘ she
having taken Apollos, an eloquent man, etc. taught him the
way of God and made him a perfect teacher.”


| Stay.
| (the Lord) suffered him not to come


| spoken to this effeet :


learning many things: and yet he did not at
present withdraw them from their custom as
Jews. ‘And he came to Ephesus, and left
them there: but he himself entered into the
synagogue, and reasoned with the Jews.
When they desired him to tarry longer time
with them, he consented not; but bade them
farewell, saying, I must by all means keep
this feast that cometh in Jerusalem.” There-
fore® it was that he was hindered from com-
ing into Asia, being impelled to what was of
pressing moment. Thus observe him here,
entreated (by them) to stay, but because he
could not comply, being in haste to depart,
“he bade them farewell.” However, he did
not leave them without more ado, but with
promise (to return): “ But I will return again
unto you, if God will. And he sailed from
Ephesus.” (v. 19-21.) ‘‘ And when he had
landed at Czsarea, and gone up, and saluted
the Church, he went down to Antioch. And
after he had spent some time there, he de-
parted, and went over all the country of Gala-
tia and Phrygia in order, strengthening all the
disciples.” (v. 22-23.) He came again to
those places which he had previously visited.
‘“ And a certain Jew named Apollos, born at
Alexandria, an eloquent man, and mighty in
the Scriptures, came to Ephesus.” (v. 24.)
Lo, even learned men are now urgent, and the
disciples henceforth go abroad. Do you
mark the spread of the preaching? ‘ This
man was instructed in the way of the Lord;
and being fervent in the Spirit, he spake and
taught diligently the things of the Lord,
knowing only the baptism of John. And he
began to speak boldly in the synagogue : whom
when Aquila and Priscilla had heard, they
took him unto them, and expounded unto him


the way of God more perfectly.” (v. 25-26.)
3 Something is wanting here, for in éxwAvero eis Thy 'Aciav
éA@ecy there seems to be a reference to xvi. 6. KwAv@evtes


AaAjeat Tov Adyov ev TH Agta, and again in ov uHy avto’s atAas
elagev to ibid. 7. ovK €lavev avTois To mvevma. He may have
This was his first visit to Ephesus, for
he was forbidden before to come into Asia. . . . Not however
that the Spirit amAa@s ovx eiacgev, but he says, with promise,
I will come to you,etc. The prohibition was not absolute,
but he was not permitted on the former occasion to preach in
Asia (Procons.), because he was impelled to more urgent
duties (in Macedonia and Greece) ; accordingly here also he
has other immediate objects in view, and therefore cannot
Soin Hom. xli. on xix. 10,11. “‘ For this reason also
into Asia, waiting (or


| reserving Himself) for this conjuncture.”


246 THE WORKS: OF


ST. CHR¥SOS( OM:


[Homity XL.


If this man? knew only the baptism of John,
how is it that he was “fervent in the Spirit,”
for the Spirit was not given in that way?
And if those after him needed the baptism
of Christ, much? more would he need it.
Then what is to be said? For it is not with-
out a meaning that the writer has strung the
two incidents together. It seems to me
that this was one of the hundred and twenty
who were baptized with the Apostles: or, if
not so, then the same that took place in the
case of Cornelius, took place also in the case
of this man. But neither does he receive
baptism. That expression, then, “they ex-
pounded more perfectly,” seems? to me to
be this, that he behooved also to be baptized.
Because the other twelve knew nothing accu-
rate, not even what related to Jesus. And it
is likely* that he did in fact receive baptism.
But if these (disciples) of John, ®* after that


1 What St. Chrysostom said has been misconceived by the
reporter or the copyists. He meant to remark two things
concerning Apollos: 1. That having only the baptism of
John he nevertheless had the Spirit, nay, was ‘‘ fervent in the
Spirit.” Howso? He had it,as Cornelius had it ; the bap-
tism of the Spirit without the baptism of water. (See Reca-
pitulation #7.) 2. That there is no mention of his receiving
baptism, as the twelve did in the following narrative. St.
Luke, he says, evidently had a meaning in this juxtaposition
of the two incidents. Apollos had the baptism of the Spirit
‘*therefore did not need the water.’’ (Hence whether he
received it or not, the writer does not think need to mention
it.) Those twelve had no accurate knowledge even of the
facts relating to Jesus: norso much as know whether there
were a Holy Ghost.—The scribes did not comprehend this
view of the case. Hence A. C. omit aad’ ov Bamrigerar,
retained by B. mod. text and Cat. (Ec. (aAA’ ove B.)—They
take oi weTa TovTOv (i. e. the twelve of the following incident)
to mean the Apostles, and therefore make it moAA@ maAAov
Kai obTos edey9y av, ‘if Christ’s own disciples after John’s bap-
tism needed the baptism of Christ, @ /ortzorz this man would
need it.’’—They find the baptism in the axpiB. ata é&€bevr0,
‘‘this was one of the points they taught him—that he must be
baptized.’’—St. Chrys. probably spoke of the case of the hun-
dred and twenty who were baptized with the Spirit on the
Day of Pentecost: i. e. ‘Those having’ the greater, the
baptism of the Spirit,did not need the less, the baptism of
water. The scribes absurdly make him suggest that Apollos
may have been one of the humdred and twenty.

2 Perhaps it should be, Kat et ot wera ToUTOV. . . . TOU X., Tas
ovx ovTos edenOn av; “AAA’ ovdE BamtiCerar. Ti odv éorwy Eimer:
ovde yap amA@s eheéns eOnxev audotepa. (By aud. perhaps the
scribes understood. the ‘‘knowing only the baptism of John,”
and, the being “fervent in Spirit’’) “Eyot Soxet omep émi tav
€xaTov elKooL TOV mEeTa TMV Ar. BamTLobEVTwY, OmEp emt TOD Kopvy-
Alou yéyove, yeyevynTat Kal emt TOVTOV..

8 Here CGicumenius perceived that Chrys. was misrepre-
sented. Accordingly he reads, Tovtov otv axpiBas éEetaabevtos
(Cat. To obv akpiBas c£eTagbév To, aconfusion of the two read-
ings), doxet tovTo mH eivac OTe. . . ‘This point being closely
examined, it does not seem to mean this, that he also needed
to be baptized.” But the scribes took it as above, and the
innovator (with whom A. partly agrees) enlarges it thus:
**But he is not baptized, but when “they expounded to him
more perfectly.”” But this seems to me to be true, that he
did also need to be baptized: since the other twelve,’ etc.
On this the Paris Editor, supposing the twelve Apostles to
be meant, strangely remarks, /tane? duodecim que Jesum
spectabant nihil noverunt Imo oi xp’, i. €, ol EKxaTov Etkoot.
As if it were likely that those hundred and twenty could be
so ignorant.

4 Eixos de avrov kat BarticOqvar. If Chrys. said this (see note
7, p. 247), the meaning may be: “It is likely however that he
did receive baptism,”’ viz. though the writer does not mention
it. For this is the point—the writer mentions it in the case of
those twelve, for it was the means by which they, ignorant
hitherto of the existence of a Holy Ghost, received the Spirit ;
not so in the case of Apollos, for as he had already the baptism
of the Spirit, the water was quite a subordinate consideration.
See above, Hom, xxiv. p. 157, on the case of Cornelius.

5 Still overlooking the reference to the following narrative,
B. C. read Et 6€ avroi of “Iwavvov—, ‘* Fut if even John’s dis-
ciples,’’ etc.: mod. text and A., HAnp ei wai avro.—, reading


baptism again received baptism, was this
needful for the disciples also? And where-
fore the need of water? These are very dif-
ferent from him, men who did not even know
whether there were a Holy Ghost.* ‘“ He was
fervent,” then, “in the Spirit, knowing only
the baptism of John:” but these “ expounded
to him more perfectly. And when he was dis-
posed to pass into Achaia, the brethren wrote,
exhorting the disciples to receive him; who,
when he was come, helped them much which
had believed through grace.” (vy. 27.) He
wished then also to depart into Achaia, and
these” also encouraged (him to do so), having
also given him letters. ‘‘Who when he was
come, helped them much which had believed
through grace: for he mightily convinced the
Jews, and that publicly, showing by the
Scriptures that Jesus was Christ.” (v. 28.)
“‘ And it came to pass, that, while Apollos was
at Corinth, Paul, having passed through the
upper coasts ’—meaning what we have read
as to Czsarea'and the other places—‘“‘ came
to Ephesus, and having found certain disciples
(ch. xix.) 1)p “ he! ‘said’ to” them} “Havel sve
received the Holy Ghost since ye believed?
And they said unto him, We have not so
much as heard whether there be any
Holy Ghost. And he said unto them, Unto
what then were ye baptized? And they said,
Unto John’s baptism. Then said Paul, John
verily baptized with the baptism of repentance,
saying unto the people, that they should be-
lieve on Him who should come after him, that
is, on Christ Jesus.” (v. 2-4.) For that they
did not even believe in Christ is plain from
his saying, “ that they should believe on Him
that was to come after him.” And he did not
say, The baptism of John is nothing, but, It is
incomplete. Nor does he add this (in so
many words), but he taught them, and many
received the Holy Ghost. “ When they heard
this, they were baptized in the name of the
Lord Jesus. And when Paul had laid his
hands upon them, the Holy Ghost came
on them; and they spake with tongues,
and prophesied. And all the men were about
twelve”’ (v. 5-7): so that it was likely they
had the Spirit, but it did not appear.’ “ And
all the men were about twelve.”


the next clause affirmatively, Cat. and CEc., et S€ otto of
"Iwavvov—, which we adopt, The scribes have further dark-
ened the sense by inserting here v. 27 to the end, and xix. 1-7.

* The utter confusion of the text makes it uncertain what
Chrys. said concerning Apollos. The probability is that he still
stood upon the plane of John’s baptism and teaching, a zealous
and able man, but not yet instructed in the Christian doctrine
of the Spirit, nor understanding the significance of Christian
baptism. It is probable that after receiving instruction he
was re-baptized with the twelve at Ephesus (xix. 5-7).—G. B. S.

8 IIpoetpeWato (Sav, marg. avto) Kat ovtos (A. ovtTws). We
read mpoetpeWavto Sé kai ovTor.

7 Viz. the Spirit came upon them in baptism, but it did not
appear until Paul had laid his hands upon them; then they
spake with tongues, etc.


Homity XL.|


ih AGES OF THE ‘APOSTLES: 247


(Recapitulation.) ‘‘ And they came to Ephe-
sus, and there he left them” (v. 19): for he
did not wish to take them about with him,
but left them at Ephesus. But they subse-
quently dwelt at Corinth, and he bears high
testimony to them, and writing to the
Romans, salutes them. (Rom. xvi. 3.)
Whence it seems to me that they afterwards
went back to Rome, in the time of Nero,! as
having an attachment for those parts whence
they had been expelled in the time of
Claudius. ‘But? he himself went into the
synagogue.” It seems to me that the faith
ful still assembled there, for they did not
immediately withdraw them. ‘“ And when
they besought him to stay, he consented
not” (v. 20, 21), for he was hastening to
Czesarea. ‘“ And having arrived at Czsarea,”
etc., “passing through the region of Galatia
and Phrygia, confirming all the disciples.”
{v. 22, 23.) Through these regions also he
merely Aasses again, just enough to establish
them by his presence. “And a certain Jew,
Apollos by name,” etc. (v. 24.) For he was
an awakened man, travelling in foreign parts
for this very purpose. Writing of him the
Apostle said, ‘‘ Now concerning Apollos our
brother.” * (1 Cor. xvi. 12.) (3) Whom when
Aquila and Priscilla had heard,” etc. (v.
26.) It was not for nothing that he left them
at Ephesus, but for Apollos’ sake, the Spirit
so ordered it, that he might come with
greater force to the attack (éz3jva) upon
Corinth. What may be the reason that to
him they did nothing, but Paul they assault ?
They knew that he was the leader, and great
was the name of the man. ‘And when he
was disposed to pass into Achaia” (v. 27):
heen taith:, (he did. all: oby faith ithe
brethren wrote,” etc. nowhere envy, nowhere
an evil eye. Aquila teaches, or rather this
man lets himself be taught. He was minded
to depart, and they send letters. (a) “ For
he mightily convinced the Jews, and that pub-
licly,” etc. (v. 28.) Now by this, that he “ pub-
licly” convinced them, his boldness was
shown: by the clearness of his arguing, his pow-
er was declared: by his convicting them out of
the Scriptures, his skill (of learning). For
neither boldness by itself contributes aught,
where there is not power, nor power where
there is not boldness. “He mightily con-


)


1 émi Népwvos must be removed from the end of the sentence
where the Mss. and Edd. have it.

2 Instead of this, Edd. have v. 22, 23.

3 From this point to the end of the Exposition, all is con-
fused, viz. in the old text the order is as here marked by the
letters a,a. . 8B. 8. . i.e. it gives two expositions, severally
imperfect, but completing each other. In mod. text the parts
are rearranged, but sothat the first of the portions marked
B is placed after the second of those marked a.
some of the comments to wrong texts, and in many places
alters the sense.


| teaching.


It also assigns |


vinced,” it says. (3) ‘ And it came to pass,”
etc. (ch. xix. 1.) But whence had those, being
in Ephesus, the baptism of John? Probably
they had been on a visit at Jerusalem at the
time (of John’s preaching), and did not even
know Jesus. And he does not say to them,
Do ye believe in Jesus? but what? “ Have
ye received the Holy Ghost?” (v. 2.) He
knew that they had not, but wishes them-
selves to say it, that having learnt what they
lack, they may ask. “John verily baptized,”
etc. (v. 4.) From the baptism itself he (John)
prophesies :* and he leads them (to see) that
this is the meaning of John’s baptism. (@)
“That they should believe on Him that was
to come:” on what kind (of Person)? “I
indeed baptize you with water, but He that
cometh after me, shall baptize you with the
Holy Ghost.” (Matt. iii. rr.) And when Paul,”
it says, “had laid his hands upon them, the
Holy Ghost came on them; and they spake
with tongues, and prophesied.” (v. 6.) (3)
The gift is twofold : tongues and prophesyings,
Hence is shown an important doctrine, that é
the baptism of John is incomplete. And he
does not say, “ Baptism ”’ of forgiveness, but,
“‘of repentance.’ Whats (is it) then? These
had not the Spirit: they were not so fervent,
not even instructed. And why did (Apollos)
not receive baptism?‘ (The case) seems to
me to be this: Great was the boldness of the
man. ‘He taught diligently the things con-
cerning Jesus,” but he needed more diligent
Thus, though not knowing all, by
his zeal he attracted the Holy Ghost, in the
same manner as Cornelius and his com-
pany.

Perhaps it is the wish of many, Oh that we
had the baptism of John now! But (if we
had), many would still be careless of a life of
virtue, and it might be thought that each for
this, and not for the kingdom of heaven’s
sake, aimed at virtue. There would be many
false prophets: for then “they which are
approved ” would not be very “ manifest.”
(1 Cor. xi. 19.) As, “blessed are they that
have not seen and yet have believed” (John
20, 29), so they that (believe) without signs.
“Except,” saith (Christ), “ye see signs, ye
will not believe.” (Ib. iv. 48.) For we lose
nothing (by lack of miracles), if we will but


4 Mod. text ‘‘From the baptism itself (i. e. immediately
after it) they prophesy : but this the baptism of John had not;
wherefore it was imperfect. But that they may be made
worthy of such gifts, he more prepared them first.”

5 Mod. text *‘that they who receive baptism are (therein)
thoroughly cleansed from their sins : for were it not so, these
would not have received the gifts immediately.’”

6 Mod. text ‘‘ And how is it that they who have received
the Spirit taught not, but Apollos did, who had not yet received
the Spirit ?”’ An entire perversion of Chrysostom’s mean-
ing.

7 In the Mss. it is m@s 5é ovx EAaBov Bartiona; which cannot
be right. We restore €AaBev.


248


THE WORKS. OF) ST. CHEYSOStGR:


[Homity XL.


take heed to ourselves. We have the sum
and substance of the good things: through
baptism we received remission of sins, sancti-
fication, participation of the Spirit, adoption,
eternal life. What would ye more? Signs?
But they come to an end (dia xarapyeirar).
Thou hast “faith, hope, charity,” the abiding
things: these seek thou, these are greater
than signs. Nothing is equal to charity. For
“ereater than all,” saith he, “is charity.”
(eta « Gor,? xii.) 1) Butamow, dilove: vis! jan
jeopardy, for only its name is left behind,
while the reality is nowhere (seen), but we
are divided each from the other. What then
shall one do to reunite (ourselves) ? For to
find fault is easy, but how may one make
friendship, this is the point to be studied;
how we may bring together the scattered
members. For be it so, that we have one
Church, or one doctrine—yet this is not the
(main) consideration: no, the evil is, that* in
these we have not fellowship—‘ living peace-
ably,” as the Apostle says, “with all men”
(Rom. xii. 18), on the contrary, we are at
variance one with another. For be it that we
are not having fights every day, yet look not
thou to this, but (to this), that neither have
we charity, genuine and unswerving. There
is need of bandages and oil. Let us bear it
in mind, that charity is the cognizance of the
disciples of Christ: that without this, all else
avails nothing: that it is an easy task if we
will. Yes, say you, we know all this, but
how (to go to work) that it may be achieved?
What (to do), that it may be effected? in
what way, that we may love one another?
First, let us put away the things which are
subversive of charity, and then we _ shall
establish this. Let none be resentful, none
be envious, none rejoicing in (others’) mis-
fortunes: these are the things that hinder
love; well then, the things that make it are
of the other sort. For it is not enough to
put away the things that hinder; the things
that establish must also be forthcoming.
Now Sirach tells us the things that are
subversive (of friendship), and does not go on
to speak of the things which make union.
“Reproaching,” he says, ‘and revealing of a
secret, and a treacherous wound.” (Kcclus.
22,27.) But in speaking of the men of those
times, these things might well be named, see-
ing they were carnal: but in our case, God
forbid they should be (even) named. Not?


1 Mod. text besides other alterations : ‘‘ that communicating
in the other things one with another, in the essentials (ev tots
avaykatots) we do not communicate, and being in peace with
all men are at variance one with another.”

2 OvK amd TovTwY Umas evayouev, add’ amd TOY addAwv. But
the scope seems to require, OvK azo 7. v. amayouer, i. e. “as
these are things not even to be supposed to exist among Chris-


from these things do we bring our induce-—
ments for you, but from the others. For us,
there is nothing good without friendship.
Let there be good things without number, but
what is the benefit—be it wealth, be it luxury
—without friendship? No possession equal
to this, even in matters of this life, just as
there is nothing worse than men hating (us).
“Charity hides a multitude of sins” (1
Pet. iv. 8): but enmity, even where sins are
not, suspects them to be. It is not enough
not to be an enemy; no, one must also love.
Bethink thee, that Christ has bidden, and
this is enough. Even affliction makes friend-
ships, and draws (men) together. ‘“ What
then,” say you, “now, when there is no
affliction ? say, how (are we to act) to become
friends?” Have ye not other friends, I ask ?
In what way are ye their friends, how do ye
continue such? For a beginning, let none
have any enemy: this (in itself) is not a small
matter: let none envy; it is not possible to
accuse the man who envies not. (6) How
then shall we be warmly affected? What
makes love of persons? Beauty of person.
Then let us also make our souls beautiful,
and we shall be amiable one to another : for
it is necessary, of course, not only to love,
but also to be loved. Let us first achieve this
point, that we may be loved, and the other
will be easy. How to act that we may be
loved? Let us become beautiful, and let us
do this, that we may always have lovers.
Let none make it his study to get money, to
get slaves, to get houses, (so much) as to be
loved, as to have a good name. Better is a
name than much wealth. For the one
remains, the other perishes : and the one it is
possible to acquire, the other impossible.
For he that has got an evil character, will
with difficulty lay it aside: but by means of
his (good) name the poor man may quickly
be rich. Let there be a man having ten
thousand talents, and another a hundred
friends ; the latter is more rich in resources
than the former. Then let us not merely
do this, but let us work it as a kind of
trade. ‘And howcan we?” say you. “A
sweet mouth multiplieth its friends, and a
gracious tongue.” Let us get a well-spoken
mouth, and pure manners. It is not pos-
sible for a man to be such, and not to be
known.

(a) We have one world that we all inhabit,
with the same fruits we all are fed. But these
are small matters: by the same Sacraments
we partake of the same spiritual food. These


tians, we do not make it our business to lead you away from
these ;’’—and for the other clause, ‘* But would lead you on to
those other things’? which Sirach has not mentioned.


Homity XL.]


THEACTS OF THE APOSTLES.


249


surely are justifications of loving! (¢) Mark?
how many (inducements and pleas) for friend-
ship they that are without have excogitated ;
community of art or trade, neighborhood,
relationships : but mightier than all these are
the impulses and ties which are among us:
this Table is calculated more (than all else)
to shame us into friendliness. But many of
us who come thereto do not even know one
another. The reason, it may be said, is that
there are so many of them. By no means; it
is only our own sluggish indifference. (Once)
there were three thousand (ch. ii. 41)—
there were five thousand (iv. 4)—and yet they
had all one soul : but now each knows not his
brother, and is not ashamed to lay the blame
on the number, because it is so great! Yet
he that has many friends is invincible against
all men: stronger he than any tyrant. Not such
the safety the tyrant has with his body-guards,
as this man has with his friends. Moreover,
this man is more glorious than he: for the
tyrant is guarded by his own slaves, but this
mano by his) peers the “tyrant, “by mien
unwilling and afraid of him; this man by
willing men and without fear. And here too
is a wonderful thing to be seen—many in one,
and one in many. (@) Just as in an harp, the
sounds are diverse, not the harmony, and
they all together give out one harmony and
symphony, (c) I could wish to bring you
into such a city, were it possible, wherein (all)
should be one soul: then shouldest thou see
surpassing all harmony of harp and flute, the
more harmonious symphony. (#) But the
musician is the Might of Love: it is this that
strikes out the sweet melody, (@) singing?


1 A. substitutes kat yap moAAa €otte Ta TUVWOoUVTA Mas Kat
auvdeopovuvta mpos diAcas: ‘*For indeed there are many things
which perforce impel us to become and bind us to continue
friends,’ viz. independently of our own choice : which is good
in point of sense ; but the original reading of the passage
implies this meaning: ‘“* Even the men of the world acknowl-
edge the necessity of friendship, and look out pleas, induce-
ments, and justifications for friendship : opa moga ot eEwbev
érevoynoav pidcka’’—i. e. which are far-fetched, and therefore
need émwoeto#ar,, compared with the near and constraining
motives which bring and keep us Christians together. For
ovvtexviay which appears in all our Mss. and is retained with-
out suspicion by the Edd. we confidently restore ocuvtexviar,
comp. xviii. 2. dta 7d Oudtexvoy eivar. There is a gradation
from lower to higher, ovytexviav, yetoviay (or yertoovvny C, A.)
ovyyevelas.

2 In the old text both sense and syntax are confused by the
transpositions of the parts marked (c) and (4)—occasioned
perhaps by the Aomwoteleuton, viz., cvudwviay at the end of
(a) and (c): hence (d@) ovdév amnxés adovega pédos has nothing
to agree with, unless it were the wia Wux7 of (c) ; accordingly
C. omits géovaa. Mod. text reforms the whole passage thus :
“Just as in an harp, the sounds are diverse, but one the har-
mony, and one the musician who touches the harp: so here,
the harp is Charity itself,and the ringing sounds are the
loving words brought forth by Charity, all of them giving out
one and the same harmony and symphony : but the musician

“is the might of Charity: this strikes out the sweet strain. I
could wish to lead you into such a city, were it possible, where-
in were one soul, and thou shouldest see how than all harp
and flute more harmonious is the symphony there, singing no
dissonant strain,’—Instead of ovdév amnxes adovga médAos.
Todro. .. , we place the full stop after g@dovaa, so that the
next sentence begins MéAos tovTo Kat ayyeAous x. T. A. and at
the end of it, instead of @cdv evdpatver TO weAos. “OAovV... .;
we read evppaiver. Tovto wéAos Odor k. T. A.


(withal) a strain in which no note is out of
tune. This strain rejoices both Angels, and
God the Lord of Angels; this strain rouses
(to hear it) the whole audience that is in
heaven; this even lulls (evil) passions—it
does not even suffer them to be raised, but
deep is the stillness. For as in a theatre,
when the band of musicians plays, all listen
with a hush, and there is no noise there; so
among friends, while Love strikes the chords,
all the passions are still and laid to sleep,
like wild beasts charmed and unnerved: just
as, where hate is, there is all the contrary to
this. But let us say nothing just now about
enmity ; let us speak of friendship. Though
thou let fall some casual hasty word, there is
none to catch thee up, but all forgive thee;
though thou do (some hasty thing), none
puts upon it the worse construction, but all
allowance is made: every one prompt to
stretch out the hand to him that is falling,
every one wishing him to stand. A wall it is
indeed impregnable, this friendship; a_ wall,
which not the devil himself, much less men,
can overpower. It is not possible for that
man to fall into danger who has gotten many
friends. (Where love is) no room is there
to get matter of anger, but® only for pleasant-
ness of feeling: no room is there to get mat-
ter of envying; none, to get occasion of
resentment. Mark him, how in all things
both spiritual and temporal, he accomplishes
all with ease. What then, I pray you, can be
equal to this man? Like a city walled on
every side is this man, the other as a city
unwalled.—Great wisdom, to bé able to be a
creator of friendship! Take away friend-
ship, and thou hast taken away all, thou hast
confounded all. But if the likeness of friend-
ship have so great power, what must the
reality itself be? Then let us, I beseech you,
make to ourselves friends, and let each make
this his art. But, lo! you will say, I do
study this, but the other does not. All the
greater the reward to thee. ‘True, say you,
but the matter is more difficult. How, I ask?
Lo! I testify and declare to you, that if but
ten of you would knit yourselves together,
and make this your work, as the Apostles
made the preaching theirs, and the Prophets
theirs the teaching, so we the making of
friends, great would be the reward. Let us
make for ourselves royal portraits. For if this
be the common badge of disciples, we doa
greater work than if we should put ourselves
into the power to raise the dead. The diadem


3 The omission in B.C.of this clause and the following
which A. and Mod. text retain, may be explained by the like
ending i7d@ecw oyxetv. Mod. text has also after @vunéias* the
clause év yeAwTt aet €oTe Kal TpUdy.


250 THE! WORKS: OF


ST: CHRYSOST ORE [Homiry XLI.


and the purple mark the Emperor, and where
these are not, though his apparel be all gold,
the Emperor is not yet, manifest. So now
thou art making known thy lineage. Make
men friends to thyself, and (friends) to others.
There is none who being loved will wish to
hate thee. Let us learn the colors, with what
ingredients they are mixed, with what (tints)
this portrait is composed. Let us be affable :
let us not wait for our neighbors to move.
Say not, if I see any person hanging back
(for me to make the first advances), I become
worse than he: but rather when thou seest
this, forestall him, and extinguish his bad
feeling. Seest thou one diseased, and addest
to his malady? This, most of all, let us make
sure of—“ in honor to prefer one another, to
account others better than one’s self” (Rom.


thou hast honored thyself more, attracting !
to thyself a still higher extinction. On all
occasions let us yield the precedence to
others. Let us bear nothing in mind of the
evil done to us, but if any good has been
done (let us remember only that). Nothing
so makes a man a friend, as a gracious
tongue, a mouth speaking good things, a soul
free from self-elation, a contempt of vain-
glory, a despising of honor. If we secure
these things, we shall be able to become
invincible to the snares of the Devil, and
having with strictness accomplished the pur-
suit of virtue, to attain unto the good things
promised to them that love Him, through the
grace and mercy of our Lord Jesus Christ,
with Whom to the Father and the Holy


Ghost together be glory, dominion, honor,


xii. 10), deem not this to be a lessening of | now and ever, world without end. Amen.


thyself. If thou prefer (another) in honor,


HOMELY® 2c


ACTS OXdse 18 No:


“And he went into the synagogue, and spake boldly
for the space of three months, disputing and per-
suading the things concerning the kingdom of
God. But when divers were hardened, and_be-
lieved not, but spake evil of that way before the
multitude, he departed from them, and separated
the disciples, disputing daily in the school of one
Tyrannus.”

(a) SEE him in every place forcing his way
into the synagogue, and in this manner de-
parting thence. For in every place, he
wished to have the occasion given him by
them.” (¢) He wished to separate the dis-
ciples thence, and to have the beginning for
ceasing to assemble with them, given by (the
Jews) themselves. And it was not for nothing
that he did this (4) which I have said. He
was henceforth “ provoking them to jealousy.”
For both the Gentiles readily received him,
and the Jews, upon the Gentiles receiving
him, repented. (@) This is why he continu-


leis tO mAéov TimnOyvar émiomwmevos. As émugracéat,
éemomagactat in Chrys. is generally transitive with accusative
of the thing, which ishere ro mAé€ov tiuyndjvat, we read, ets
gavuTov TO TA. T.”.

2 Mss. and Edd. Wavraxyov yap map avt@v €BovAeTo AaBeww
apoppnyv, orep Ebnv. Ta te yap eOvy tapeCnAov AouToV kai padiws
«. 7. A. In wapegyjAov there is an allusion to Rom. xi. 14, “if
by any means I may provoke them to jealousy :’’ its subject
therefore should be ‘tthe Apostle” (zamz et gentes exstimu-
dabat jam, Erasm.) ‘‘he was henceforth provoking to jeal-
ousy, being what he said to the Romans, ‘“‘If by any means I
may provoke,” etc., not ‘‘the Gentiles,’ as Ben. makes it,
nam gentes jam zelo fervebant. Besides transposing the
parts 4, c, we read, TlapegjAov Aouréy. Tate yap bun padiws.
. . - But perhaps it should be IapegnAov Aourov, owep Eby ** Et
TOS TapacnAwaw kK. T. A.”


lally made a stir among them,’ “for three
months arguing and persuading concerning
the kingdom of God:” for you must not
suppose because you hear of his “ speaking
boldly,” that there was any harshness : it was
of good things that he discoursed, of a king-
dom: who would not have heard him? “ But
when divers were hardened, speaking evil of
the way.” They might well call it “the
way ;” this was indeed the way, that led into
the kingdom of heaven. “He departed from
them, and separated the disciples, disputing
daily in the school of one Tyrannus. And
this was done for the space of two years, so
that all that were in Asia heard the word of
the Lord, both Jews and Greeks.” (v. 10.)
(2) Do you mark how much was effected by
his persisting?* ‘Both Jews and Greeks


3 Ava TovTO évoxAer (HvwxAEt Sav.) avTots TUVEXMs peTaTELBwr,
old text, retained by Saville. He is explaining why St. Paul
still resorted to the synagogues, though an unwelcome visi-
tant. He wished to separate the Church from the Synagogue ;
but he would not himself take the first step towards this. It
must be the act of the Jews. Therefore until they by their
outrageous conduct obliged him to depart, he kept on troub-
ling them with his presence (etowdovvta, nvwxAer). Not that
his discourse was harsh: that word, émappyo., does not mean
this, but that he spoke freely and without reserve. (Recapitu-
lation)—The unusual word metaretdwv is probably a corrup-
tion of the abbreviation of the text-words, émi miyvas tpets
Scadey. kai recOwv, which the reporter may have written thus,
. T. weiOwv.—Mod. text substitutes Aca todto dueAeyeTo avTots
TUVEXMS OTL EmeELOe.

4 récov Hvvcev H Emrotacia. Cat., atootacta, with reference
to amooras in v. 9.—The letters marking the order in which the

| parts are given in the Mss. will show the extreme confusion
! into which the notes of this Homily have fallen.


HomiLy XLI.]


heard: (c) all that dwelt in Asia:” it was for
this also that the Lord suffered him not to go
into Asia (ch. xvi. 6) (on a former occasion) ;
waiting, as it seems to me, for this same con-
juncture. (Hom. xl. p. 245.) (0) “And God
wrought special miracles by the hands of
Paul: so that from his body were brought
unto the sick handkerchiefs or aprons, and
the diseases departed from them, and the evil
spirits went out of them.” (v.11, 12.) Not
touched the wearer only (and so were healed),
but also receiving them, they laid them upon
the sick (and so healed them).* (v) “He
that believeth on Me,” saith Christ, ‘‘doeth
greater works than those which I do.” (John
xiv. 12.) This, and the miracle of the shad-
ows is what He meant (in those words). (@)
“Then certain of the vagabond Jews, exor-
cists, took upon them to call over them which
had evil spirits the name of the Lord Jesus,
saying, We adjure you by Jesus whom Paul
preacheth.” (v. 13.) So entirely did they do
all by way of trade! Observe: vagabond,
or, itinerant, Jewish exorcists. Andto believe
indeed, they had no mind; but by that Name
they wished to cast out the demons. ‘By
Jesus, whom Paul preacheth.” Only see
what a name Paul had got! “And there
were seven sons of one Sceva, a Jew, and
chief of the priests, which did so. And the
evil spirit answered and said, Jesus I know,
and Paul I know; but who are ye? And the
man in whom the evil spirit was leaped on
them, and overcame them, and _ prevailed
against them, so that they fled out of that
house naked and wounded.” (v. 14-16.)
They did it in secret: then their impotence is
publicly exposed. (/) Then not the Name
does anything, unless it be spoken with faith.
(i) See how they used their weapons against
themselves! (7) So far were they from think-
ing Jesus to be anything great: no, they must
needs add Paul, as thinking him to be some-
thing great. Here one may marvel how it
was that the demon did not cooperate with
the imposture of the exorcists, but on the
contrary exposed them, and laid open their
stage-play. He seems to me (to have done
this) in exceeding wrath: just as it might be,
if a person being in uttermost peril, should be


1 Ovdxt PopodvTes HmTovTo povov. Edd. i. e., ‘* The process
was not only this, that persons bearing these things, by touch-
ing the sick healed them, but the things themselves simply
laid upon the sick were effectual for their healing.’’ But A.
C. Cat. gdopodvros, which is much better: ‘It was not only
- that they touched him (the Apostle) wearing these things”
—viz. as the woman was healed by touching the hem of
Christ’s garment—* but receiving them, they laid them upon
the sick,” etc.—In the next sentence (g), for TovTo kai To TOY
oK.@v eotiv orep EAeyer, (Which Sav. gives in marg.), Edd. have
TOUTO TO TwY oKL@y alviTTOmevos, Which Ben. renders ‘as
umbras instnuans. St. Chrys. elsewhere alleges the miracu-
lous efficacy of St. Paul’s garments and of St. Peter’s shadow,
in illustration of our Lord’s saying, t. i. 537. A. t. il. 53. C


Th ACTS) OF: THE APOSELES:


251


exposed by some pitiful creature, and wish to
vent all his rage upon him, “Jesus I know,
and Paul I know.” For, that there may not
seem to be any slight put upon the Name of
Jesus, (the demon) first confesses (Him), and
then has permission given him. For, to show
that it was not any weakness of the Name,
but all owing to the imposture of those men,
why did not the same take place in the case
of Paul? ‘They fled out of that house naked
and wounded:” he sorely battered their
heads, perhaps rent their garments. (e)
“And this became known to all, both Jews
and Greeks, that dwelt at Ephesus, and fear
fell upon them all, and the name of the Lord
Jesus was magnified. And many of them that
had believed came confessing and making
known their practices.” (v. 17, 18.) For
since they had got to possess such power as,
by means of the demons, to do such things,
well might this be the consequence. ‘“ And
many of them that practised curious arts,
brought their books together, and burnt them
in the presence of all men;’’-—having seen
that there was no more use of them now that
the demons themselves do these things—“ and
reckoned up the price of them, and found the
amount fifty thousand pieces of silver.* So
mightily grew the word of God and prevailed.”
(v. 19, 20.) (2) “And”? (so) “he disputed,”
in the school of one Tyrannus for two years :”
where were believers, and believers exceed-
ingly (advanced in the faith). Moreover
(Paul) writes (to them) as to great men.


(Recapitulation.) (4) “And g
teredin to the synagogue,” etc. (v.8.) But
It means, he was ready
to confront dangers, and disputed more
openly, not veiling the doctrines. (a) “ But
when some were hardened, and spake evil of
the way, having departed from them, he sepa-
rated the disciples.” (v. 9.) He put a stop,
it means, to their evil-speaking: he did not
wish to kindle their envy, nor to bring them
into more contention. (c) Hence let us also
learn not to put ourselves in the way of evil-
speaking men, but to depart from them: he
did not speak evil, when himself evil spoken
of. ‘He disputed daily,” and by this gained


having en-


why érappynoracero ?


* Ephesus was famous for its sorcerers and magicians.
Plutarch and Eustathius speak of Ephesian letters (E¢eova
ypauuata) which, written on slips, were carried about as
charms and had power to assure success and avert disaster.
The wepiepya were arts connected with this sorcery and the
books burned contained, no doubt, mysterious sentences and
symbols which gave to them an extravagant worth in the eyes
of the superstitious. In this way the large price set upon
them may be accounted for.—G, B. S.

2 The meaning seems to be, Such was the effect of his two
years’ preaching at Ephesus: and his Epistle shows what
high attainments in the faith were made by the Ephesians.

3 The partial restoration which is here attempted implies this
scheme of the derangement: 2, 1.: 1, 3, 2, 4: see note 3, p. 252.


THE WORKS OF


222
<)-


ST: CHRYSOSTOME [Homity XLI.


the many, that, being evil intreated and (evil)
spoken of, he did not (utterly) break away
from them, and keep aloof. (e) The evil-
speakers are defeated. They calumniated the
doctrine itself; (therefore) so as neither to
rouse the disciples to wrath, nor * * them,
he withdrew, ! showing that everywhere alike
they repel salvation from them. Here now
he does not even apologize, seeing that the
Gentiles everywhere have believed. ‘In the
school of one Tyrannus:” it was not that he
sought the place, but without more ado where
there was a school (there he discoursed).*
(z) And look, no sooner is the trial from
those without over, than this from the demons
begins. Mark the infatuated Jewish hard-
ness. Having seen his garments working
miracles, they paid no heed to it. What
could be greater than this? But, on the con-
trary, it resulted in just the opposite effect.
If any of the heathens believe not, having
seen the (very) dust working these effects,
let him believe.” (7) Wonderful, how great
the power of them that have believed! Both
Simon for the sake of merchandise sought the
grace of the Spirit, and these for this object
did this. What hardness (of heart)! Why
does not Paul rebuke them? It would have
looked like envy, therefore it is so ordered.
This same took place in the case of Christ
(Mark ix. 36): but then the person is not
hindered, for it was the beginning of the new
state of things: since Judas also is not hin-
dered, whereas Ananias and Sapphira were
struck dead: and many Jews even for oppos-
ing (Christ) suffered nothing, while Elymas
was blinded. “For I am not come,” saith
Christ, “to judge the world, but that the
world might be saved.” (John iii. 17.)
ANG Seven sons wete. (Vv. 14.) see ithe
villany of the men! They still continued to


1 @s pte TOUS WabyTas Eis Sumo eyeipat, UATE ExElvVoUS avaxw-
pnoa.. Mod. text. transposes eis 3. €yetpar and avaywp. We
read avexwpnoe. The verb either to éxeivous or to Tovs paéyntas
is probably lost.

* Some have supposed Tyrannus to have been a Jewish
teacher, who conducted a school in a private synagogue—a
Beth Midrash (so Meyer). In this view, Paul and his compan-
ions, on account of the opposition which they encountered,
separated themselves from the public synagogue, and betook
them to this private Jewish school. But Tyrannus is a Greek
name and the more common and preferable opinion is that he
was a teacher of philosophy or rhetoric who had become a
Christian and in whose apartments both Jews and Gentiles
could meet without molestation.—G. B. S.

2 Thy KOvLY TavTa epyagouerny, migTeveTw, B.C. Cat. But A.
substitutes xopyv, Mod. text oxiav. He seems to allude here
to the miracles effected by the very ashes of the martyrs: see
e€. g. t. il. 494, A.: and perhaps with reference to these he says,
BaBat, moon Tov mioTevoavTwv 7 Svvauts: unless this be meant
as an exclamation of the persons who ‘“‘took upon them,” etc.
i.e. Like Simon, they saw the wonders wrought in the name
of Jesus; ‘‘ Wonderful (said they)! Why, what power is
exercised by these men who have believed!’’ namely, by
those who by laying the handkerchiefs, etc., upon the sick
restored them to health.—Mod. text adds, ‘‘ that to others also
there comes (the power) of doing the same things: and how
great the hardness of those who even after the demonstrations
of power yet continue in unbelief.”’


be Jews, while wishing to make a gain of that
Name. All that they did was for glory and
profit. (g) Look,*® in every case, how men
are converted not so much in consequence of
good things as of things fearful. In the case
of Sapphira, fear fell upon the Church, and
men dared not join themselves to them: here
they received handkerchiefs and aprons, and
were healed: and after this, then they came
confessing their sins. (Hereby) the power of
the demons is shown to be a great one, when
it is against unbelievers. For why did he not
say, “Who is Jesus?” He was afraid, lest
he also should suffer punishment; but, that it
might be permitted him to take revenge upon
those who mocked him, he did this; “ Jesus,”
says he, “I know,” etc. He was in dread of
Paul. For why did not those wretched men
say to him, We believe? How much more
splendid an appearance they would have made
had they said this, that is, if they had claimed
Him as their Master? But instead of that,
they spoke even those senseless words, ‘ By
Jesus, whom Paul preacheth.”” Do you mark
the forbearance (of the writer), how he writes
history and does not call names? This
makes the Apostles admirable. “And the
evil spirit,” etc. (v. 15), for what had hap-
pened at Philippi (ch. xvi. 16) had given a ~
lesson to these also. He mentions the name,
and the number, thereby giving to the per-
sons then living a credible proof of what he
wrote. And why were they itinerant? For
the sake of merchandise: not assuredly to
bear tidings of the word; how should that be
their object? And* how ran they anon,
preaching by the things they suffered? ‘ In-
somuch,” it says, “that all that dwelt in Asia
heard the word of the Lord.” Ought not this
to have converted all? And marvel not, for
nothing convinces malice. But come now, let
us look at the affair of the exorcists, with
what an evil disposition (they acted). Why
the same was not done in the case of Christ,
is an inquiry for another time, and not for the
present, save that this also was well and use-


8’ From this point to the end of the Exposition, having in
vain attempted to restore the true order, we take it as it lies
in the Mss. and Edd.—Below, ‘“‘and after this;” i. e. “yet
after this,’’ then these itinerant Jewish exorcists took upon
them, etc. and not until after their punishment, when ‘“‘ fear
fell upon them all,’’ did those of the professed believers (rwv
memiatevkotwv) who still practiced magic come forward con-
fessing their sins.

4 Ilws 6€ Etpexos Aouwov KypUTTOVTEs St Gv Exacxov. The sub-
ject to €macxov seems to be ‘‘ these exorcists’’ the sons of
Sceva : but to étpeyov it seems to be ‘‘the Apostles.” ‘‘ This
made the Apostles wonderful in men’s eyes:’’ they had
wrought miracles, and preached two years, ‘‘so that all in
Asia heard the word of the Lord,” yet still these practices
continued : but (see) how they ran (what success they had)
now, preaching by the things these men were suffering: ‘‘and
this became known to all the Jews and Greeks also dwelling
in Asia, and the name of the Lord Jesus was magnified.’’—
Mod. text, seemingly referring étpexov to the exorcists, reads
kada@s 5€ €rp. And in place of v. 10, gives, ‘‘ Whence, showing
this, it saith, ‘ And this became known to all,’ ” etc. v. 17.


HomiLy XLI.]


ully ordered. It seems to me that they did
this also in mockery, and that in consequence
of this (punishment), none dared even at
random to name that Name. Why did this
put them upon confession? Because this was
a most mighty argument of God’s omnis-
cience (therefore), before they should be
exposed by the demons, they accused them-
selves, fearing lest they should suffer the
same things. For when the demons. their
helpers are their accusers, what hope is
there thenceforth, save the confession by
deeds?

But see, I pray you, after such signs had
been wrought, what evils within a short space
ensue. Such is human nature: it soon for-
gets. Or, do ye not remember what has been
the case among ourselves? Did not God last
year shake our whole city?* Did not all run
to baptism? Did not whoremongers and
effeminate and corrupt persons leave their
dwellings, and the places where they spent
their time, and change and become religious ?


But three days passed, and they returned |


again to their own proper wickedness. And
whence is this? From the excessive laziness.
And what marvel if, when the things have
passed away (this be the case), seeing that,
the images lasting perpetually, the result is
such? The fate of Sodom—say, does it not
still last (in its effects)?? Well, did the
dwellers beside it become any the better?
And what say you to the son of Noah? Was
he not such (as he is represented), did he not
see with his eyes so vast a desolation, and yet
was wicked? Then let us not marvel how,
when such things had been done, these Jews
(at Ephesus) believe not, when we see that
belief itself often comes round for them into
its opposite, ® into malignity; as, for instance,
when they say that He hath a devil, He, the
Son of God! Do you not see these things
even now, and how men are many of them
like serpents, both faithless and thankless,
men who, viper-like, when they have enjoyed
benefits and have been warmed by some, then
they sting their benefactors? This we have
said, lest any should marvel, how, such sigts
having been wrought, they were not all con-
verted, For behold, in our own times hap-
pened those (miracles) relating to the martyr

1 Ben. assigns this to the year 399, and cites the first of the
“Eleven Homilies’’ t. xii. as having been delivered accord-
ing to St. Chrys. thirty days after that great earthquake, viz.,
in the year of the fall of Eutropius, therefore a. D. 399. But
Ed. Par. justly corrects this mistake: in fact, the cetomos of
which St. Chrys. there speaks (t. xii. p. 324. A.) is only a met-
aphor, meaning the catastrophe of Eutropius.

2 Perhaps with an allusion to Jude ver. 7, ‘‘Sodom and
Gomorrah—set forth for an example, suffering the vengeance
of eternal fire.”’

3 Meaning, perhaps, Even when they believe the miracles


to be real, that which should have brought them to faith be-
comes to them an occasion of greater wickedness.


POE ACES OF THE APOSTLES,


253


Babylas,* those relating to Jerusalem, those
relating to the destruction of the temples, and
not all were converted. Why need I speak of
ancient things? I have told you what hap-
pened last year; and none gave heed to it,
but again little by little they fell off and sunk
back. The heaven stands perpetually crying
aloud that it has a Master, and that it is the
work of an Artificer, all this that we see—I
mean the world—and yet some say that it is
not so. What happened to that Theodorus
last year—whom did it not startle? And yet
nothing came of it, but having for a season
become religious, they returned to the point
from which they had started in their attempt
to be religious. So it was with the Jews.
This is what the Prophet said of them:
“When He slew them, then they sought Him,
and turned early unto God.” (Ps, Ixxviii. 34.)
And what need to speak of those things that
are common to all? How many have fallen
into diseases, how many have promised, if
raised up, to work so great a change, and yet
they have again become the same as ever!
This, if nothing else, shows that we have
natural free-will—our changing all at once.
Were evil natural, this would not be: things
that are natural and necessary, we cannot
change from. “And yet,” you will say, “we
do change from them. For do we not see
some, who have the natural faculty to see, but
are blinded by fear?”’ (True—) because this
also is natural: * * if a different (necessity
of) nature come not also into operation :5
(thus) it is natural to us, that being terrified
we do not see; it is natural to us that when a
greater fear supervenes, the other gives way.
“What then,” you will say, “if right-minded-
ness ° be indeed according to nature, but fear
having overpowered it cast it out?” What
then if I shall show that some even then’are
not brought to a right mind, but even in these
fears are reckless? Is this natural? Shall I
speak of ancient things? Well then, of re-


cent? How many in the midst of those fears
continued laughing, mocking, and experienced


Pharaoh
run


nothing of the sort? Did not
change immediately, and (as quickly)


4 The miracles at Antioch, when at the instigation of the

demon (Apollo) the remains of the martyr Babylas were
removed by order of Julian. See the Hom. de S. Baéyla,
t. il. p. 567.—The Theodorus mentioned below cannot be the
lapsed person of that name to whom St. Chrys. addressed the
first of the two Pareneses, t. 7. init. But probably wépvar is
corrupt, and the allusion may be to the troubles at Antioch in
connection with Theodorus the Sicilian ; see p. 238, note *.
5 av wn dias eTépa mpogeAPn. To complete the sense we
must supply, ** because this also (the being blinded by fear) is
a natural affection : but what I have said is true, viz. that
Tav KaTa diow Kai avayxynv ov duvaueba pebiotacba, av py
K.T. A,

8 ti ovv av Kain owhpooivyn. This is corrupt or mutilated.
The sense requires, ‘* What if in some cases ‘an evil mind’
be a natural necessity—as much as seeing or any other natural
property or affection, but when there seems to be a change, it
is only that fear casts out the evil mind for a while? ”’


254 THE IWORKKS .OF


ST.’ CHENMSOS HOM; [Homity XLI.


back to his former wickedness? But here, as
if (the demons) knew Him not, they (the
exorcists) added, ‘‘Whom Paul preacheth,”
whereas they ought to have said, “the Saviour
of the world.” ‘“‘ Him that rose again.” By
this they show that they do know, but they
did not choose to confess His glory. Where-
fore the demon exposes them, leaping upon
them, and saying, “Jesus I know, and Paul I
know, but who are ye?” So that not ye are
believers, but ye abuse that Name when ye
say this. Therefore the Temple is desolate, *
the implement easy to be overcome. So that
ye are not preachers; mine, says he, ye are.
Great was the wrath of the demon. The
Apostles had power to do this to them, but
they did it not as yet. For they that had
power over the demons that did these things
to them, much more had power over the men
themselves. Mark how their forbearance is
shown, in that they whom they repulsed do
these things, while the demons whom they
courted do the contrary. “Jesus,” says he,
“T know.” Be ashamed, ye that are ignorant
(of Him). “And Paul I know.” Well said,
“Think not that it is because I despise them,
that I do these things.” Great was the fear
of the demon. And why without these words
did he not rend their garments? For so he
would both have sated his wrath, and estab-
lished the delusion. He feared as I said, the
unapproachable force, and would not have
had such power had he not said this. But
observe how we find the demons everywhere
more right minded (than the Jews), not daring
to contradict nor accuse the Apostles, or
Christ. There they say, ‘We know Thee
who Thou art” (Matt. vili. 29); and, “ Why
art Thou come hither before the time to tor-
ment us” (Mark i. 24): and again, “I know
Thee who Thou art, the Son of God.” And
here, ‘‘These men are servants of the most
high God” (ch. xvi. 17): and again, “ Jesus I
know, and Paul I know.” For they exceed-
ingly feared and trembled before those holy
persons. Perhaps some one of you, hearing
of these things, wishes he were possessed of
this power, so that the demons should not be
able to look him in the face, and accounts
those saints happy for this, that they had such
power. But let him hear Christ saying, “‘ Re-
joice not because the demons are subject
unto you” (Luke x. 20), because He knew
that all men rejoice most in this, through
vainglory. For if thou seekest that which
pleaseth God, and that which is for the com-
mon good, there is another, a greater way.
It is not so great to free from a demon as it


1 Meaning perhaps, That which should be the Temple of
Christ, the body of the believer.


is to rescue from sin. A demon hinders not
to attain unto the kingdom of Heaven, nay,
even cooperates, unwillingly indeed, but
nevertheless cooperates by making him that
has the demon more sober-minded; but sin
casts a man out.

But it is likely some man will say, ‘God
forbid it should ever befall me to be sobered
in this way!” Nor do I wish it for you, but a
very different way, that you should do all
from love of Christ: if however, which God
forbid, it should so befall you, then even on
this behalf I would comfort you. If then the
demon does not cast out (from the kingdom
of heaven), but sin does cast out, to free a
man from sin is greater beneficence.

From this let us study to free our neigh-
bors, and before our neighbors, our own
selves. Let us see to it, lest we have a de-
mon : let us examine ourselves strictly. More
grievous than a demon is sin, for the demon
makes men humble. See ye not those pos-
sessed with a demon, when they have recov-
ered from the attack, how downcast they are,
of how sad a countenance, how fraught with
shame their faces are, how they have not
even courage to look one in the face? See
the strange inconsistency! While those are
ashamed on account of the things they suffer, -
we are not ashamed on account of the things
we do; while they are abashed being wronged,
we are not abashed when doing wrong: and
yet their condition is not a subject for shame,
but for pity and tenderness and indulgence:
nay, great is the admiration it calls for, and
many the praises, when struggling against
such a spirit, they bear all thankfully : whereas
our condition in very deed is a subject for
ridicule, for shame, for accusation, for cor-
rection, for punishment, for the worst of
evils, for hell-fire; calling for no compassion
whatever. Seest thou, that worse than a
demon is sin? And those indeed, from the
ills they suffer, reap a double profit: first,
their being sobered and brought to more self-
control; then, that having suffered here the
chastisement of their own sins, they depart
hence to their Master, purified. For indeed
upon this we have often discoursed to you,
that those who are punished here, if they bear
it thankfully, may naturally be supposed to
put away thereby many of their sins. Whereas
from sins the mischief resulting is twofold ;
first, that we offend; secondly, that we be-
come worse. Attend to what I say. Not this
is the only injury we get from sin, that we
commit a sin: but another and a worse is this,
that our soul receives a habit. Just as it is in
the case of the body—for it will be more plain
when put in the form of an example—as he


HomILy XLI.]


THe cAGCTS: On THE APOSTLES:


un


who has taken a fever has got harm not only
in this respect, that he is sick, but also that
after the sickness he is become weaker, even
though he may return to health after a long
disease: just so in the case of sin, though we
may regain health, yet we are far from having
the strength we need. For! take the case of
one who has been insolently abusive: does
he not suffer ‘his deserts for his abusive con-
duct? Aye, but there is another and a worse
thing to rue (which is), that his soul is be-
come more insensible to shame. For from
each several sin that is committed, even after
the sin has been done and has ceased, there
remains a kind of venom instilled into our
souls. Do you not hear people saying, when
they are recovered from sickness, “ I dare not
drink water now?” And yet the man has re-
gained his health: aye, but the disease has
done him this harm also. And whereas those
(possessed) persons, albeit suffering ill, are
thankful, we, when faring well, blaspheme
God, and think ourselves very ill used: for
you will find more persons behaving thus in
health and wealth than in poverty and sick-
ness. For there stands the demon over (the
possessed), like a very hangman, fierce, utter-
ing many (menaces), even as a schoolmaster
brandishing the lash, and not suffering them
to give way to any laxity. And suppose that
some are not at all brought to a sober mind,
neither are these liable to punishment ;? no
small thing this: even as fools, even as mad-
men and children, are not called to account,
so neither are these: since for things that are
dcne in a state of unconsciousness, none can
be so merciless as to call the doers to account.
Why then, in a far worse condition than those
who are possessed of evil sprits are we that
sin. We do not, indeed, foam at the mouth,
nor distort our eyes, or throw about our hands
convulsively ; but as for this, would that we


did it in our body and not in our soul! Will
you that I show you a soul, foaming, filthy,
and a distortion of the mind’s eyes? Think


of those who are ina passion and drunken
with rage; can any form be filthier than the
words they discharge? In very deed it is like
a sputtering of noisome slaver. And just as
the possessed know none of those who are


1 Mod. text, “‘For look now at some one who has been
abusive, and has not been punished : not for this only is ita
subject for weeping, that he does not suffer the punishment
for his abusiveness, but also for another reason it is a subject
for mourning. What may this be? That his soul is now be-
come more shameless.’’ But Chrys. is speaking of the imme-
diate evil—here the act of USpis for which the man suffers, or
will have to give account hereafter—and the permanent effect,
the e€ts which every evil act fixes on ‘the soul. — Erepov here
and above we render in its pregnant sense, ** other and worse,’
or, ** what is quite another and a more serious thing.”

2 Old text. Et dé tees umd dAws vijhovev, ovSE exetvor Siddacr
dcxnv. Sav. and Ben. ov7w and dwaover. But Par. has resumed
the unintelligible reading of mod. text, et d€ Tives 78’ ov Tw v.
add’ ody exetvor diddace Sixny.


present, so neither do these. Their under-
standing darkened, their eyes distorted, they
see not who is friend, who foe, who worthy of
respect, who contemptible, but they see all
alike without a difference. And then, do you
not see them, how they tremble, just like
those others? But they do not fall to the
ground, say you? ‘True, but their soul lies on
the ground and falls there in convulsions:
since had it stood upright, it would not have
come into the condition it is in. Or think
you not that it betokens a soul abjectly
sprawling and lost to all self-possession, the
things men can do and say when drunken
with rage? Thereis also another form of mad-
ness worse than this. What may this be?
When men cannot so much as suffer them-
selves to vent their anger, but instead of that
nourish within their own bosoms, to their own
proper hurt,3 as it were a very hangman
with his lash, the rancorous remembrance of
wrongs. For it is a bane to themselves first,
the malice that they bear. To say nothing of
the things to come, what torture, think you,
must that man undergo in the scourging of
his soul, as day by day he looks how he may
avenge himself on his enemy? He chastises
himself first, and suffers punishment, swelling
(with suppressed passion), fighting against him-
self, setting himself on fire. For needs must
the fire be always burning within thee: while
raising the fever to such a height, and not
suffering it to wane, thou thinkest thou art
inflicting some evil on the other, whereas thou
art wasting thyself, ever bearing about with
thee a flame which is always at its height, and
not letting thy soul have rest, but evermore
being in a state of fury, and having thy
thoughts in a turmoil and tempest. What is
more grievous than this madness, to be always
smarting with pain, and ever swelling and in-
flamed? For such are the souls of the resent-
ful: when they see him on whom they wish to
be revenged, straightway it is as if a blow
were struck them: if they hear his voice, they
cower and tremble: if they be on their bed,
they picture to themselves numberless re-


venges, hanging, torturing that enemy of
theirs: and if, beside all this, they see him


also to be in renown, O!. the misery they
suffer! Forgive him the offence, and free


thyself from the torment. Why continue al-
ways in a state of punishment, that thou
mayest once punish him, and take thy re-
venge? Why establish for thyself a hectic


disease?+ W hy, when thy wrath would fain


3 aAAa Tpidbwot Tap EavToLs oixeiov KaKxodv, KaBarep Ti.wa Syucoy
Thy pynotkaxiav, Mod. text oixecaxdy cad. 7. 6.

4 For ri xatackxevacers Extixov cgavtTw voonua; B. has, Ti x,
EKTYKOV TAVTOV “TW VOTHMATL, GUE non spernanda, te
morbo tabefactens, Ben. The reading €éxt7xov is explained by


ray
tectio


256


THE’ WORKS OF ST. CHEY60sSTGRE


[Homity XLI.


depart from thee, dost thou keep it back?
Let it not remain until the evening, says
Paul. (Eph. iv. 26.) For like some eating
rot or moth, even so does it gnaw through the
very root of our understanding. Why shut up
a beast within thy bowels ? ‘Better a serpent
or an adder to lie within thy heart, than
anger and resentment: for those indeed
would soon have done with us, but this re-
mains forever fixing in us its fangs, instilling
its poison, letting loose upon us an inv ading
host of bitter thoughts. ‘“ That he should
laugh me to scorn,” say you, “that he should
despise me!?1 O wretched, miserable man,
wouldest thou not be ridiculed by thy fellow.
servant, and wouldest thou be hated by thy
Master? Wouldest thou not be despised by
thy fellow-servant, and despisest thou thy
Master? To be despised by him, is it more
than thou canst bear, but thinkest thou not
that God is indignant, because thou ridiculest
Him, because thou despisest Him, when thou
wilt not do as He bids thee? But that thine
enemy will not even ridicule thee, is manifest
from hence (that), whereas if thou follow up
the revenge, great is the ridicule, great the
contempt, for this is a mark of a little mind ;
on the contrary, if thou forgive him, great is
the admiration, for this is a mark of greatness
of soul. But you will say, he knows not this.
Let God know it, that thou mayest have the
greater reward. For He says, “‘ Lend to those
of whom ye hope not to receive.” (Luke vi.
34.) So let us also do good to those who do
not even perceive that one is doing them
good, that they may not, by returning to us
praise or any other thing, lessen our reward.
For when we receive nothing from men, then
we shall receive greater things from God.
But what is more worthy of ridicule, what
more paltry, than a: soul which is always in
anger, and wishing to take revenge? It is
womanly, this disposition, it is babyish. For
as the babes are angry even with lifeless
things, and unless the mother beats the
ground, they will not let go their anger:? so
do these persons wish to revenge themselves
on those who have aggrieved them. Why
then, it is they who are worthy of ridicule:
for to be overcome by passion, is the mark of
a childish understanding, but to overcome it,
is a sign of manliness. Why then, not we are
the objects of ridicule, when we keep our tem-
the etacism ; the tt in vooyjmare is derived from the following
Tt BovAdpevoy ; hence it was necessary to alter cavt# into
gaurov 7». In the following sentence, B. has ti Bovacuevos,
Peet By, when thou wouldest be quit of it, dost thou keep thine
rite Mod. text weakly, ‘‘ But this I do that he may not laugh
me to scorn, that he may not despise me.’

2 KaSamep yap éxetva (meaning Ta Bpedn) Kat mpos (om. BG)


ra ayuxa. opyiGeTar, Kav wy TANHEN TO Edadhos 7H MyTHP, ouK adinot
Thv opynv.—Mod. text and Edd. except Sav. omit 7 uyrnp.


per, but they. It is not this that makes men
contemptible—not to be conquered by pas-
sion : what makes them contemptible is this—
to be so afraid of ridicule from without, as on
this account to choose to subject one’s self to
one’s besetting passion, and to offend God,
and take revenge upon one’s self. These things
are indeed worthy of ridicule. Let us flee
them. Let a man say, that having done us
numberless ills, he has suffered nothing in re-
turn: let him say that he might again fran-
tically assault us, and have nothing to fear.
Why, in no other (better) way could he have
proclaimed our virtue; no other words would
he have sought, if he had wished to praise us,
than those which he seems to say in abuse.
Would that all men said these things of me:
“he is a poor tame creature; all men heap
insults on him, but he bears it: all men
trample upon him, but he does not avenge
himself.” Would that they added, “ neither,
if he should wish to do so, can he: » that so I
might have praise from God, and not from
men. Let him say, that it is for want of spirit
that we do not avenge ourselves. This does
us no hurt, when God knows (all): it does but
cause our treasure to be in greater safety. If
we are to have regard to them, we shall fall
away from everything. Let us not look to -
what they say, but to what becomes us. But,
says he, “Let no man ridicule me,” and some
make a boast of this. O! what folly! “No
man,” says he, ‘‘ having injured me, has rid-
iculed me:” that is, “I had my revenge.”
And yet for this thou deservest to be ridi-
culed, that thou didst take revenge. Whence
came these words among us—being, as they
are, a disgrace to us and a pest, an overthrow
of our own proper life and of our discipline ?
It is in downright opposition to God that thou
(so) speakest. The very thing which makes
thee equal to God—the not avenging thyself
—this thou thinkest a subject for nidicule!
Are not we for these things worthy to be
laughed at, both by ourselves, and by the
heathen, when we thus speak against God? I
wish to tell you a story of a thing that hap-
pened in the old times (which they tell) not on
the subject of anger, but of money. A man
had an estate in which there was a hidden
treasure, unknown to the owner: this piece of
ground he sold. The buyer, when digging it
for the purpose of planting and cultiv ation,
found the treasure therein deposited, and
came* and wanted to oblige the seller to


3 Mod. text followed by Edd. perverts the whole story,
making the parties contend, not for the relinquishing of the
treasure, but for the possession of it, so making the conclu-
sion (the willing cession of it by both to the third party) unin-
telligible, and the application irrelevant. The innovator was
perhaps induced to make this alteration, by an unseasonable


Homity XLII.]


Tieere to OF THE APOSTLES.


257


receive the treasure, urging that he had bought
a piece of ground, not atreasure. ‘The seller
on his part repudiated the gift, saying, ‘“ The
piece of ground (is not mine), I have sold it,
and I have no concern whatever with this
(treasure).” So they fell to altercation about
it, the one wishing to give it, the other stand-
ing out against receiving it. So chancing
upon some third person, they argued the mat-
ter before him, and said to him, “To whom
ought the treasure to be assigned?” The
man could not settle that question; he said,
however, that he would put an end to their
dispute—he would (if they pleased) be master
of it himself. So he received the treasure,
which they willingly gave up to him; and in
the sequel got into troubles without end, and
learnt by actual experience that they had done
well to have nothing to do with it. So ought


it be done likewise with regard to anger; both
ourselves ought to be emulous? not to take
revenge, and those who have aggrieved us,
emulous to give satisfaction. But perhaps
these things also seem to be matter of ridi-
cule : for when that madness is widely prevalent
among men, those who keep their temper are
laughed at, and among many madmen he who
is not a madman seems to be mad. Where-
fore I beseech you that we may recover (from
this malady), and come to our senses, that
becoming pure from this pernicious passion,
we may be enabled to attain unto the king-
dom of heaven, through the grace and mercy
of His only-begotten Son, with Whom to the
Father, together with the Holy Spirit, be glory,
might, honor, now and ever, world without
end. Amen.


jou OMG De GND.S ba Oe


ACTS UX. 29, 23:


“ After these things were ended, Paul purposed in the
Spirit, when he had passed through Macedonia
and Achaia, to go to Jerusalem, saying, After I
have been there, I must alsosee Rome. So he
sent into Macedonia two of them that ministered
unto him, Timotheus and Erastus; but he himself
stayed in Asia for a season. And the same time
there arose no small stir about the Way.’’


HE sends Timothy and Erastus into Mace-
donia, but himself remains at Ephesus. Hayv-
ing made a long enough stay in that city, he
wishes to remove elsewhere again. But how
is it, that having from the first chosen to de-
part into Syria, he turns back to Mace-
donia? “He purposed,” it says, “in the
Spirit,” showing that all (that he did) was
done not of his own power. Now he prophe-
sies, saying, “I must alsosee Rome :” perhaps
to comfort them with the consideration of his
not remaining at a distance, but coming
nearer to them again, and to arouse the
minds of the disciples by the prophecy. At
this point, 2 I suppose, it was that he wrote his


recollection of the Parable of the Treasure hid in a field.—
“The seller having learnt this, came and wanted to compel
the purchaser aroAafecv rov Onoavpor,” (retaining amoA., in the
unsuitable sense ‘‘ that he, the seller, should receive back the
treasure.’’) ‘‘On the other hand, the other (the purchaser)
repulsed him, saying, that he had bought the piece of ground
along with the treasure, and that he made no account of this
(kai ovd€éva Adyov wovety UTEp TovTov.) So they fell to conten-
tion, both of them, the one wishing to receive, the other not
to give,’’ etc.

1 Kat nuas dtAoverkecy wy auvvacbat, Kai Tovs AEeAUTHKOTAS
drdroverxery Sovvat Sixyv. as in the story, the parties edcAor-
ecxouv, the one uy AaBeiy ror 6., the other dovvat.

2 ’Evrevdev. If St. Chrys. is rightly reported, he means the
second Epistle, which he proceeds to quote from. But that


17


Epistle to the Corinthians from Ephesus, say-
ing, ‘“‘I would not have you ignorant of the
trouble which came to usin Asia.” (2 Cor.
i. 8.) For since he had promised to go to
Corinth, he excuses himself on the score of
having loitered, and mentions the trial relat-
ing the affair of Demetrius. “There arose
no small stir about the Way.” * Do you see
the renown ®* (acquired)? They contradicted,
it says: (then) came miracles, twofold:
(then) again, danger: such is the way the
threads alternate throughout the whole text-
ure (of the history). ‘“ For a certain man
named Demetrius, a silversmith, which made
silver temples of Diana, brought no small
gain unto the craftsmen.” (v. 24.). ‘ Which
made,” it says, “silver temples of Diana.”
And how is it possible that temples could be
made of silver? Perhaps as small boxes


Epistle was plainly not written ard "Edéoov. Perhaps what
he said was to this effect: “ At this point I suppose it was—
viz. after the mission of Timothy and Erastus—that he wrote
(his first Epistle) to the Corinthians from Ephesus: and in the
second Epistle he alludes to the great trial which ensued in
the matter of Demetrius. Hehad promised to come to Corinth
sooner, and excuses himself on the score of the delay.”’ But
Ta KaTa AnpyTprov Sumyovmevos can hardly be meant of St. Paul:
it should be auvurromevos.

* The use of 7 0565 without further definition, to represent
the Christian religion, is peculiar to the Acts (ix. 2; XIX. 9, 23;
XXiv. 22). Kuvuptov or owrnpias would express the omitted defin-
ing idea.—G. B.S.

3”Opas thv evdoxtunow; This seems to refer to v. 17-20.
“But see how successes and trials here, as all along, alternate.
Then the Jews contradicted: (v. g) then miracles, twofold,
(11-12 and 13-19): now again (after that evdoxiuyors), danger.’
—Here the Mss. and Edd. give v. 24-27, which we have dis-
tributed to their proper places.


2538


THE.WORKS. GF ST. CHERYSOSi0OR


[Homity XLII.


(««3épca).* Great was the honor paid to this
(Diana) in Ephesus; since, when (Hom, im
Eph. Prol.) their temple was burnt it so
grieved them, that they forbade even the
name of the incendiary ever to be mentioned.
See how, wherever there is idolatry, in every
case we find money at the bottom of it. Both in
the former instance it was for money, and in
the case of this man, for money. (ch. xix,
13.) It was not for nets religion, because they
thought that in danger; no, it was for their
lucrative craft, that it would have nothing to
work upon. Observe the maliciousness of the
man. He was wealthy himself, and to him
indeed it was no such great loss; but to them
the loss was great, since they were poor, and
subsisted on their daily earnings. Neverthe-
less, these men say nothing, but only he.
And observe :? “ Whom having collected, and
the workmen of like occupation,” having
themselves common cause with him, ‘he
said, Sirs, ye know that by this craft we have
our wealth” (v. 25); then he brought the
danger home to them, that we are in danger
of falling from this our craft into starvation.
“Moreover ve see and hear, that not alone at
Ephesus, but almost throughout all Asia, this
Paul hath persuaded and turned away much
people, saying that they be no gods, which
are made with hands: so that not only this
our craft is in danger to be set at naught; but
also, that the temple of the great goddess
Diana should be despised, and her magnifi-
cence should be destroyed, whom all Asia
and the world worshippeth. And when they
heard these sayings, they were full of wrath,
and cried out, saying, Great is Diana of the
Ephesians.” (v. 26-28.) And yet the very
things he spoke were enough to bring them to
true religion: but being poor senseless crea-
tures, this is the part they act. For if this
(Paul being) man is strong enough to turn
away all, and the worship of the gods is in
jeopardy, one ought to reflect, how great must
this man’s God be, and that he will much
more give you those things, for which ye are
afraid. Already (at the outset) he has
secured a hold upon their minds by saying,
“This Paul hath turned away much people,
saying, that they be no gods, which are made
with men’s hands.” See what it is that the
heathen are so indignant at; because he said


* These silver ‘‘ temple ’”’ (vaovs) were shrines, small models
of the temple containing images of the goddess, which pilgrims
to the temple purchased and carried away and probably used
in their homes as objects of domestic worship.—G. B. S.

1 Kai dpa kotvwvous Ovtas avtouvs: eita Tov Kivduvoy éréeaTHTEV
(so Cat. C. -cav, A. B. émérnoev). Mod. text, ‘* But being them-
selves partners of the craft, he takes them as partners also of
the riot. Then also he exaggerated (nvénoev) the danger,
adding, This our craft isin danger of coming into contempt.
For this is pretty nearly what he declares by this, that from
this art,”’ etc.


that ‘‘ they which be made of men are no
gods.” Throughout, he drives his speech at
their craft. Then that which most grieved
them he brings in afterwards. But, with the
other gods, he would say, we have no concern,
but that “the temple also of the great god-
dess Diana is in danger to be destroyed.”
Then, lest he should seem to say this for the
sake of lucre, see what he adds: ‘‘ Whom the
whole world worshippeth.” Observe how he
showed Paul’s power to be the greater, prov-
ing all (their gods) to be wretched and miser-
able creatures, since a mere man, who was
driven about, a mere tentmaker, had so much
power. Observe the testimonies borne to the
Apostles by their enemies, that they over-
threw their worship.” There (at Lystra) they
brought ‘garlands and oxen.” (ch. xiv. 13.)
Here he says, “ This our craft is in danger to
be set at naught.—Ye have filled (all) every-
where with your doctrine.” (ch. v. 28.) So
said the Jews also with regard to Christ:
“Ve see how the world is going after Him”
(John xii. 19); and, ‘‘ The Romans shall come
and take away our city.” (ch. xi. 48). And
again on another occasion, “‘ These that have
turned the world upside down are come hither
also.” (ch, xvii. 6).—‘‘ And when they heard
these sayings, they were full of wrath.” Upon
what was that wrath called forth? On hear-
ing about Diana, and about their source of
gain. “And cried out, saying, Great is Diana
of the Ephesians. And the whole city was
filled with confusion: and rushed with one
accord ‘into the ‘theatre77> (vi29)) suenieie
the way with vulgar minds, any trivial occa-
sion shall hurry them away and inflame their
passions. Therefore? it behooves to do
(things) with (strict) examination. But see
how contemptible they were, to be so exposed
to all (excitements)! “ Having caught Gaius
and Aristarchus, men of Macedonia, Paul’s
companions in travel, they dragged them:”
(here) again recklessly, just as did the Jews
in the case of Jason; and everywhere they
set upon them.* “And when Paul would


2 ore Kabaupav (Cat. OTE €xaO7jp0vv) avuT@aV Ta ocBacpara, eKec
oTeumata Kal Tavpous mpoaedepov evtavOa hyo OTe KivduvEever
x. tT. A, These seem to be only rough notes or hints of what
Chrys. said. The first words «a0. avtwv 7a oe. look like a
reference to Acts XVii. 23, avafewpav Ta ceBacwata Vuev: “ thus
at Athens, surveying the objects of their worship, and finding
an Altar, etc. he thence takes occasion to preach the Unknown
God. At Lystra, they brought garlands and oxen, and the
Apostles thereupon, etc. Therefore these men here might
well say, Our craft isin danger. For it was true, as was said
on another occasion (at Jerusalem), Ye have filled, etc.: and,
They that have turned the world, etc. Nay, of. Christ also
the Jews said the same, The world is going after Him.’

3 Ava TadTa mer e£etacews dec movecvy, Mod. text adds mavta,
This sentence, om. by A., seems to be out of place, and to
belong rather to v. 36. We have transposed the text v. 28, 20,
which in Mss. and Edd, is given after ws maou mpoxeto@ar.

4 Kat mavTaxov avtois mpoKervtar. To make some sense of the
passage, we adopt mpookeivtar from B. We also transpose v.
30 which is given with 31 after the following sentence.


HomiLy XLII.]


Tre ACls OF ‘THE


AOS Tins: 259


have entered in unto the people, the disciples
suffered him not,” (v. 30) so far were they
from all display and love of glory. ‘“ And
certain of the Asiarchs, which were his
friends, sent unto him, desiring him that he
would not adventure himself into the theatre”
(v. 31) to a disorderly populace and tumult.
And Paul complies, for he was not vainglori-
ous, nor ambitious. ‘ Some therefore cried
one thing, and some another: for the assem-
bly was confused.” Such is the nature of the
multitude: it recklessly follows, like fire when
it has fallen upon fuel; and the more part
knew not wherefore they were come together.”
(v. 32.) “And they drew Alexander out of
the multitude, the Jews putting him forward.”
It was the Jews that thrust him forward ;* but
as providence ordered it, this man did not
speak. “And Alexander beckoned with the
hand, and would have made his defence unto
pae wacople.” ="(v) 335) “But “when © they
knew that he was a Jew, all with one voice
about the space of two hours cried out, Great
is Diana of the Ephesians.” (v. 34.) A child-
ish understanding indeed! as if they were
afraid, lest their worship should be extin-
guished, they shouted without intermission.
For two years had Paul abode there, and see
how many heathen there were still! ‘And
when the town clerk had appeased the people,
he said, Ye men of Ephesus, what man is
there that knoweth not how that the city of
the Ephesians is temple-keeper of the great
goddess Diana, and of the image which fell
down from Jupiter?” (v. 35.) As if the
thing were not palpable. With this saying
first he extinguished their wrath. ‘“ And of
the Diopetes.” There was another sacred
object (iepiv) that was so called. Either he
means the piece of burnt earth or her
image.”* This (is) a lie. ‘“ Seeing then that


1 TIpoeBadovto “Iovdator oixovouixas S¢ (supplied by Cat.)
ovTos ovK eb9eyéaro. Mod. text ‘‘ The Jews thrust him for-
ward, as Providence ordered it, that they might not have (it
in their power) to gainsay afterwards. This man is thrust
forward, and speaks: and hear what (he says).”’

2 Old text: ‘lepov erepov ows exadecTo—meaning, as we take
it, the Palladium of Troy, which was also called ‘‘ the Dio-
petes,’’ ro IlaAAaétov To Acometés Kadovmevov, Clem. Alex. Pro-
trept. iv. 47.’’—Tot Td boTpakov avTns dno. Something more
is needed, therefore we supply 7 70 ayaAua aitns dyno. But
iepov in this sense is not usual. "Oorpaxov, whatever it mean,
cannot be the image of Diana, which was known to be of
wood. The passage seems to be corrupt, and one might con-
jecture that iepov erepor relates to *‘ another Temple”’ of Diana
built after the first which was burned by Herostratos, and that
the name of this man is latent in the unintelligible ynro-
Toogtpaxov, and that Chrysostom’s remark is this, that together
with that former Temple perished the original Diopetes: so
that to speak of that image as still in being was a lie (tovro
Wevddos)—Mod. text ‘‘ But a different iepoy was thus called
étomeres: either then the idol of Diana they called Diopetes,
@s ek ToD Atos TO OoTpaKkov exec voreTTwKOs, and not made by
man: ora different ayaAuwa was thus called among them.’’—
Isidore of Pelus. in the Catena: ‘t Some say that it is spoken
of the image of Diana, i. e. ‘(a worshipper) of the great Diana
and of her étometés ayadua:’ some that the Palladium also (is
here named as éco7.), i. e. the image of Minerva, which they
worshipped along with Diana.*’ Ammonius ibid., “the vaos
tov Avos: or the otpoyyvAocedées’’—meaning the ootpaxov ?—


these things cannot be spoken against, ye
ought to be quiet, and to do nothing rashly.
For ye have brought hither these men, which
are neither robbers of churches, nor yet
blasphemers of your goddess.” (v. 36, 37.)
All this however he says to the people; but in
order that those (workmen) also might be-
come more reasonable, he says: ‘* Wherefore
if Demetrius, and the craftsman which are
with him, have a matter against any man, the
law is open, and there are deputies: let them
implead one another. But if ye enquire any-
thing concerning other matters, it shall be
determined in a lawful assembly. For we are
in danger to be called in question for this
day’s uproar, there being no cause, for which
(matter) we shall not be able to give an
account for this concourse.” v. 38-40.) “A
lawful assembly,” he says, for there were
three assemblies according to law in each
month; but this one was contrary to law.
Then he terrified them also by saying, “ We
are in danger to be called to account” for


sedition. But let us look again at the things
said.
(Recapitulation.) “After these things


were ended,” it says, ‘‘ Paul purposed in the
Spirit, when he had passed through Macedo-
nia and Achaia, to go to Jerusalem,” saying,
‘After I have been there, I must also see
Rome.” (v. 21.) He no longer speaks here
after the manner of a man, * or, He purposed
to pass through those regions, without tarrying
longer. Wherefore does he send away Timo-
thy and Erastus? Of this I suppose he says,
‘‘Wherefore when we could no longer forbear,
we thought it good to be left at Athens alone.
He sent away,” it says, “‘two of those who
ministered to him” (1 Thess. iii. 1), both to
announce his coming, and to make them more


‘* or rather, which is the true explanation, this image of Diana:
or the Palladium, which they thought came from Jupiter, and
was not the work of men.’’ CEcum. gives the same variety of
expkanations, from the Catena. The words tovro wWevdos,
which in the Mss. follow the text v. 36, 37, are better referred
to the Diopetes, as in our translation.—Mod. text apa 70 wav
Weddos: and then, ‘‘these things however he says to the peo-
ple, in order that those also,”’ etc. omitting 6€ preserved by the
old text.

* This Déofetes, the image which was supposed to have
fallen down from Jupiter or heaven (Atos—minrw), was the
image of Diana which was in the great temple at Ephesus
This was the superstitious belief of the people as is clear from
the many instances in classic mythology in which statues are
famed to have fallen from heaven. This image was of wood
and was probably found there by the Greeks when they
colonized Ionia.—G. B. S.

3 j. e. In this, he prophesies (see above on this verse): but in
his purpose of going to Jerusalem from Achaia, he was disap-
pointed, for he had to return through Macedonia: 7 mpoetAeto,
1. e. this is the meaning of é¥eto év mvevuatt. Mod. text om.
overt eyxpovioas, and adds: *‘ for this is the meaning of é¥ero,
and such is the force of the expression.’’ Then: “ But why he
sends away T. and E., the writer does not say: but it seems
to me that of this also he says, "Ev mvevuatt. Wherefore
when,”’ etc.—The meaning is: ‘‘He sends them away on this
occasion, as he did at Athens: viz. because he could no longer
forbear, therefore he thought it good to be left alone.”


Sl. CHRYSOSTOM:


[HomiLy XLII.


260 LAE WORKS. OF
eager. “But he himself tarried awhile in| say,
Asia.” (v. 22.) Most of all does he pass


his time in Asia; and with reason: there,
namely, was the tyranny, of the philosophers. 1
(Afterwards) also he came and discoursed to
them again. “And the same time” etc. (v.
23), for indeed the superstition was excessive.
(a) ‘Ye both see and hear,” so palpable
was the result that was taking place—‘“ that
not alone at Ephesus, but almost throughout
all Asia, this Paul by persuading hath turned
away,” not by violence: this is the way to
persuade a city. Then, what touched them
closely, ‘that they be no gods which are
made with hands.” (v. 26.) He overturns,
says he, our craft: (e) ‘From this work we
have our wealth. Hath persuaded.” How?
did he persuade—he, a man of mean consid-
eration? How prevail over so great a force of
habit? by doing what—by saying what? It
is not for a Paul (to effect this), it is not for
a man. Even this is enough, that he said,
“They are no gods.” ‘Now if the impiety (of
the heathen religions) was so easy to detect,
it ought to have been condemned long ago: if
it was strong, it ought not to have been over-
thrown so quickly. (0) For, lest they should
consider within themselves (how strange),
that a human being should have such power
as this, and if a human being has power to
effect such things, why then one ought to be
persuaded by that man, he adds: (Sf) “not
only is this our craft in danger to be set at


naught, but also,” as if forsooth alleging a
greater consideration, “the temple of the
great goddess Diana,” etc. (¢) “whom all


Asia and the world worshippeth.” (v. 27.)
(g) “And when they heard, they were filled
with wrath, and shouted, Great is. Diana of
the Ephesians!” (v. 28.) For each city
had its proper gods. (¢) They thought to
make their voice a barrier against the Divine
Spirit. Children indeed, these Greeks ! (h)
And their feeling was as if by their voice they
could reinstate the worship of her, and undo
what had taken place! ‘“ And the whole city,”
etc. (v. 29.) See a disorderly multitude!
“And whén Paul,’ ete, ‘(v. 30.) Paul. then
wished to enter in that he might harangue


them: for he took his persecutions as occa-
sions for teaching: “but the disciples suf-
fered him not.” Mark, how great fore-


thought we always find them taking for him.
At the very first they brought him out that
they might not (in his person) receive a
mortal blow; and yet they had heard him


l éxet yap qv Tvpavvis (mod. text » moAAn datpia) Tov
diiocopwy, But this seems to belong rather to Athens.

2 Mod. text inserts for connection: ‘** And if from this work
wealth accrues to you, how hath he persuaded,”’ etc.


“IT must also see Rome.” But it was
providential that he so predicts beforehand,
that they might not be confounded at the
event. But they would not that he should
even suffer any evil. ‘And certain of the
Asiarchs besought him that he would not
enter into the theatre.” Knowing his eager-
ness, they ‘“‘ besought him :”’ so much did all
the believers love him.—And they drew
Alexander,” «ete: »(v..) 33pq.¢0nis; Alexander,
why did he wish to plead? Was he accused ?
No, but it was to find an opportunity, and
overturn the whole matter, and inflame® the
anger of the people. “ But when they knew
that he was a Jew, all with one voice about
the space of two hours cried out, Great is
Diana of the Ephesians.” (v. 34.) Do you
mark the inordinate rage? Well, and with
rebuke does the town clerk say, “What man is
there that knoweth not how that the city of
the Ephesians—’’(v. 35) (coming to the point)
which they were frightenened about. Is_ it
this, * says he, that ye do not worship her?
And he does not say, “That knoweth not”
Diana, but, ‘our city,” that it always wor-
shipped her.®° “Seeing then that these
things cannot be spoken against.” (v. 36.)
Why then do ye make a question about them,
as if these things were not plain? (4) Then
he quietly chides them, showing that they had
come together without reason. ‘And to do
nothing rashly,” he says. Showing that they
had acted rashly. (@) “For ye have
brought hither,” etc. (v. 37.) They wanted
to make religion the pretext for what con-
cerned their own money-making: (¢) and it
was not right on account of private charges to
hold a public assembly. For he put them to
a nonplus, and left them not a word to say
for themselves.® “There being no cause,”
he says, ‘“‘for this concourse, for which”
(matter) ‘we shall not’ be able to give the
account.” (v. 40.) See how prudently, how
cleverly, the unbelievers (act). Thus he ex-
tinguished their wrath. For as it is easily


3 exkavoar, Erasm. ut et confutaret totum et furorem pop-
uli extingueret. Ben. subverteret .... extingueret. But
exkavoae will not bear this sense, nor does the context suggest
it. Alexander’s object, it is represented, was to overthrow the
preaching, and kindle the rage of the people yet more.—Cat.
and Sav. marg. €Axvoav,

* Mod. text ‘‘ As if he had said, Do ye not worship her ?”’

5 Mod. Texte But, Our city, paying court to them:
depatevwy avTovs: ’ for which the old text has. But, Your
city. "Edepdmevoev avTnv. Which may mean, Thus he, the
town clerk, pai? homage to the city, by speaking of its hon-
ors. But Depamevere aurnv in the preceding sentence requires
the sense given in the translation.

& Shodpa yap avtTovs nAodyngev Kai Sintopynoev. Mod. text
Tovtw od. avTous Sun7., omitting, nAoyynaev, which, if not cor-
rupt is here put in an unusual sense.

7 ov dvynooueda old text, here and above, as in the Alexan-
drine Ms. of the N. T. (received by Griesbach) but here with
THS TVOTP. T. transposed. (If the negative be retained, it is
better to read mepi r9s o. 7. as in the leading authorities of the
text: so that this clause is epexegetical to mept ov: for which,
namely, for this concourse.)


Homity XLII.]


VHEACTS “OF


kindled, so also is it easily extinguished.
* And when he had thus spoken,” it says,
“he dismissed the assembly.” (v. 41.)

Seest thou how God permits trials, and by
them stirs up and awakens the disciples, and
makes them more energetic? Then let us
not sink down under trials: for He Himself
will ‘‘also make the way of escape, that we
may be able to bear them.” (1’ Cor. x. 13.)
Nothing so makes friends, and rivets them so
firmly, as affliction: nothing so fastens and
compacts the souls of believers: nothing is so
seasonable for us teachers in order that the
things said by us may be heard. For the
hearer when he is im ease is listless and
indolent, and seems to suffer annoyance from
the speaker: but when he is in affliction and
distress, he falls into a great longing for the
hearing. For when distressed in his soul, he
seeks on all sides to find comfort for his afflic-
tion: and the preaching brings no small
comfort. ‘“‘ What then,” you will say, ‘ of the
Jews? How was it that in consequence of
their weakheartedness, they did not hear?”
Why, they were Jews, those ever weak and
miserable creatures: and besides, the afflic-
tion in their case was great, but we speak of
affliction in moderation. For observe: they
expected to be freed from the evils that
encompassed them, and they fell into number-
less greater evils: now this is no common
distress to the soul. Afflictions cut us off
from the sympathy we have for the present
world, as appears in this, that we wish for
death immediately, and cease to be loving
of the body: which very thing is the greatest
part of wisdom, to have no hankering, no ties
to the present life. The soul which is afflict-
ed does not wish to be concerned about
many things: repose and stillness are all it
desired, content for its part to have done with
the things present, even though there be
nothing else to follow. As the body when
wearied and distressed does not wish to
indulge in amours, or gormandizing, but only
to repose and lie down in quiet ; so the soul,
harassed? by numberless evils, is urgent to be
at rest and quiet. The soul which is at ease
is (apt to be) fluttered, alarmed, unsettled:
whereas in this there is no vacuity, no run-
ning to waste: and the one is more manly,
the other more childish; the one has more
gravity, in the other more levity. And as
some light substance, when it falls upon deep
water, is tossed to and fro, just so is the soul
when it falls into great rejoicing, Moreover,
that our greatest faults arise out of overmuch


pleasure, any one may see. Come, if you)


1 tapaydetoa B, The other Mss. taptyevdeioa, “which is
unsuitable here.


THE “APOSTLES.


| former


261
will, let us represent to ourselves two houses,
the one where people are marrying, the other
where they are mourning: let us enter in
imagination into each: let us see which is
better than the other. Why, that of the
mourner will be found full of seriousness
(gAocogiac) ; that of the marrying person, full of


indecency. For look, (here are) shameful
words, unrestrained laughter, more unre-


strained motions, both dress and gait full of
indecency, words fraught with mere nonsense
and foolery: in short, all is ridicule there, all
ridiculous.2. I do not say the marriage is
this; God forbid; but the accompaniments
of the marriage. Then nature is beside itself
in excess of riot. Instead of human beings,
those present become brute creatures, some
neighing like horses, others kicking like
asses: such utter license, such dissolute unre-
straint: nothing serious, nothing noble: (it is)
the devil’s pomp, cymbals, and pipes, and
songs teeming with fornication and adultery.


But not so in that house where there is
mourning; all is well-ordered there: such


silence, such repose, such composure; nothing
disorderly, nothing extravagant: and if any
one does speak, every word he utters is
fraught with true philosophy: and then the
wonderful circumstance is, that at such times
not men only, but even servants and women
speak like philosophers—for such is the
nature of sorrow—and while they seem to be
consoling the mourner, they in fact utter
numberless truths full of sound philosophy.
Prayers are there to begin with, that the afflic-
tion may stop there, and go no further: many
a one comforting the sufferer, and recitals
without number of the many who have the
like cause for mourning. ‘“ For what is
man?” (they ask) (and thereupon) a serious
examination of our nature—‘ aye, then, what
is man!” (and upon this) an impeachment
of the life (present) and its worthlessness,
a reminding (one another) of things to come,
of the Judgment. (So from both these
scenes) each returns home: from the wed-
ding, grieved, because he himself is not in the
enjoyment of the like good fortune ; from the
mourning, light-hearted, because he has not
himself undergone the like affliction, and
having all his inward fever quenched. But
what will you? Shall we take for another
contrast the prisons and the theatres? For
the one is a place of suffering, the other of
pleasure. Let us again examine. In the
there is seriousness of mind; for
where there is sadness, there must needs be
seriousness. He who aforetime was rich, and


2 GAws ovdev ETE00v H TaVTa yeAws Kal KaTayEeAWws Ta EKEL,


262


THE WORKS OF ‘ST. CHRYSOSTOM


[Homity XLII.


inflated with his own importance, now will
even suffer any common person to converse
with him, fear and sorrow, like some mightier
fire, having fallen on his soul, and softening
down his harshness : then he becomes humble,
then of a sad countenance, then he feels the
changes of life, then he bears up manfully
against everything. But in a theatre all is the
reverse of this—laughter, ribaldry, devil’s
pomp, dissoluteness, waste of time, useless
spending of days, planning for extravagant
lust, adultery made a study of, practical train-
ing to fornication, schooling in intemperance,
encouragement to filthiness, matter for laugh-
ter, patterns for the practice of indecency.
Not so the prison: there you will find humble-
ness of mind, exhortation, incentive to serious-
ness, contempt of worldly things; (these)
are all trodden under foot and spurned and,
fear stands over (the man there), as a school-
master over a child, controlling him to all his
duties. But if you will, let us examine in a
different way.' I should like you to meet a
man on his return from a theatre, and another
coming out of prison ; and while you would see
the soul of the one fluttered, perturbed, actually
tied and bound, that of the other you would
see enlarged, set free, buoyant as on wings.


For the one returns from the theatre, enfettered |


by the sight of the women there, bearing about
chains harder than any iron, the scenes, the
words, the gestures, that he saw there. But
the other on his return from ee prison, re-


leased from all (bounds), will no longer
think that he suffers any evil as comparing


his own case with that of (those) others.
(To think) that he is not in bonds will make
thankful ever after; he will despise hu-
man affairs, as seeing so many rich men
there in calamity, men (once) having power
to do many and great things, and now lying
bound there: and if he should suffer anything
unjustly, he will bear up against this also; for
of this too there were many examples there :
he will be led to reflect upon the Judgment
to come and will shudder, seeing here? (in
the earthly prison) how it will be there. For
as it is with one here shut up in prison, so in
that world also before the Judgment, before
the Day that is to come. Towards wife,
children, and servants, he will be more gentle.


1C,, ’AAA’ et BovAer maddy woAAovs éfeTaAgwpev ToTOUs: B.,
*AAAa maduy ei BovAer étepous eer. TOTOVs. Mod. text AAA’ et
B., madw érépws eer. Tovs avTovs Torovs. Inthe Translation we
adopt €répws and omit Tozovus.

? The text is corrupt: Kai dpifec tovs tomovs—perhaps it
should be tous exet TOoTOUsS—evTavba opayv: Kavamep yap evTavia
év Serpwrnpio TVYXAVHV OUT KaKEL ™po THS KploEews, mpO THS
meAAOVoNS NEpas, SC. Ppiger, i. e. *‘justas here, being shut up
in prison he looks forward with dread to the coming trial, so
will he in that world,” etc. Mod. text quite misrepresenting
the sense: ‘‘ For, as he that is here shut up in prison is gentle
towards all, so those also before the Judgment, before the
coming Day, will be more gentle,” etc.


Not so he that comes from the theatre: he
will look upon his wife with more dislike, he
will be peevish with his servants, bitter to-
wards his children, and savage towards all.
Great are the evils theatres cause to cities,
great indeed, and we do not even know that
they are great. Shall we examine other
scenes of laughter also, I mean the feasts,
with their parasites, their flatterers, and abun-
dance of luxury, and (compare with them)
places where are the halt and blind? As
before, in the former is drunkenness, luxury,
and dissoluteness, in the latter the reverse.—
See also with regard to the body, when it is
hot-blooded, when it is in good case, it under-
goes the quickest change to sickness : not SO,
when it has been kept low. Then let me
make my meaning clearer to you :—let there
be a body having plenty of blood, plenty of
flesh, plump with good living: this body will
be apt even from any chance food to engender
a fever, if it be simply idle. But let there be
another, struggling rather with hunger and
hardship: this is not easily overcome, not
easily wrestled down by disease. Blood,
though it may be healthy in us, does often
by its very quantity engender disease: but
if it be small in quantity, even though
it be not healthy, it can be easily worked
off. So too in the case of the soul, that
which leads an easy, luxurious life, has_ its
impulses quickly swayed to sin: for such a
soul is next neighbor to folly, to pleasure, to
vainglory also, and envy, and plottings s, and
slanderings. Behold this great city of ours,
what a size it is! Whence arise the evils? is
it not from those who are rich? is it not from
those who are in enjoyment? Who are they
that “drag” men “before the tribunals?”
Who, that dissipate properties? Those who
are wretched and outcasts, or those who are
inflated with consequence, and in enjoyment ?
It is not possible that any evil can happen
from a soul that is afflicted. (James ii. 6.)
Paul knew the gain of this: therefore he says,
“Tribulation worketh patience, and patience
experince, and experience hope, and hope
maketh not ashamed.” (Rom. v. 3.) Then
let us not sink in our afflictions, but in all
things give thanks, that sowe may get great
gain, that we may be well-pleasing to God,
who permits afflictions, A great good is
affliction: and we learn this from our own
children: for without affliction (a boy) would
learn nothing useful. But we, more than
they, need affliction. For if there, when the
passions (as yet) are quiet, (chastisement)
benefits them, how much more us, especially
possessed as we are by so many! Nay, we
behoove rather to have schoolmasters than


Homity XLIII.]


Pee oe nS OF THE APOSTLES.


263


they: since the faults of children cannot be
great, but ours are exceeding great. Our
schoolmaster is affliction. Let us then not
draw it down willingly upon ourselves, but
when it is come let us bear it bravely, being,
as it is, always the cause of numberless good


things ; that so we may both obtain grace
from God, and the good things which are laid
up for them that love Him, in Christ Jesus
our Lord, with Whom to the Father, together
with the Holy Spirit, be glory, might, honor,


POE YOR LU TTT


AGAS


** And after the uproar was ceased, Paul called unto
him the disciples, and embraced them, and
departed for to go into Macedonia.”


THERE was need of much comforting after
that uproar. Accordingly, having done this,
he goes into Macedonia, and then into
Greece. For, it says, “when he had gone
over those parts, and had given them much
exhortation, he came into Greece, and there
abode three months. And when the Jews
laid wait for him, as he was about to sail into
Syria, he purposed to return through Macedo-

tweens.) Aran he is ‘persecuted: by


nia.
the Jews, and goes into Macedonia. ‘And


there accompanied him into Asia Sopater of
Berea; and of the Thessalonians, Aristarchus
and Secundus; and Gaius of Derbe, and
Timotheus; and of Asia, Tychicus and
Trophimus. These going before tarried for
us at Troas.”’ (v. 4. 5.) But how does he call
Timothy a man “of Thessalonica?”* This
is not his meaning, but, “Of Thessalonians,
Aristarchus and Secundus and Gaius: of
Derbe, Timothy,’ etc., these, he says, went
before him to Troas, preparing the way for
him. “And we sailed away from Philippi
after the days of unleavened bread, and came


* The phrase aypt ths ‘Actas are omitted by 8 and B. and are
now discarded in the leading critical editions. The residence
of Timothy is not given, as being well known. It was prob-
ably Lystra (Acts xvi. 1).—G. B.S.

1 St. Chrysostom’s reading of v. 4 is peculiar, but does not
appear in the vv. ll. of N. ae sSersee because the Edd, got
Chrys. conform it to the usual text, which is Oegaad., dé, ‘Ap.
kat Sex. kat Taios AepSatos cai Tipoteos, i. e. two Thessalo-
nians, and beside them Gaius of Derbe, and Timothy, etc.
But in the preceding chapter, v. 29, a Gaius was mentioned
along with Aristarchus, and both as Macedonians. Hence it
seems St. Chrys. read it with a stop after Tatos, of Thessa-
lonians, Aristarchus and Secundus and Gaius. In his remark,
he seems to be giving a reason for striking out «at before
Tipoveos - viz. “ How does he call Timothy a Thessalonian,
(as a negligent reader might suppose to be the case, viz., Of
Thess. Ar. and Sec. and ae Derbzeus and Timothy?) He
does not say this, but, of Thessalonians he mentions three,
and then, of Derbe, Timothy, cf. xvi. 1., whereas Gaius was
not of Derbe, but of Macedonia, xix. 29.” The note of
CEcumen. on the passage shows that AepBatos was supposed
by some to bea proper. name : ‘““Of the rest, he tells us what
countries they were of: for Timothy he is content with the
name, his_ personal character was distinction enough, and
besides he has already told us where T. came from : viz. xvi. 1.
But if AepBatos here is a noun of nation and not a proper name,
perhaps he has here also’ mentioned his country.


now and evermore, world without end. Amen.
XOX, T
unto them to Troas in five days; where we


abode seven days.” (v.6.) For it seems to
me that he made a point of keeping the feasts
in the large cities. “From Philippi,’’ where
the affair of the prison had taken place. This
was his third coming into Macedonia, and it
is a high testimony that he bears to the
Philippians, which is the reason why he
makes some stay there. “And upon the first
day of the week, when the disciples came
together to break bread, Paul preached unto
them, ready to depart on the morrow; and
continued his speech until midnight.” (v. 7.)
It was then the (season between Easter and)
Pentecost.” See how everything was subor-
dinate to the preaching. It was also, it says,
the Lord’s day.f Not even during night-time
was he silent, nay he discoursed the rather
then, because of stillness. Mark how he
both made a long discourse, and beyond the
time of supper itself. But the Devil disturbed
the feast—not that he prevailed, however—
by plunging the hearer in sleep, and causing
him to fall down. “And,” it says, “there
were many lights in the upper chamber,
where they were gathered together. And there
sat in a window a certain young man named
Eutychus, being fallen into a deep sleep: and
as Paul was long preaching, he sunk down
with sleep, and fell down from the third loft,
and was taken up dead. And Paul went
down, and fell on him, and embracing him,
said, Trouble not yourselves ; for his life is
in him. When he therefore was come up


2 Tlevtyxoo7H, meaning the w hole of the seven weeks. The
scope of the remark is, Being met for celebration of the Holy
Eucharist, which followed the Sermon, and the discourse
being lengthened out until midnight, they were fasting all
the time (for the Eucharist was taken fasting, see Hovr. xxvii.
in 1 Cor.): so that, though it was during the weeks after
Easter, when there was no fast, and not only so, but the
Lord’s Day moreover, here was a fast protracted till mid-
night.

+ That the religious observance of Sunday is here alluded to
has been generally assumed. Taken in connection with r
Cor. xvi. 2 and Rev. i. 10, the passage renders it highly prob-
able that at this time (about a.p. 57) the first day of the week was
regularly observed by the Christians in memory of the Lord's
resurrection, although it is certain that the Jewish Christians
still observed the Jewish Sabbath.—G. B. S.


264 THE WORKS OF


ST... CHENS@ST Or |Homity XLIII.


again, and had broken bread, and eaten, and
talked a long while, even till break of day, so
he departed. And they brought the young
man alive, and were not a little comforted.”
(v. 8-12.) But observe, I pray you, the
theatre, how crowded it was : and the miracle,
what it was. “ He was sitting in a window,”
at dead of night. Such was their eagerness
to hear him! Let us take shame to our-
selves! “Aye, but a Paul,” say you, “ was
discoursing then.” Yes, and Paul discourses
now, or rather not Paul, either then or now,
but Christ, and yet none cares to hear. No
window in the case now, no importunity of
hunger, or sleep, and yet we do not care to
hear: no crowding in a narrow space here,
nor any other such comfort. And the won-
derful circumstance is, that though he was a
youth, he was not listless and indifferent ; and
though (he felt himself) weighed down by
sleep, he did not go away,’ nor yet fear the
danger of falling down. It was not from
listlessness that he slumbered, but from
necessity of nature. But observe, I beseech
you, so fervent was their zeal, that they even
assembled in a third loft: for they had nota
Church yet. ‘Trouble not yourselves,” he
says. He said not, “ He shall come to life
again, for I will raise him up:”’ but mark the
unassuming way in which he comforts them:
“for his life,” says he, “is in him. When he
was come up again, and had broken bread,
and eaten.” This thing cut short the dis-
course ; it did no harm, however. ‘‘ When he
had eaten,” it says, “and discoursed a long
while, even till break of day, so he departed.”
Do you mark the frugality of the supper? Do
you observe how they passed the whole
night? Such were their meals, that the
hearers came away sober, and fit for hearing.
But we, in what do we differ from dogs? Do
you mark what a difference (between us and
those men)? “And they brought the young
man alive, and,” it says, “were not a little
comforted,” both because they received him
back alive, and because a miracle had been
wrought.* ‘And we went before to ship,
and sailed unto Thasos,’ there intending to


1 ob anéoty, so as to lose the opportunity of hearing, and
forego the ‘‘ breaking of bread,’’ which was to follow the dis-
course. Comp. Hom. x. in Gen. init.

* The narrative requires the interpretation of Chrys. that
this was a case of restoration to life, not merely of revival
from suspended animation (as Olshausen, Ewald, DeWette).
This is established by the fact that Eutychus is said to have
seen taken up vexpos, not ws vexpos. Moreover to p60 vexpos
(v. 9) is opposed yyayov Gavra (v. 12). He was dead, they
brought him ad7ve. It is true that the apostle says: ‘ His life
(soul) is in him,” but this is said after he had fallen upon and
embraced him, or this may have been said from the standpoint
of his confidence of a miraculous restoration, as Jesus said of
Jairus’ daughter: ‘‘The damsel is not dead, but sleepeth,”’
meaning that from his standpoint and in view of his power
she still lived, although she was in reality dead.—G. B. S.

2 Old text instead of "Acgov has @acov, a misreading which
appears in some Mss. and Versions of the Acts: Cat., Nagov.


take in Paul: for so had he appointed, mind-
ing himself to go afoot.” (v. 13.) We often
find Paul parting from the disciples. For
behold again, he himself goes afoot: giving
them the easier way, and himself choosing
the more painful. He went afoot, both that
he might arrange many matters, and by way
of training them to bear a parting from him?
“And when he had joined us at Thasos,
having taken him on board, we came to
Mytilene; and having sailed thence on the
morrow, we come over against Chios ””—then
they pass the island—‘‘and on the next day
we touched at Samos, and having stopped
at Trogylium, on the following day we came
to Miletus. For Paul had determined to sail
by Ephesus, because he would not spend the
time in Asia: for he hasted, if it were possi-
ble for him, to be at Jerusalem the day of
Pentecost.” (v. 14-16.) Why this haste?
Not for the sake of the feast, but of the mul-
titude. At the same time, by this he con-
ciliated the Jews, as being one that did honor
the feasts, wishing to gain even his adver-
saries: at the same time also he delivers the
word. Accordingly, see what great gain
accrued, from all being present. But that
the interests of the people of Ephesus might
not be neglected on that account, he man-
aged for this in a different way. But let us
look over again what has been said.


(Recapitulation.) ‘ And having. embraced
them,” it says, “he departed for to go into
Macedonia.” (v. 1.) By this again he
refreshed them (dvexrjoaro), giving them much
consolation. ‘And having exhorted” the
Macedonians, ‘‘ with much discourse, he came
into Greece.” (v.2.) Observe how we every-
where find him accomplishing all by means
of preaching, not by miracles. ‘And we
sailed,” etc. The writer constantly shows
him to us as hasting to get to Syria; and the


/reason of it was the Church, and Jerusalem,.


but still he restrained his desire, so as to set
all right in those parts also? And yet Troas


3 radevwv Te avTOUS xwpiserdar avTOV. but mod. text ama Kai
mradevwv avtovs pndé xwpigervar avtov. After this, old text has
av7nxOnuev, hyow, eis THY @acorv evidently confusing this clause
of v. 13, with the first of v. 14, then, eira wapéxovtar (for
mapépx.) Thy vigor, followed by v. 15,16. Mod. text, v. 15. fol-
lowed by ‘*See, how Paul being urgent, they put to sea, and
lose no time, but mapépxovtat Tas vygous,” and v. 16.

4 Kai tos €xOpovs éAciv (F. eAeetv) BovAduevos, wishing by
this means to overcome (for their good) even those who hated
him. Then, ama xat tov Adyov kabier. Mod. text ama éeomevie
Tov Adyov Kkafervac. Mr. Field remarks on How. in 2 Cor. p.
553 B. where we have vapatveow xaéinor, that the much more
usual expression is, els te xa@ecvar, and adds: ‘‘ sewed tantune
ap. Nostrum reperimus dAGyov Kabetvat, Viz. t. ix. p. 236. E.””—
our passage. "

5 GAA’ Ouws Katelxe TOV TOSOV kal Ta Exel KaTopdouv. The
infinitive requires BovAduevos or the like : i. e. ‘‘ though desirous
to get to Jerusalem, he restrained his desire, and made a stay
at Troas of seven days, wishing, etc.:’* but B. gives the same
sense by reading xatop@av, Cat. katwpdov. Mod. text ovtws eixe
Tov TOvOY Kal Ta ExEL KaTOPIOUV.


Homity XLIII.]


ae -AGio, OF THE APOSTLES.


265


is not a large place: why then do they pass
seven days in it? Perhaps it was large as
regarded the number of believers. And after
he had passed seven days there, on the fol-
lowing day he spent the night in teaching :
so hard did he find it to tear himself away
from them, and they from him, “ And when
we came together,” it says, “to break bread.”
(v. 7-12.) At the very time (of breaking
bread) the discourse having taken its com-
mencement, * extended :* as representing that
they were hungry, and it was not unseason-
able: for the principal object (which brought
them together) was not teaching, but they
came together “to break bread;” discourse
however having come up, he prolonged the
teaching. See how all partook also at Paul’s
table. It seems to me, that he discoursed
while even sitting at table, teaching us to con-
sider all other things as subordinate to this.
Picture to yourselves, I beseech you, that
house with its lights, with its crowd, with Paul
in the midst, discoursing, with even the win-
dows occupied by many: what a thing it was
to see, and to hear that trumpet, and behold
that gracious countenance!” But why did he
discourse during night time? Since “he was
about to depart,” it says, and was to see
them no more: though this indeed he does
not tell them, they being too weak (to bear
ieee he) did. tell, it to the. others.:.At
the same time too the miracle which took
place would make them evermore to remem-
ber that evening; so that the fall turned out
to the advantage of the teacher. Great was
the delight of the hearers, and even when
interrupted it was the more increased. That
(young man) was to rebuke all that are care-
less (of the word), he whose death was caused
by nothing else than this, that he wished to
hear Paul, ‘And we went before to ship,”
etc. (v. 13.) Wherefore does the writer say
where they came, and where they went to?
To show in the first place that he was making
the voyage more leisurely—and this upon
human grounds—and sailing past (some):
also (for the same reason he tells) where he
made a stay, and what parts he sailed past;
(namely,) “that he might not have to spend
the time in Asia.” (v. 16.) Since had he
come there, he could not have sailed by; he


1 TIpds avtov Tov Katpov, apxnyv o Aoyos AaBwv mapeTervev ws
EvOELKVUMEVOS TELVAV* KAL OVK HY AkKaLpoV" OV yap MpOnyoumEVwS Eis
didacxadiav kadjKev. This is evidently mutilated ; the verb to
‘0 Adyos is wanting : ws evderx. mew7yv, either *“‘ making a display
of,’’ or, ‘ pleading as excuse the being hungry,” is unintelli-
gible ; sois ovx Hv ax. Mod. text attempts to make sense by
reading : ‘‘ At the very time & évedetxvuTo Tewwnv, Kal ovK hv
akatpov, apxnv o Adyos AaBwv wapeTaty, Wate OV TpONy.””

2 Mod. text ‘‘many occupying even the windows, to hear
that trumpet, and see that gracious countenance. What must
the persons taught have been, and how great the pleasure
they must have enjoyed !”’


did not like to pain those who would have
begged him to remain. “ For he hasted,” it
says, “if it were possible for him to keep the
day of Pentecost in Jerusalem:” and (this)
was not possible (if he stayed). Observe,
how he is also moved like other men. For
therefore it is that all this is done, that we
may not fancy that he was above human
nature: (therefore) you see him desiring
(something), and hasting, and in many
instances not obtaining (his object): for those
great and holy men were partakers of the
same nature with us; it was in the will and
purpose that they differed, and so it was that
also they attracted upon themselves the
great grace they did. See, for instance, how
many things they order by an economy of
their own. “That we give not offence” (2
Cor. vi. 3) to those who wish (to take
offence), and, “That our ministry be not
blamed.” Behold, both an_irreproachable
life and on the other hand condescension.
This is (indeed to be) called economy, to the
(very) summit and height (of it). For he
that went beyond the commandments of
Christ, was on the other hand more humble
than all. ‘I am made all things to all men,”
he says, “that I might gain all.” (1 Cor. ix,
22.) Hecast himself also upon dangers, as he
says in another place; ‘In much patience, in
afflictions, in necessities, in distresses, in
stripes, in imprisonments.” (2 Cor. vi. 4, 5.)
And great was his love for Christ. For if
there be not this, all else is superfluous, both
the economy (of condescending accommoda-
tion), and the irreproachable life, and the


exposing himself to dangers. ‘Who is
weak,” he says, “and Iam not weak? Who
is offended, and I burn not?” (2 Cor. xi.


29.) These words let us imitate, and let us
cast ourselves upon dangers for our brethren’s
sake. Whether it be fire, or the sword, cast
thyself on it, beloved, that thou mayest rescue
(him that is) thy member: cast thyself, be not
afraid. Thou art a disciple of Christ, Who
laid down His life for His brethren: a fellow-
disciple with Paul, who chose to suffer num-
berless ills for his enemies, for men that were


3 Toro oixovouia A€yeTat €is axpoTnTa Kai eis UWos. ** This”
—the blameless life and therewith ovyxataBaots described in
2 Cor. vi. 3 fi—‘ is what one may indeed call Oixovoxia—man-
aging or dispensing things for the good of others, so that they
shall have what is best for them in the best manner, without
shocking their prejudices. Oixov., in the moral sense of the
word, implies cvyxataBagots, letting one’s seit down to the
level of others for their good. (Hence below, «ai ta tis
oixovouias, Kai (Ta) TOV aAynmTov Biov.) ‘* Talk of ‘economy’—
here you have it at its very top and summit, in a degree not to
be surpassed.”” Instead of UWos the context seems to require
‘the lowest depth.’ Hence mod. text 70 eis axpo7ynTa eivat Kat
UwWous apetis, Kai Tamewwodpooivns asuvyxataBacews. Kai axove
mws 0 UmepBavwv. . . ‘the being at the summit both of lofti-~
ness of virtue and of lowliness of condescension.’’ In the
next sentence St. Paul is described as 0 UmepSatvwyv ta rapay-


| yéAuara Tov Xpiotov, namely, the precept “that they which


preach the Gospel should live by the Gospel,’’ 1 Cor. ix. 14.


266 ee WORKS Or


warring against him; be thou filled with zeal,
imitate Moses. He saw one suffering wrong,
and avenged him; he despised royal luxury,
and for the sake of those who were afflicted
he became a fugitive, a wanderer, lonely and
deserted; he passed his days in a foreign
land; and yet he blamed not himself, nor
said, “ What is this? I despised royalty, with
all that honor and glory: I chose to avenge
those who were wronged, and God hath over-
looked me: and not only hath He not
brought me back to my former honor, but
even forty years am I passing in a foreign
land. Truly, handsomely! have I received
my wages, have I not!” But nothing of the
kind did he say or think. So also do thou:
be it that thou suffer any evil for doing good,
be it that (thou have to wait) a long time, be
not thou offended, be not discomposed : God
will of a surety give thee thy reward. The
more the recompense is deiayed, the more is
the interest of it increased. Let us have a
soul apt to sympathize, let us have a heart
that knows how to feel with others in their
sorrows: no unmerciful temper (audv), no in-
humanity. Though thou be able to confer
no relief, yet weep thou, groan, grieve over
what has happened: even this is not to no
purpose. If it behooves us to feel for those
who are justly punished by God, much more
for those who suffer unjustly at the hands of
men. “(They of) “Atnan,”* it saith, “came
not forth to mourn for the house which was
near her’? (Micah i..11) = -they shall receive
pain, “in| Sreturm) ‘ior: that’ they built for
derision.” And again, Ezekiel makes this an
accusation against them, that they did not
eneve: for (the saniicted = (iMzek. | xvigeees)
What sayest thou, O Prophet? God _ pun-
isheth, and shall I grieve for those that He is
punishing? Yea verily: for God Himself
that punisheth wisheth this: since neither
does He Himself wish to punish, nay, even
Himself grieves when punishing. Then be
not thou glad at it. You will say, “If they
are justly punished, we ought not to grieve.”
Why, the thing we ought to grieve for is this
—that they were found worthy of punish-
ment. Say, when thou seest thy son under-
going cautery or the knife, dost thou not
grieve? and sayest thou not to thyself,


1 Edd. kadas ye: ov yap Tovs pidovs améAaBov. as if it meant,
“And well that it is so: for I have not received my wages—
therefore the reward is yet to come: not as it is with those
who améxovor Tov prodoyv avtoy in this life, Matt. vi. 2 ff.’ If
this were the meaning, the sentence would be out of place; it
Should be, ‘‘ He said nothing of the kind, but would rather
have repressed such thoughts with the consideration, It is
well: for I have not received my wages—they are yet to
come.” Butin fact here as elsewhere the Edd. overlook the
ironical interrogation o¥ yap. Read kad@s ye (ov yap;) Tovs
“utovovs am €XaBov (or Kadovs ye.).

2 Aivav. Sav. marg., Sawav LXX. Edd., Sevvadp. Hebr.,
Zaanan.


ST. CHRYSOSTOM. _—_ [Hoty XLUL.


“What is this? It is for health this cutting,
to quicken his recovery; it is for his deliver-
ance, this burning?” but for all that, when
thou hearest him crying out, and not able to
bear the pain, thou grievest, and the hope of
health being restored is not enough to carry
off the shock to nature. So also in the case
of these, though it be in order to their health
that they are punished, nevertheless let us
show a brotherly feeling, a fatherly disposi-
tion. They are cuttings and cauteries, the
punishments sent by God: but it is for this
we ought to weep, that they were sick, that
they needed such a mode of cure. If it be
for crowns that any suffer these things, then
grieve not; for instance, as Paul, as Peter
suffered: but when it is for punishment that
one suffers justice, then weep, then groan.
Such was the part the prophets acted; thus one
of them said, “Ah! Lord, dost thou destroy
the residue of Israel?” (Ezek. ix. 8.) We see
men-slayers, wicked men, suffering punishment,
and we are distressed, and grieve for them.
Let us not be philosophical beyond measure :
let us show ourselves pitiful, that we may be
pitied ; there is nothing equal to this beauti-
ful trait: nothing so marks to us the stamp of
human nature as the showing pity, as the
being kind to our fellow-men.
fore do the laws consign to public execu-
tioners the whole business of punishment:
having compelled the judge to punish so far
as to pronounce the sentence, thereafter they
call forth those to perform the act itself. So
true is it, that though it be justly done, it is
not the part of a generous (g:Aosde0v) soul to
inflict punishment, but it requires another
sort of person for this: since even God
punishes not by His own hand, but by means
of the angels. Are they then executioners,
the angels? God forbid: I say not this, but
they are avenging powers. When Sodom was
destroyed, the whole was done by them as the
instruments: when the judgments in Egypt
were inflicted, it was through them. For,
“He sent,” it says, “evil angels among
them.” (Psalm Ixxviil. 50.) But when there
is need of saving, God does this by Himself:
thus, He sent the Son :—(4) but,? “ He that
receiveth you, receiveth Me, and he that
receiveth Me, receiveth Him that sent Me.”
(Matt. x. ,40.)) @) And again. He saith,
“Then will I say unto the angels, Gather
together them that do iniquity, and cast them
into the furnace? -(Matt. xl. 30,-4aq4e))
But. concerming) ‘the,, just, not jsousiae)
And again, “ Bind him hand and foot, and


3 This clause isevidently misplaced, and moreover requires
to be completed. The meaning may be: ‘“‘So in the highest
of all God’s saving acts, the mission of the Son: for he that
receiveth Him receiveth the Father.”’


In fact, there-


Se ae a ee


Homity XLIV.]


THE ACES OF THE: APOSTLES.


267


cast him into outer darkness.” (Matt. xxii.
13.) Observe how in that case His servants
minister: but when the point is to do good,
see Himself doing the good, Himself calling :
“Come, ye blessed of My Father, inherit the
Kingdom prepared for you.” (Matt. xxv. 34.)
When the matter is, to converse with Abra-
ham, then Himself comes to him: when it is,
to depart to Sodom, He sends His servants,
like a judge raising up those who are to
punish. “Thou hast been faithful over a few
things, I will make thee ruler over many
things” (Matt. xxv. 21); Z(will make thee):
but that other, not Himself, but His servants


bind. Knowing these things, let us not
rejoice over those who are suffering punish-
ment, but even grieve: for these let us
mourn, for these let us weep, that for this also
we may receive a reward. But now, many


rejoice even over those who suffer evil
unjustly. But not so, we: let us show all
sympathy: that we also may have God


vouchsafed us, through the grace and mercy
of His only-begotten Son, with Whom to
the Father and the Holy Ghost together
be glory, might, honor, now and ever, world
without end. Amen.


OV ye ay.


IN Gili) XOXG. 17, —2 Te


« And from Miletus he sent to Ephesus, and called the
elders of the Church. And when they were come
to him, he said unto them, Ye know, from the
first day that I came into Asia, after what manner
I have been with you at all seasons, serving the
Lord with all humility of mind, and with many
tears, and temptations, which befell me by the
lying in wait of the Jews: and how I kept back
nothing that was profitable unto you, but have
showed you, and have taught you publicly, and
from house to house, testifying both to the Jews,
and also to the Greeks, repentance toward God,
and faith toward our Lord Jesus Christ.”


SEE him, hasting to sail by, and yet not
overlooking them, but taking order for all.
Having sent for the rulers, through those he
discourses to them (the Ephesians): but it is
worthy of admiration, how finding himself
under a necessity of saying certain great
things about himself, he tries to make the
least he can of it (cepara ueT place). * Ye
know.” For just as Samuel, when about to
deliver up the government to Saul says in
their presence, ‘‘ Have [ taken aught of your
hands? Ye are witnesses, and God also”
(Z Sam. xii. 3, 5); (so Paul here). David
also, when disbelieved, says, “I was with the
flock keeping my father’s sheep: and when
the bear came, I scared her away with my
hands. (t ‘Sam. xvii. 34; 35): and» Paul
himself too says to the Corinthians, “I
am become a fool; ye have compelled me.”
(2 Cor. xii. 11.) Nay, God Himself also does
the same, not speaking of himself upon any
and every occasion, but only when He is dis-
believed, then He brings up His benefits.
Accordingly, see what Paul does here: first
he adduces their own testimony; that you
may not imagine his words to be mere boast-


ing, he calls the hearers themselves as wit-
nesses of the things he says, since he was not
likely to speak lies in their presence. ‘This is
the excellence of a teacher, to have for wit-
nesses of his merits those who are his dis-
ciples. And what is wonderful, Not for one
day nor for two, says he, have I continued
doing this. He wishes to cheer them for the
future, that they may bravely bear all things,
both the parting from him, and the trials
about to take place—just as it was in the case
of Moses and Joshua. And see how he
begins: ‘‘How I have been with you the
whole time, serving the Lord with all humility
of mind.’ Observe, what most becomes
rulers: “‘ hating pride” (Exod. xviii. 21, LXX.),
says (Moses): which (qualification) is espe-
cially in point for rulers, because to them
there is (almost) a necessity of becoming
arrogant. This (humility) is the groundwork
of all that is good, as in fact Christ saith,
‘“‘ Blessed are the poor in spirit.” (Matt. v. 3.)
And (here) not simply, “with humility of
mind,” but, “with all humility.” For there
are many kinds of humility, in word and in
action, towards rulers, and toward the ruled.
Will you that I mention to you some kinds of
humility? There are some who are lowly
towards those who are lowly, and high towards
the high: this is not the character of humil-
ity.2 Some then are such. Then, that he


1 i, e. putting this foremost of the Beatitudes.

2 Something more ought to follow, but the report is imper-
fect. Mod. text ‘‘ Others again there are who are not such as
these, but who in the case of both characters preserve accord-
ing to the occasion both the lowly and the high bearing:
which thing indeed above all is characteristic of humility.
Since then he is about to teach them such things, lest he should
seem to be arrogant,”’ etc.


268


THE. WORKS (OF ST. GHRYSOS Eom


[HomiLy XLIV.


may not seem to be arrogant, he lays a foun-
dation beforehand, removing that suspicion :
Hor,,.; “if, says he, I have acted ‘with ali
humility of mind,’ it is not from arrogance
that I say the things L isay.” hen for his
gentleness, ever with much condescension

making them his fellows, “With you,” she
says, “have I been serving the Lord;” he
makes the good works common to them with
himself: none of it his own peculiar.
“What?” (you will say) “why, against God
could he possibly bear himself arrogantly ?”
And yet there are many who do bear them-
selves arrogantly against God: but this man
not even against his own disciples. This is
the merit of a teacher, by his own achieve-
ments of virtue to form the character of his
disciples. Then for his fortitude, upon which
also he is very concise. ‘ With many tears,”
he says, ‘‘and temptations which befell me by
the lying in wait of the Jews.” Do you see
that he grieves at their doings? But here too
he seems to show how sympathizing he was:
for he suffered for those who were going to
perdition, for the doers themselves: what was
done to himself, he even rejoiced at it; for he
belonged to that band which “ rejoiced that
they were counted worthy to suffer shame for
that Name (Acts v. 41): and again he says,
“Now I rejoice in my sufferings for you’ ’ (Col.
i. 24): and again, “For our light affliction,
which is but for the moment, worketh for us a
far more exceeding and eternal weight of
glory.” (2 Corav. 27)... Phese: things, how-
ever, he says, by way of making the least of
his merits (werpeafov). But here he shows his
fortitude, not so much of daring, as of endur-
ing: “I,” says he, “have been evil entreated,
but it was with you: and what is indeed the
grievous part of the business, at the hands of
Jews.” Observe, he puts here both love
and fortitude. Mark, here, I pray you, a
character of teaching: “I kept back noth-
ing,” he says, ungrudging fulness, unshrinking
promptness—“ of what was profitable unto
you:” because there were things which they
did not need to learn, For as the hiding
some things would have been like grudging,
so the saying all things would be folly. This
is why he adds, “that was profitable unto you.
But have showed you, and have taught you:”
have not only said, but also taught: not do-
ing this either as a mere matter of form. For
that this is what he means, observe what he
says: “publicly, and from house to house :”
thereby representing the exceeding toil, the
great earnestness and endurance. ‘Both
Jews, and Greeks.” Not (addressing myself)
to you alone. ‘Testifying:” here, the bold-
ness of speech: and that, even though we do


no good, yet we must speak: for! this is the
meaning of “testifying,” when we speak to
those who do not pay attention: and so the
word diauapripactac is for the most part used.
‘“T call heaven and earth to witness ” (Deut. iv.
26), duanapripoua, Moses says: and now Paul
himself, AvapapTupouevoc “both to Jews and
Greeks repentance toward God.” What tes-
tifiest thou? That they should be careful
about their manner of life: that they should
repent, and draw near to God. ‘Both to
Jews and Greeks ”—for neither did the Jews
know Him—both?” by reason of their works,
he says, “ repentance towards God,” and, by
reason that they knew not the Son, he adds,
“and faith in the Lord Jesus.”’ ‘To what end,
then, sayest thou these things? to what end
dost thou put them in mind of them? What
has come of it? hast thou anything to lay to
their charge? Having first alarmed their
feelings, then he adds, ‘‘ And now, behold, I
go bound in the Spirit unto Jerusalem, not
knowing the things that shall befall me there:
save that the Holy Ghost witnesseth in every
city, saying that bonds and afflictions abide
me. But none of these things move me,
neither count I my life dear unto myself, so
that I might finish my course with joy, and


the ministry, which I have received of the


Lord Jesus, to testify the Gospel of the grace
of God.” (v. 22-24). Wherefore says he
this? By way of preparing them to be always
ready to meet dangers, whether seen or un-
seen, and in all things to obey the Spirit.*
He shows that it is for great objects that he
is led away from them. ‘Save that the Holy
Ghost,” he says, “‘in every city witnesseth to
me, saying”’—to show that he departs wil-
lingly; that (see Hom. xlv. p. 273) ‘you
may not imagine it any bond or necessity,
when he says, “bound in the Spirit—that in
every city bonds and afflictions await me.”
Then also he adds this, “I count not my life
dear, until I shall have fulfilled my course and
the ministry, which I received of the Lord
Jesus.” Until I shall have finished my course,


1 To yap Stanaptipacbar TovTe eoTt, OTOUS Toul ete To yap
Stawaptvpagtar ws ert TO TOAV TOVTO orev.

2 Old text dua te Ta Epya, dua Te Tov Yiov ayvoety: Kai mioTLy
THhv eis Tov K. "I, as if all this were said in explanation of the
preceding Ov6e yap “Iovdator ydecav avtov. But dia te ra epya
explains the clause 7nv eis Tov @eov petavorav, which requires
to be inserted as in the Translation. Mod. text ‘‘ both be-
cause they were ignorant of the Son, and because of their
works, and their not having faith in the Lord Jesus.”

* Chrys. understands ‘‘bound in the spirit’? to mean con-
strained by the Holy Spirit (so Theophylact, Beza, Calvin,
Wordsworth e¢ aZ.), The fact that the Holy Spirit is men-
tioned in the next verse (23) in such a way as to be dis-
tinguished apparently from “the spirit ° ” here mentioned, has
led most critics to believe that ‘‘the spirit’? was Paul’s own
spirit (so Meyer, Lechler, Lange, DeWette, Ewald, Alford,
Hackett, Gloag). Aedeuevos should not be taken as meaning
bound with chains in prospect, i. e., as seen in his spirit in
advance (as Bengel, Conybeare and Howson), but rather con-
strained, inwardly constrained.—G. B. S.


a


HomiLy XLIV.]


says he, with joy. Do you mark how (clearly)
these were the words not of one lamenting,
but of one who forbore to make the most (of
his troubles) (erpsafovroc), Of one who would
instruct those (whom he addressed), and sym-
pathize with them in the things which were
befalling He says not, “I grieve indeed,’ but
one must needs bear it:” “ but,” says he, “ of
none of these things do I make account,
neither do I have,” i. e. account “ my life dear
tome.” Why this again? not to extol him-
self, but to teach them, as by the former
words, humility, so by these, fortitude and
boldness: “I have it not precious,” i. e. “I
love it not before this: I account it more
precious to finish my course, to testify.” And
he says not, ‘“‘to preach,” “to teach ”—but
what says he? “to testify (dcazapripactar)—the
Gospel of the grace of God.” He is about to
say something more uncomfortable (goprixérepov),
namely, “I am pure from the blood of all
men (because on my part) there is nothing
lacking:’” he is about to lay upon them the
whole weight and burden: so he first mollifies
their feelings by saying, “And now behold I
know that ye shall see my face no more.”
The consolation? is twofold: both that “ my
face ye shall see no more,” for in heart I am
with you: and that it was not they alone (who
should see him no more): for, ‘‘ ye shall see my
face no more, ye all, among whom [I have
gone about preaching the Kingdom.” * So
that he may well (say), ‘‘ Wherefore I take
you to record (read 6d wapr. for diauapr.),—see-
ing Ishall be with you no more—‘“ that I am
pure from the blood of all men.” (v. 26.)
Do you mark how he terrifies them, and
troubled and afflicted as their souls are, how
hard he rubs them (ézirpife)? But it was
necessary.. “‘For I have not shunned,” he
says, ‘to declare unto you all the counsel of
God.” (v. 27.) Why then, he who does not
speak, has blood to answer for: that is, mur-


1 Mss. Cat. and Edd. aAyauev “‘ let us grieve:”’ but Savile,
adyo ev. The next clause add’ ovdé nyoduat, or, add’ ovde,
“Hyovwar, requires something to make sense of it, as in the
Translation.

2 AurAy y Tapauvdia. The meaning is, “‘ It was his face that
they would see no more: he chooses that expression by way
of softening matters, implying that in spirit he would be
present: and again, all ye, not they only, so that the grief was
not peculiar to them:’’ but this being rather obscure, A. sub-
stitutes aduuca, and mod. text AcrAy 7 Avrn, i.e. ‘‘ the dejec-
tion (or, the sorrow) was twofold, both the being to see his
face no more, and the, All of them.”

* Neither of the two ideas which Chrys. draws from v. 25—
(a) that though absent in body, he would be present with them
in spirit ; (4) that the ‘‘ali’’ addressed refers to the whole com-
pany—comes naturally from the text. The apostle states his
firm conviction that he shall not again visit Ephesus. Whether
he ever did so or not, we do not know. The probabilities in
the case would depend upon the question of a release from his
Roman imprisonment. He hoped for such a release and in-
tended to visit Colossz (Philem. 22). On the supposition of
such a release and on the consequent supposition of the
Pauline authorship of the Pastoral Epistles, a visit after this
time to Ephesus becomes very probable, especially since we
find the apostle (2 Tim. iv. 13, 20)at Troasand Miletus.—G.B.S.


THe ACTS OF THE AROSPLES:


269
der! Nothing could be more terrifying than
this. He shows that they also, if they do it


not, have blood to answer for. So, whereas
he seems to be justifying himself, in fact he is
terrifying them. ‘Take heed therefore unto
yourselves, and to all the flock, over the which
the Holy Ghost hath made you overseers (or,
bishops) to feed the Church of God (see note
8), which He hath purchased with His own
blood.” (v. 28.) Do you mark? he enjoins
them two things. Neither success in bringing
others right of itself is any gain—for, I fear,
he says, “lest by any means, when I have
preached to others, I myself should be a cast-
away”’ (1 Cor. ix. 27); nor the being diligent
for one’s self alone. For such an one is selfish,
and seeks his own good only, and is like to
him who buried his talent. “Take heed to
yourselves:” this he says, not because our
own salvation is more precious than that of
the flock, but because, when we take heed to
ourselves, then the flock also is a_ gainer,
“In which the Holy Ghost hath made you
overseers, to feed the Church of God.” See,
it is from the Spirit ye have your ordination.
This is one constraint: then he says, “To
feed the Church of the Lord.”*® Lo! another
obligation: the Church is the Lord’s.— And
a third: “which He hath purchased with His
own blood.” It shows* how precious the
concern is; that the peril is about no small
matters, seeing that even His own blood He
spared not. He indeed, that he might recon-
cile those who were enemies, poured out even
His blood: but thou, even when they are be-
come thy friends, art not able to retain them.
“For I know this, that after my departing
shall grievous wolves enter in among you, not
sparing the flock.” (v. 29.) Again he en-
gages (éxozpéder) them from another quarter,
from the things which should come after: as
when he says, “‘ We wrestle not against flesh
and biood. After my departing,’ he says,
“ srievous wolves shall enter in among you”
(Eph. vi. 12); twofold the evil, both that he
himself would not be present, and that others
would assail them. “Then why depart, if
thou knowest this beforehand?” The Spirit


3 Hence it appears that St. Chrys. reads Kvpiov not @eov in
this text, though in the citation the Scribes give it according
to the other reading, @eov.

+It is an interesting fact that in this passage where the
reading vacillates between Kvpiov and @eou, while the report
of the Homily has given us @eov, the citation of the N. T. text
favors the reading Kvpiov. The great majority of Mss. read
tov Kupiov: Nand B. have 7ov 8eov (the usual Pauline formula).
Many critics hold that Kup. was changed to @. in accordance
with Pauline usage in the Epistles. The idea of the “ blood
of God” is against the reading @eov. Modern critics are
nearly equally divided. Alford, Westcott and Hort, read 6eov ;
Meyer, Tischendorf, Kvpiov; to us the latter seems decidedly
preferable.—G. B.S. _ es ; :

4 Seixvugt Titov TO mpayua, Orr. Mod. text. rodv decxy. & ov
ele Timcov 70 mp. So Edd. J/ultum ostendit dum dicit pretio-
sam rem, Ben.


270


THE WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTORE


[Homity XLIV.


draws me, he says. Both “wolves,” and
“‘orievous, not sparing the flock;” and what
is worse, even “from among your own selves :”
the grievous thing (this), when the war is
moreover an intestine war. The matter is
exceeding serious, for it is “the Church of
the Lord :” great the peril, for with blood He
redeemed it: mighty the war, and twofold.
“Also of your own selves shall men arise,
speaking perverse things, to draw away dis-
ciples after them.” (v. 30.) ‘“ How then?
what comfort shall there be?” “Therefore
watch, and remember, that by the space of
three years I ceased not to warn every one
night and day with tears.” (v. 31.) See how
many strong expressions are here: “ with
tears,” and “night and day,” and “ every one.”
For it was not that if he saw many,! then he
came in (to the work), but even were it for a
single soul, he was capable of doing every-
thing (for that one soul), So it was, in fact,
that he compacted them together (cuvexpérycev)
(so firmly as he did). ‘Enough done on my
part: three years have I remained:” they
had establishing enough, he says; enough of


rooting. “With tears,” he says. Seest thou
that the tears were on this account? The
bad man grieves not: grieve thou: perhaps


he will grieve also. As, when the sick man
sees his physician partaking of food, he also is
incited to do the same: so likewise here,
when he sees thee weeping, he is softened :
he will be a good and great man.?


(Recapitulation.) ‘ Not knowing,” he says,
“the things that shall befall me.” (v. 22, 23.)
Then is this why thou departest? By no
means; on the contrary (I know that),
“bonds and _ afflictions await me.” That
(there are) trials, I know, but of what kind I
know not: which was more grievous. “ But
none of these things move me” (v. 24): for do
not suppose that I say these things as lament-
ing them: for “I hold not my own life dear.”
It is to raise up their minds that he says all
this, and to persuade them not only not to
flee, but also to bear nobly. Therefore it is
that he calls it a “course” and a “ ministry,”
on the one hand, showing it to be glorious
from its being a race, on the other, showing
what was due from it, as being a ministry.
I am a minister: nothing more. Having
comforted them, that they might not grieve
that he was so evil entreated, and having


1 OU yap el moAAOUs cide TOTE Eheicato (mod. édetdeTo). Nox
enim st multos vidisset, eis pepercisset, Ben. But Cat. has
preserved the true reading, é¢iotarto.

2 "Eotat xpyotos kat wéyas avynp. The second epithet being
evidently unsuitable, mod. text gives, xpyaTos avynp Kal mpaos
yevngetar, But perhaps x. a. kai. belongs to the next sen-
tence, as an exclamation on vy. 22. ‘‘ A good and great man!”’
and for paAagoetau’ Eotac we may read padaxdyoeTa.


told them that he endured those things “ with
joy,” and having shown the fruits of them,
then (and not before) he brings in that which
would give them pain, that he may not over-
whelm their minds. “And*® now behold,”
etc. ‘Wherefore I take you to record, that I
am pure from the blood-of all men, because
I have not shrunk from declaring unto you
the whole counsel of God ” (v. 25-27): * * * that
(counsel) which concerns the present matter.
“For I) know this,’ ete, a, 29;) >" What
then,” someone might say, “thinkest thou
thyself so great? if thou shouldest depart,
are we to die?” I say not this, he replies,
that my absence causeth this: but what?
That there should rise up against you certain
of another sort: he says not, “ because of my
departing,” but “after my departing:” that
is, after his going on his journey.—And yet
this thing has happened already: much more
(then. will it happen) hereafter. Then we
have the cause, “to draw away disciples
afterthem.’’ (v. 30.) That there are heresies,
this is the cause, and no other than this.
Then comes also consolation. But if He “ pur-
chased” it “with His own blood,” He will
assuredly stand forward in its defence.
** Night» and day,” the says,“ L.cease nett
warn with tears.” (v. 31.) This might well
be said in our case also: and though the
speech seems to. refer peculiarly to the
teachers, it is common also to the disciples.
For what, though I speak and exhort and
weep night and day, while the disciple obeys
not? Therefore* it is that he says, “I take
you to record :” since also himself says, “TI
am pure from the blood of all men: for I
have not shunned to declare unto you.” (v.
26, 27.) Why ‘then,sthiswenly 1s “tombe a
teacher, to declare, to preach, to instruct,
shrink from nothing, to exhort night and day :
but if, while one is doing all this, nothing
comes of it, ye know what remains. Then


3 Old text: twa uy Kataxwon attay Thy dcavorav, followed by
the latter part of v.27. Tov avayyetAae vuivx.7.A. But the
connection may also be, “‘ I have not shrunk—of course in due
order and proportion” (or something of that kind) *‘ that he
may not overwhelm their minds, from declaring,” etc. It
might seem, however, from the comment which follows, viz
Thy Tepl Tov TapovTos mpaymaros, that Chrys. is here proposing
an interpretation of v. 27 different from what was implied in
the first exposition, p. 269, and from that of v. 20: i. e. ‘* pain-
ful as it is, I have not shrunk from announcing to you all the
counsel of God, to wit, as touching the present matter, m
separation from you, so that ye shall see my face no more.”
But this being very unsatisfactory, it is better to take the
connection thus: Nor does he now shrink from declaring to
them the whole counsel of God concerning the coming events,
and their duty and responsibility therein. (We have therefore
placed the mark of an hiatus before this clause.)—Mod. text
substitutes, ‘ But what is this (that he adds), ‘Also of yourown
selves shall men arise, speaking perverse things.’ What then,”
ete.

4 The ‘text is evidently confused or defective here. Mod.
text ‘‘ For that none may fancy it plea enough for his justifica-
tion, that he is a disciple while yet he does not yield, therefore
having said, I take you to record, he adds, for I have not
shunned,” etc.


HomiLy XLIV.]


ye have another justification: “I am pure
from the blood of all men.” Think not that
these words are spoken to us only: for indeed
this speech is addressed to you also, that ye
should attend to the things spoken, that ye
should not. start away from the hearing.
What canI do? Lo! each day I rend myself
with crying out, “‘ Depart from the theatres :”’
and many laugh at us: “ Desist from swear-
ing, from covetousness :” numberless are our
exhortations, and there is none to hear us.
But I do not discourse during night? Fain
would I do this also in the night time, and at
your tables, if it were possible that one could
be divided into ten thousand pieces, so as to
be present with you and discourse. But if
once in the week we call to you, and ye shrink
back, and some of you do not even come here,
and you that do come, depart having received
no profit,—what shall we do? Many I know
even sneer atus, that we are forever dis-
coursing about the same things: so weari-
some are we become to you by very satiety.
But for this not we are to blame, but the
hearers. may thank themselves. For he
indeed who is making good progress, rejoices
to hear the same things always; it seems to
be his praises that he hears spoken: but he
who does not wish to get on, seems even to be
annoyed, and though he hear the same thing
but twice, it seems to him that he 1s hearing
it often.

“Tam pure,” he says, “from the blood of
all men.” (v. 26.) This was fit and proper
for Paul to say, but we dare not say it, con-
scious as we are of numberless faults.
Wherefore for him the ever vigilant, ever at
hand, the man enduring all things for the
sake of the salvation of his disciples, it was
fitand proper to say this: but we must say
that of Moses, ‘‘ The Lord was wroth with me
for your sakes ”’ (Deut. iii. 26), because ye lead
us also into many sins. For when we are
dispirited at seeing you make no progress,
is not the greater part of our strength struck
down? For what, I ask you has been done?
Lo! by the grace of God we also have now
passed the space of three years,’ not indeed
night and day exhorting you, but doing this,
often every third day, or every seventh.
What more has come of it? We accuse, we
rebuke, we weep, we are in anguish, although
not openly, yet in heart. But those (inward)
tears are far more bitter than these (outward
ones): for these indeed bring a kind of relief

1 St. Chrysostom succeeded Nectarius in the Archbishopric
of Constantinople, 26th Feb. Coss. Honorius iv. and Eutychi-
anus A.D. 398. Socrat. vi. 2.—From the following passage it
appears that these Homm. though begun after Easter, perhaps
of A.D. 400, extended over a considerable period of time, not


being preached every day.—Below, mod. text spoils the sense
by altering 7txpotepa into Kgudortepa.


Jie etorQOrs THE. APOSTEES.


271


to the feelings of the sorrowful, whereas
those aggravate it, and bind it fast. Since
when there is any cause of grief, and one
cannot give vent to the sorrow, lest he should
seem to be vainglorious, think what he
suffers! Were it not that people would tax
me with excessive love of display, you would
see me each day shedding fountains of tears :
but to those my chamber is witness, and my
hours of solitude. For believe me I have (at
times) despaired of my own salvation, but from
my mourning on your account, I have not
even leisure to bemoan my own evils: so
entirely are ye all in all tome. And whether
I perceive you to be advancing, then, for
very delight, I am not sensible of my own
evils: or whether I see you not advancing,
such is my grief, I again dismiss my own
cares from my thoughts: brightening up on
account of your good things, though I my-
self have evils without number, and saddened
on account of your painful things, though my
own successes are without number. For
what hope is there for the teacher, when his
flock is destroyed? .What kind of life, what
kind of expectation is there for him? With
what sort of confidence will he stand up
before God? what will he say? For grant
that he has nothing laid to his charge, has
no punishment to suffer, but is “pure from
the blood of all men:” yet even so will he
suffer a grief incurable: since fathers also
though they be not liable to be called to
account for their children’s sins, nevertheless
have grief and vexation, And this profits
them nothing,? nor shields them (zpoorarac).
“For it is they that watch for our souls, as
those that must give account.” (Heb. xiii.


17.) This seems to be a fearful thing: to
me this gives no concern after your
destruction. For whether I give account,


or not, it is no profit tome. Might it be,
that ye were saved, and I to give account
because of you: ye saved, and I charged
with not having fulfiled my part! For my
anxiety is not that you shanld be saved
through me as the means, but only that you
should be saved, no matter by what person as
the instrument. Ye know not the pangs of
spiritual childbirth, how overpowering they


2 Mod. text inserts a @yoiv, and makes the sentence interrog-
ative. ‘‘ And does this, you will say, profit them nothing nor
shield them, that they watch for our souls? But then they
watch as they that must give an account: and to some indeed
this seems to be terrible.’"” The meaning in general seems to
be: “If they perish, yet surely you can comfort yourself with


the thought, that you at least are pure from their blood. No,
this thought avails nothing to ward off (that sorrow). ‘ Be-


cause they watch,’’ etc.—this seems a fearful thing. But if
you be lost, it is not the thought of my accountability that
gives me most concern—it is the thought of your perishing.
Oh! that I might in the last day find you saved though not
through me, yea, though I myself thereafter were called to
account as not having done my part by you!”’


272


THE: WORKS OF ST. CHRYSGSfGRr


[HomiLty XLV.


are ; how he who is in travail with this birth,
would rather be cut into ten thousand pieces,


than see one of those to whom he has
given birth perishing and undone. Whence
shall we persuade you? By no_ other


argument indeed, but by what has been done,
in all that regards you we shall clear our-
selves.1 We too shall be able to say, that in
nothing have we “shrunk from declaring ”
to you the whole truth: nevertheless we
grieve: and that we do grieve, is manifest
from the numberless plans we lay and con-
trivances we devise. And yet we might say
to ourselves, What matters it tome? I have
done my part, “I am pure from” (their)
“blood :” but this is not enough for comfort.
If we could tear open our heart, and show it
to you, ye would see with what largeness it
holds (you) within it, both women and chil-
dren and men; for suchis the power of love,
that it makes the soul more spacious than the
heaven. “Receive us,’ says (Paul): “we
have wronged no man, ye are not straitened
umes |. (2 Cor vil. 2.;"vi. 12.) | Hie mada
Corinth in his heart, and says, “Ye are not
straitened: be ye also enlarged (2 Cor. vi.
13); but I myself could not say this, for
I well know, that ye both love me and receive
me. But what is the profit either from my


love or from yours, when the things pertaining
to God thrive not in us? It is a ground for
greater sorrow, an occasion of worse mischief
(Abpyc, al. A07yc). I have nothing to lay to
your charge: “for I bear you record, that,
if it had been possible, ye would have plucked
out your own eyes, and have given them
to me.” (Gal. iv. 15.) “We yearn not only to
give you the Gospel, but also our own souls.”
(1 Thess. ii. 8.) We are loved and we love
(you): but this is not the question. But
let us love Christ, ‘for the first command-
ment is, Thou shalt love the Lord thy God:
and the second is like unto it, And thy
neighbor as thyself.” (Matt. xxii. 37-39.)
We have the second, we need the first: need
the first, exceedingly, both I and you. We
have it, but not as we ought. Let us love
Him : ye know how great a reward is laid up
for them that love Christ: let us love Him
with fervor of soul, that, enjoying his good-
will, we may escape the stormy waves of
this present life, and be found worthy to
obtain the good things promised to them that
love Him, through the grace and mercy
of His only-begotten Son, with whom to
the Father, together with the Holy Ghost, be
glory, might, honor, now and ever, world
without end. Amen.


FO: Maley 2G


ACTS XX. 32.


“ And now, brethren, I commend you to God, and to
the word of His grace, which is able to build you
up, and to give you an inheritance among all them
that are sanctified.”


Wuat he does when writing in an Epistle,
this he does also when speaking in council:
from exhorting, he ends with prayer: for since
he had much alarmed them by saying, “ Griev-
ous wolves shall enter in among you” (v. 29),
therefore, not to overpower them, and make
them lose all self-possession, observe the con-
solation (he gives). ‘‘ And now,’’ he says, as
always, ‘I commend you, brethren, to God,
and to the word of His grace: that is, to His
grace: it is grace that saveth. He constantly
puts them in mind of grace, to make them
more earnest as being debtors, and to per-


1 “Erépwiev wéev ovdapover, amd 5& Tav yevouwevwv) Meaning per-
haps, ** From what has been done by us in our ministry: we
will endeavor to persuade you by reminding you of all our
care and pains for our salvation:’’) ta xa@’ vas mavta
amoAvooueba. “AtoAverOar (€yxAnmata), is frequent in Chrys.,
often confused with amoAovertar and amodverdar. See Mr.
Field’s /zdex and Annotat. in Hom. Matth.


suade them to have confidence. “Which is
able to build you up.”* He does not say, to
build, but, “to build up,” showing that they
had (already) been built. Then he puts
them in mind of the hope to come; “to give
you an inheritance,” he says, “among all
them which are sanctified.” Then exhorta-
tion again: “I have coveted no man’s silver,
or gold; or ‘apparel?’ 33)) de tales
away that which is the root of evils, the love
of money. “Silver, or gold,” he says. He
says not, I have not taken, but, not even
“coveted.” No great thing this, but what
follows after is great. ‘“ Yea, ye yourselves
know, that these hands have ministered unto


* The phrase ‘‘ which is able’’ (to édvvayévw) may be con-
nected with the word ‘‘ God,’ or with ‘‘the word of His
grace.’’ As standing nearer the latter, this would be the
natural construction. So our author has taken it, understand-
ing by ‘‘ the word of His grace”’ rather the grace itself than the
doctrine concerning it. Most critics have preferred to con-
nect the phrase with tw @e# on the ground that it is more
appropriate to ascribe the giving of an inheritance among the
sanctified directly to God than to His word. (So DeWette,
Meyer, Alford, Gloag). —G. B.S.


a es es ec


Homity XLV.] BRE AGTS OF


my necessities, and to them that were with
me. I have showed you all things, how that
so laboring, ye ought to support the weak.”
(v. 34, 35-) Observe him employed in work,
and not simply that, but toiling. ‘These
hands have ministered unto my necessities,
and to them that were with me:” so asto put
them to shame. And see how worthily of
them. For he says not, Ye ought to show
yourselves superior to. money, but what? “to
support the weak ”—not all indiscriminately
—‘ and to hear the word of the Lord which
He spake, It is more blessed to give than to
receive.”* For lest any one should think
that it was spoken with reference to them, and
that he gave himself for an ensample, as he
elsewhere says, ‘‘ giving an ensample to you”
(Phil. iii. 17), he added the declaration of
Christ, Who said, “ It is more blessed to give
than to receive.” He prayed over them while
exhorting them : he shows it both by action,—
** And when he had thus spoken, he kneeled
down, and prayed with them all,” (v. 36)—he
did not simply pray, but with much feeling:
(karavizewc): great was the consolation—and by
his saying, “ I commend you tothe Lord. And
they all wept sore, and fell on Paul’s neck,
and kissed him, sorrowing most of all for the
words which he spake, that they should see
bisstace) no more: (v.37, 38.) He’ had
said, that ‘“ grievous wolves should enter in ;”’
had said, ‘I am pure from the blood of all
men:” and yet the thing that grieved them
most of all was this, “that they should see
him no more :”’ since indeed it was this that
made the war grievous. ‘ And they accom-
panied them,” it says, “unto the ship. And
it came to pass, that after we had torn our-
selves from them”—so much did they love
him, such was their affection towards him—
“and had launched, we came with a straight
course unto Coos, and the day following unto
Rhodes, and from thence unto Patara: and
finding a ship sailing over unto Phenicia, we
went aboard, and set forthe Now when we
had discovered Cyprus, we left it on the left
hand, and sailed into Svria, and landed at
Tyre” (Acts xxi. 1-3): he came to Lycia,
and having left Cyprus, he sailed down to
Tyre—“ for there the ship was to unlade her
burden. And finding disciples, we tarried
there seven days: who said to Paul through
the Spirit, that he should not go up to Jeru-
salem.” (v. 4.) They too prophesy of the
afflictions. It is so ordered that they should


* By ‘‘the weak’’ Chrys. evidently understands the physi-
cally weak, the sick and poor (see the Recapitulation) and we
think correctly as opposed to the ‘tweak in faith.’’ The
apostle counsels labor in order to liberality toward the needy.
So Olshausen, DeWette, Hackett, Gloag, Alford, vs. Neander,
Tholuck, Lechler, Meyer.—G. B. S.


18


THE


ZOOS LES.


273


be spoken by them also, that none might im-
agine that Paul said those things without
cause, and only by way of boasting. And
there again they part from each other with
prayer. ‘And when we had accomplished
those days, we departed, and went our way ;
and they all brought us on our way, with
wives and children, till we were out of the
city: and we kneeled down on the shore, and
prayed. And when we had taken our leave
one of another, we took ship; and they re-
turned home again. And when we had fin-
ished our course from Tyre, we came to
Ptolemais, and saluted the brethren, and abode
with them one day. And the next day we
that were of Paul’s company departed, and
came unto Cesarea: and we entered into the
house of Philip the evangelist, which was one
of the seven ; and abode with him.” (v. 5-8.)
Having come to Caesarea, it says, we abode
with Philip, which was one of the seven.
“And the same man had four daughters,
virgins, which did prophesy.” (v. 9.) But it
is not these that foretell to Paul, though they
were prophetesses ; it is Agabus. ‘“ And as we
tarried there many days, there came down
from Judea a certain prophet, named Agabus.
And when he was come unto us, he took
Paul’s girdle, and bound his own hands and
feet, and said, Thus saith the Holy Ghost,
So shall the Jews at Jerusalem bind the man
that owneth this girdle, and shall deliver him
into the hands of the Gentiles.” (v. 10, 11.)
He who formerly had declared about the
famine, the same says, This “man, who
owneth this girdle, thus shall they bind.”
(ch. xi. 28.) The same that the prophets
used to do, representing events to the sight,
when they spoke. about the captivity—as did
Ezekiel—the same did this (Agabus).
“ And,” what is the grievous part of the busi-
ness, “deliver him into the hands of the
Gentiles. And when we heard these things,
both we, and they of that place, besought him
not to go up to Jerusalem.” (v. 12.) Many
even besought him not to depart, and still he
would not comply. ‘Then Paul answered,
What mean ye to weep and to break mine
heart?” ! (v. 13.) Do you mark? Lest,
having heard that saying, “I go bound in the
Spirit” (ch. xx. 22), you should imagine it a
matter of necessity, or that he fell into it igno-
rantlv, therefore these things are foretold. But
they wept, and he comforted them, grieving at
their tears. For, “what mean ye,” he says,
“to weep and to break my heart?” Nothing
could be more affectionate: because he saw
them weeping, he grieved, he that felt no pain


1 The remainder of v. 13 and r4 we have removed from this
to its proper place.


274


at his own trials. ‘ For I am ready not to be
bound only, but also to die at Jerusalem for
the name of the Lord Jesus. And when he
would not be persuaded, we ceased, saying,
The will of the Lord be done.” (v. 13, 14.)
Ye do me wrong in doing this: for do I
grieve? Then they ceased, when he said, *‘ to
break my heart.” I weep, he says, for you,
not on account of my own sufferings : as for
those (men), I am ‘willing even to die for
them. But let us look over again what has
been said.


(Recapitulation.) ‘Silver, or gold, or ap-
parel,” etc. (ch. xx. 33, 34; I Cor. ike 2 Cole
a So then, it was not in Corinth an that
they did this _they that corrupted the disci-
ples, but in Asia as well. But he nowhere
casts this up as a reproach to the Ephesians,
when writing to them. And why? Because
he did not fall upon any subject that obliged
him to speak of this. But to the Corinth-
ians he says, “My boasting has not been
stopped in the regions of Achaia.” (2 Cor. xi.
to.) And he does not say, Ye did not give to
me; but, “ Silver, or gold, or apparel, I cov-
eted not,” that it might not seem to be their
doing, that they had not given. And he does
not say, From no man have I coveted the
necessaries of life, that again it might not
look like accusing them: but he covertly
hints as much, seeing that he provided sub-
sistence for others as well as himself. See
how he worked with earnestness, ‘ night and
day” discoursing (to others), ‘“ with tears,
warning each one of them.” (v. 31.) (Here)
again he puts them in fear: “I have showed
you all things,” he says: ye cannot take ref-
uge in the plea of ignorance: ‘‘ have shown
you” by works “how that so laboring ye
ought to work.” And he does not say, that
to receive is bad, but that not to receive is
better", “Por remember,’ jie Says,« the
words of the Lord which he spake: It is more
blessed “to sive than: Storreceive:” (v2 35:)
And where said He this? Perhaps the Apos-
tles delivered it by unwritten tradition; or
else it is plain from (recorded sayings, from)
which one could infer it. For in fact here he
has shown both boldness in meeting dangers,
sympathy with those over whom he ruled,
teaching with (unshrinking) boldness, humil-
ity, (voluntary) poverty: but, what we have
here is even more than that poverty. For if


1 OvK apa év Kopiviw tovto eipyacavto povor ot diaditeipovtes
Tovs patytas k. T. A. One would have expected eipyacato
Ovov, kat ovx ws ot 6. But the connection, not fully expressed,
may be this : “‘ So different from those “‘ grievous wolves not
sparing the flock,” the false teachers who would makea gain
of them ! ! So then” etc.

2 Some text or texts of the Gospels should be supplied here :
beginning perhaps like the next sentence with a Kat yap.


THE .WORKS OF .ST..CHRYSOST CRE


| seven days.


[Homity XLV.


He says there (in the Gospel), “If thou wilt
be perfect, sell what thou hast and give to the
poor ” (Matt. xix. 21), when, besides receiving
nothing himself, he provides sustenance for
others also, what could equal this? It is one
degree to fling away one’s possessions; a
second, to be sufficient for the supply of one’s
own necessities: a third, to provide for others
also; a fourth, for one (to do all this) who
preaches and has a right to receive. So that
here is a man far better than those who
merely forego possessions. ‘“ Thus it is right
to support the weak:”’ this is (indeed) sym-
pathy with the weak; for to give from the
labors of others, is easy. ‘And they fell on
his neck,” it says, “‘and wept.” (v. 37.) He
shows their affection also by saying, “ Upon
his neck,” as taking a last and yet a last em-
brace, such was the love they conceived from
his discourse, such the spell of love that
bound them. For if we groan when simply
parting from each other, although we know
that we shall receive one another back again,
what a tearing away of themselves it must
have been to them! Methinks Paul also
wept. “Having torn ourselves away,” he
says: he shows the violence of it by saying,
“having torn ourselves away from them.”
And with reason: otherwise they could never |
have got to sea. What means, “ We came
with a straight course unto Coos?” Instead
of saying, “we did not go round nor make
stay in other places.” Then ‘“ unto Rhodes.”
(ch. xxi. 1.) See how he hastess on, “And
finding a ship sailing over unto Phenicia. (v.
2.) Possibly that ship (in which they had
come) was making a stay there: wherefore
they shifted to another, and not having found
one going to Cxesarea, but (finding this) for
Phenice, they embarked in it (and pursued
their voyage), having left Cyprus also and
Syria: but the expression, “having left it on
the left hand,” is not said simply (in that
meaning), but that they made speed not to
get to Syria either.2 “We landed at Tyre.”
(v. 3.) ‘Then they tarry with the brethren
Now that they were come near
to Jerusalem, they no longer run. (0) “Who
said to Paul through the Spirit, that he
should not go up to Jerusalem.” (v. 4.) Ob-
serve how, when the Spirit does not forbid, he
complies. They said, ‘‘ Adventure not thyself
into the theatre, and he did not adventure”
(ch. xix. 31): often they bore him off (from
dangers), and he complied: again he es-


3 By Syria he seems here to mean the northern parts, about
Antioch. ‘* They left Cyprus on the left, but nearer to it
than the opposite coast of Syria, because he did not wish to
come near that either.’’ Mod. text ‘* This is not said idly, but
to show that he did not think fit even to come near it (Cyprus),
they sailing straight for Syria.” What follows required
transposition : the derangement, 2,1: 3,5,7: 4, 6, 8.


HomiLy XLV.]


WEE ACTS. OF THE APOSTLES.


275


caped by a window: and now, though number-
less persons, so to say, beseech him, both
those at Tyre and those at Czsarea, weeping
also and predicting numberless dangers, he
refuses to comply. And yet it is not (merely),
they predicted the dangers, but ‘said by the
Spirit.” If then the Spirit bade, why did he
gainsay? “By the Spirit,” that is, they
knowing “by the Spirit ” (what would be the
consequences, said to him): for of course it
does not mean that the exhortation they made
was by the Spirit. For they did not simply
foretell to him the dangers (through the
Spirit), but (added of themselves) that it be-
hooved him not to goup—sparing him. But
‘after we had accomplished the. days,” i. e.
had fulfilled the appointed days, “we sep-
arated, and went on our way: they all bring-
ing us on our way with wives and children.”
(v. 5.)—See how great was the entreaty. And
again they part with prayer. Also in Ptole-
mais they stay one day, but in Casarea many.
(v. 6-8.) (a) Now that they are near to Jeru-
salem, they no longer hurry. For observe, I
pray you, all the days. ‘“ After the day of un-
leavened bread” they came ‘to Troas in five
days’’ (ch. xx. 6); then they there spent
““seven;” in all, twelve: then to ‘“ Thasos,”
to “Mytilene,” to “ Trogylium” and “over
against Chios,” and to “ Samos ” and “ Mile-
tus” (ib. 13-17); eighteen in all. Then to
“Cos,” to “ Rhodes,” to “ Patara,” twenty-
one: then say’ five to “Tyre;” twenty-six:
there “seven;” thirty-three; ‘ Ptolemais,”
thirty-four; then to “Czesarea, many days”
ice. (Xxi.90—ro)); and? then, theréatter; the
prophet puts them up thence. (c) When Paul
has heard that he has to suffer numberless
perils, then he is in haste, not flinging himself
upon the dangers but accounting it to be the
command of the Spirit. (e) And Agabus does
not say, “They shall bind” Paul, that he may
not seem to speak upon agreement (with
Paul), but ‘‘the man that owneth this girdle”
(v. 11)—so then he had a girdle also.” But
when they could not persuade him—this was
why they wept—then they “ held their peace.”
Do you mark the resignation? do you mark
the affection? ‘They held their peace,” it
says, “saying, The will of the Lord be done.”
(v. 12-14.) (g) The Lord, say they, Himself
will do that which is pleasing in his sight.
For they perceived that it was the will of God.


1 A. C. Cat. (in B. the original characters are written over
by a later hand), Eira BovAndjvar wevte eis Tipov. Perhaps
BovAe Setvar. Mod. text cira éxetder di nuepov revte.

2? Hom. x. in Matt. E. “ But why, you may ask, did
he (the Baptist) use a girdle also with his garment? This
was a custom with the ancients, before this present soft and
dissolute fashion of ourscame in. Thus Peterappears girdled,
and Paul likewise: as it says,‘ The man that owneth this
girdle.”


Else Paul would not be so bent (upon going)
—he that on all (other occasions delivers him-
self out of dangers. (d) “And after these
days,” it says, “having taken up our bag-
gage”—i. e. having received the (supplies)
necessary for the journey—“ we went up to
Jerusalem.” (v. 15.) “And there went with
us also certain of the disciples from Czsarea,
bringing us to one with whom we should
lodge, one Mnason, an ancient disciple of Cy-
prus.”* (v. 16.) ‘And when we were come
to Jerusalem, the brethren received us gladly.”
(v. 17.) (/) “ Bringing us,” it says, “ (to him)
with whom we should lodge”—not to the
church: for on the former occasion (ch. xv. 4),
when they went up concerning the decrees,
they lodged with the Church, but now witha
certain ‘ancient disciple.” (The expression)
shows that the preaching had been going on
a long time : whence it seems to me that this
writer in the Acts epitomizes the events of
many years, relating (only) the matters of
chief importance.. (4) So unwilling were they
to burthen the Church, when there was another
to lodge them; and so little did they stand
upon their dignity. ‘‘The brethren,” it says,
“received us gladly.” Affairs among the Jews
were now full of peace: there was not much
warfare (among them). “ Bringing us,’ it
says, “‘to one with whom we should lodge.”
Paul was the guest he entertained. Per-
chance some one of you says: Aye, if it were
given me to entertain Paul as a guest, I read-
ily and with much eagerness would do this.
Lo! it is in thy power to entertain Paul’s Mas-
ter for thy guest, and thou wilt not: for “ he
that receiveth one of these least,’ he saith,
“‘receiveth Me.” (Matt. xvill. 5 ; Luke ix. 48.)
By how much the brother may be least, so
much the more does Christ come to thee
through him. For he that receives the great,
often does it from vainglory also; but he that
receives the small, does it purely for Christ’s
sake. It is in thy power to entertain even
the Father of Christ as thy guest, and thou
will not: for,* “I was a stranger,” He says,
“and ye took me in” (Matt. xxv. 35): and
again, ‘“‘ Unto one of the least of these the breth-
ren that believe on Me, ye have done it unto
Me.”(ib. 40.) Though it be not Paul, yet if it
be a believer and a brother, although the least,


* The meaning of the latter part of v. 16 (ayowres map &
fevisdanevy Mvagwvt Tiwi Kutpiw x, 7. A.), according to Chrys., is
that the disciples from Czsarea conducted Paul to the house
of Mnason at Jerusalem where he was to lodge, not (as our
Eng. vss.), that they brought with them Mnason on their
journey from Czsarea to Jerusalem. The former seems the
preferable view as there is nothing in the context to intimate
that Mnason was at this time in Czsarea and his residence
was evidently Jerusalem. The construction of attraction is
also equally well resolved in this way.—G. B. S.

3 Here supply, ‘‘He that receiveth Me, receiveth Him that
sent Me.”


276


Christ cometh to thee through him. Open
thine house, take Him in. ‘ He that receiv-
eth a prophet,” He saith, ‘shall receive a
prophet’s reward.” (Matt. x. 41.) Therefore
too he that receives Christ, shall receive the
reward of him who has Christ for his guest.’
Do not thou disbelieve His words, but be
believing. Himself hath said, Through them
I come to thee: and that thou mayest not dis-
believe, He lays down both punishments for
those who do not receive, and honors for
those who do receive; since He would not
have done this, unless both the person hon-
ored and the person insulted were Himself.
“Thou receivedst Me,” He saith, ‘into thy
lodging, I will receive thee into the Kingdom
of My Father; thou tookest away My hunger,
I take away thy sins; thou sawest Me bound,
I see thee loosed; thou sawest Me a stranger,
I make thee a citizen of heaven; thou gavest
Me bread, I give thee an entire Kingdom,
that thou mayest inherit and possess it.” He
saith not, ‘‘ Receive,” but, ‘ Inherit,” the word
which is spoken of those who have possession
by right of ownership; as when we say, “This
have I inherited.” Thou didst it to Me in
secret, I will proclaim it openly : and of thine
acts indeed I say, that they were of free gift,
but Mine are of debt. ‘“ For since thou,” He
saith, “didst begin, I follow and come after:
I am not ashamed to confess the benefits con-
ferred on Me, nor from what things thou didst
free Me, hunger and nakedness and wander-
ing. ‘Thou sawest Me bound, thou shalt not
behold the fire of hell; thou sawest Me sick,
thou shalt not behold the torments nor the
punishments.” O hands, truly blessed, which
minister in such services as these, which are
accounted worthy to serve Christ! Feet
which go into prisons for Christ’s sake, with
ease defy the fire: no trial of bonds have
they, (the hands)? which saw Him bound!
Thou clothedst Him with a garment, and thou
puttest on a garment of salvation: thou wast
in prison with Him, and with Him thou find-
est thyself in the Kingdom, not ashamed,
knowing that thou visitedst Him. The Patri-
arch knew not that he was entertaining
Angels, and he did entertain them. (Gen.
Xvill. 3.) Let us take shame to ourselves, I
beseech you: he was sitting in mid-day, being
in a foreign land, where he had none inherit-
ance, ‘not so much as to set his foot on”
(ch. vil: 5): he ‘was a” stranger, “and the
stranger entertained strangers: for he was a


1 ovKovv Kai 0 Xpuorov (Should it be Xprotravoy ?) dexonevos,
Anwetat priotov Tov Xprotov evigovos.—Ben. renders the latter
clause, recipiet mercedem Christi peregrinantzis.

2 All our Mss. omit xetpes, but the text ai dedeuévov avtov
i6ovoac requires more than this for its emendation. Below.
before ‘‘ not ashamed.”’ mod. text inserts, ‘‘ These things He
(Christ) confesseth.”’


THE WORKS OF (ST. :CHEASCSTIGrr


[HomMILy XLV.


citizen of heaven. ‘Therefore, not even while
he was on earth was he a stranger (to Him).
We are rather strangers than that stranger, if
we receive not strangers. He had no home,
and his tent was his place of reception. And
mark his liberality—he killed a calf, and
kneaded fine meal : mark his ready mind—by
himself and his wife: mark the unassuming
manner—he worships and beseeches them.
For all these qualities ought to be in that
man who entertains strangers—readiness,
cheerfulness, liberality. For the soul of the
stranger is abashed, and feels ashamed; and
unless (his host) show excessive joy, he is as
(if) slighted, and goes away, and it becomes
worse than not to have received him, his
being received in this way. Therefore he
worships them, therefore he welcomes them
with speech, therefore with a seat. For who
would have hesitated, knowing that this work
was done unto Him? “ But we are not ina
foreign land.” If we will, we shall be able to
imitate him. How many of the brethren are
strangers? There is a common apartment,
the Church, which we call the “ Xenon.” Be
inquisitive (epiepydfeche), sit before the doors,
receive those who come yourselves; though
you may not wish to take them into your
houses, at any rate in some other way (receive
them), by supplying them with necessaries.
“Why, has not the Church means” you will
say? She has: but what is that to you? that
they should be fed from the common funds of
the Church, can that benefit you? If another
man prays, does it follow that you are not
bound to pray? Wherefore do you not say,
“Do not the priests pray? then why should I
pray?” ‘ But I,” you will say, “ give to him
who cannot be received there.” Give, though
it be to that one: for what we are anxious for
is this, that you should give at any rate.
Hear what Paul ‘says: “That it may relieve
them that are widows indeed, and that the
Church be not burdened.” (1 Tim. v. 16.)
Be it how you will, only do it. But 7 put it,
not, “that the’ Church be mot burdened,”
but, “that thou be not burdened;” for at
this rate thou wilt do nothing, leaving all to
the Church. This is why there is a common
room set apart by the Church, that you may
not say these things. ‘The Church,” say
you, “has lands,®? has money, and revenues.”
And has she not charges? I ask; and has she
not a daily expenditure? ‘No doubt,” you
will say. Why then do you not lend aid to
her moderate means? Iam ashamed indeed
to say these things: however, I compel no
man, if any one imagines what I am saying to


3 °AAA’ Exer Lovya n exkAnola. On iovya, juga, seep. 74. Here


also B, tvyya., mod. text substitutes davavyuata.


Homity XLV.] Tab AES OF


THE


AF OSELES: eA


be for gain. Make for yourself a guest-cham-
ber in your own house: set up a bed there,
set up a table there and a candlestick. (comp.
2 Kings iv. 10.) For is it not absurd, that
whereas, if soldiers should come, you have
rooms set apart for them, and show much care
for them, and furnish them with everything,

because they keep off from you the visible
war of this world, yet strangers have no place
where they might abide? Gain a victory over
the Church. Would you put us to shame?
This do: surpass us in liberality: have a
room, to which Christ may come; say, ‘“ This
is Christ’s cell; this building is set apart for
Him.” Be it but an underground? chamber,
and mean, He disdains it not. ‘‘ Naked and
a stranger,” Christ goes about, it is but a
shelter He wants: afford it, though but this.
Be not uncompassionate, nor inhuman; be
not so earnest in worldly matters, so cold in
spiritual. Let also the most faithful of thy
servants be the one entrusted with this office,
and let him bring in the maimed, the beggars,
and the homeless. These things I say to
shame you. For ye ought indeed to receive
them in the upper part of your house ; but if
ye will not do this, then though it be below,
though but where thy mules are housed, and
thy servants, there receive Christ. Perchance
ye shudder at hearing this. What then, when
ye do not even this? Behold, I exhort, be-
hold, I bid you; let this be a matter to be
taken up in earnest. But ye do not wish it
thus, perhaps? Do it some other’ way.
There are many poor men and poor women:
set apart some one (of these) constantly to
remain there: let the poor man be (thine in-
mate) though but as a guard to thy house: let
him be to thee wall and fence, shield and
spear. Where alms are, the devil dares not
approach, nor any other evil thing. Let us
not overlook so great a gain. But now a
place is set apart for a chariot, and for litters
(Sacrepvine) another; but for Christ Who is
wandering, not even one! Abraham received
the strangers in the place where he abode
himself; his wife stood in the place of a ser-
vant, the guests in the place of masters. He
knew not that he was receiving Christ; knew
not that he was receiving Angels; so that had
he known it, he would have lavished his
whole substance, But we, who know that we
receive Christ, show not even so much zeal as
he did who thought that he was receiving
men. “ But they are impostors,” you will say,
“many of them, and unthankful. > And for
this the greater thy reward, when thou receiv-
est for the sake of Christ’s name. For if


Ben. But E. has
true reading xatwyeov, so Savil. with


> A. B.C. xav kxataywy.ov 7 so Morel.
here preserved the
Marg. kaTayavov,


thou knowest indeed that they are impostors,
receive them not into thy house: but if thou
dost not know this, why dost thou accuse
them lightly? “ Therefore I tell them to go
to the receiving house.” But what kind of
excuse is there for us, when we do not even
receive those whom we know, but shut our
doors against all? Let our house be Christ’s
general receptacle : let us demand of them as
a reward, not money, but that they make our
house the receptacle for Christ; let us run
about everywhere, let us drag them in, let us
seize our booty: greater are the benefits we
receive than what we confer. He does not
bid thee kill a calf: give thou bread to the
hungry, raiment to the naked, shelter to the
stranger. But that thou mayest not make
this thy pretext, there is a common apartment,
that of the Church; throw thy money into
that, and then thou hast received them: since
(Abraham) there had the reward of those
things also which were done by his servants.
“He gave the calf to a young man, and he
hasted to dress it.” (Gen. xviii. 7.) So well
trained were his servants also! They ran,
and murmured not as ours do: for he had
made them pious. He drew them out to war,
and they murmured not: so well disciplined
were they. (Gen. xiv. 14.) For he had equal
care for all as for himself: he all but said as
Job did, “We were alike formed in the same
womb.” (Job xxxili.6.) Therefore let us also
take thought for their salvation, and let us
make it our duty to care for our servants, that
they may be good; and let our servants also
be instructed in the things pertaining to God.
Then will virtue not be difficult to us, if we
train them orderly. Just as in war, when the
soldiers are well-disciplined, the general
carries on war easily, but the contrary hap-
pens, when this is not so; and when the sail-
ors too are of one mind, the pilot easily
handles the rudder-strings ; so here likewise.
For say now, if thy servants have been so
schooled, thou wilt not be easily exasperated,
thou wilt not have to find fault, wilt not be
made angry, wilt not need to abuse them, It
may be, thou wilt even stand in awe of thy
servants, if they are worthy of admiration,
and they will be helpers with thee, and will
give thee good counsel. But from all these
shall all things proceed that are pleasing to
God, and thus shall the whole house be filled
with blessing, and we, performing things
pleasing to God, shall enjoy abundant succor
from above, unto which may we all attain,
through the grace and mercy of our Lord
Jesus Christ, with Whom to the Father and


'the Holy Ghost, together be glory, might,
honor, now and ever, world without end.
Amen.


THE WORKS


Ni
fore)


OF) ST.; CHRYSOsT ORE


[Homity XLVI.


POM LY) ar or.


ACTS XXI- 18; ro.


“And the day following Paul went in with us unto!come together: for they will hear that thou


James: and all the elders were present. And
when he had saluted them, he declared particu-
larly what things God had wrought among the
Gentiles by his ministry.”


Tuts was the Bishop of Jerusalem; and to
him (Paul) is sent on an earlier occasion.
This (James) was brother of the Lord; a
great and admirable man. (To him, it says,)
“Paul entered in with us.” Mark the
(Bishop’s) unassuming behavior: “and the
elders” (were present). Again Paul relates
to them the things relating to the Gentiles, not
indulging in vainglory, God forbid, but wish-
ing to show forth the mercy of God, and to
fill them with great joy. (ch. xv.) See ac-
cordingly: ‘when they heard it,” it says,
“they glorified God,”—not praised nor ad-
mired Paul: for in such wise had he narrated,
as referring all to Him—“and said unto him,
Thou seest, brother, how many thousands of
Jews there are which believed.” Observe
with what modest deference they too speak:
“they said to him:” not (James) as Bishop
discourses authoritatively, but they take Paul
as partner with them in their view; “ Thou
seest, brother:” as though immediately and
at the outset apologizing for themselves, and
saying, ‘We did not wish this. Seest thou
the necessity of the thing? ‘how many
thousands,’ say they, ‘of Jews there are
which’ have come together.” And they say
not, “how many thousands we have made
catechumens,” but, ‘there are. And these,”
say they, “are all zealous for the law.” (v.
20.) ‘Two reasons—the number of them, and
their views. For neither had they been few,
would it have been right to despise them:
nor, if they were many and did not all cling
to the law, would there have been need to
make much account of them. Then also a
third cause is given: “ And they all,” it says,
“have been informed of thee ”’—they say not,
“have heard,” but xarny7Ayoav, that is, so they
have believed, and have been taught, “ that
thou teachest apostasy from Moses to all the
Jews which are among the Gentiles, by telling
them not to circumcise their children, neither
to walk after the customs.” (v. 21.) ‘ What
is it therefore? the multitude must needs


|
|


| but taught that it had been fulfilled in Christ.


art come. Do therefore this that we say to
thee” (v. 22, 23): they say these things as
advising, not as commanding. ‘‘We have
four men which have a vow on them; them
take, and purify thyself with them, and be at
charges with them.” Make thy defence in
act, not in word—* that they may shave them-
selves,” it says, “and all may know that those
things, whereof they were informed concern-
ing thee, are nothing; but that thou thyself
also walkest orderly, and keepest the law ”
(v. 23, 24): they say not, “teachest,” but, of
superabundance, “that thou thyself also keep-
est the law.” For of course not this was the
matter of chief interest, whether he did not
teach others, but, that he did himself observe
the law. ‘ What then” (he might say), “if
the Gentiles should learn it? I shall injure
them.” How so? say they, seeing that even
we, the teachers of the Jews, have sent unto
them. ‘ As touching the Gentiles which be-
lieve, we have written and concluded that
they observe no such thing, save only that .
they keep themselves from things offered to
idols, and from blood, and from strangled,
and from fornication.” (v.25.) Here witha
kind of remonstrance (évtpexrixoc), As ‘ we,”
say they, commanded them, although we are
preachers to the Jews, so do thou, although a
preacher to the Gentiles, cooperate with us.
Observe Paul : he does not say, “ Well, but I
can bring forward Timothy, whom I circum-
cised : well, but I can satisfy them by what
I have to say (of myself) :” but he complied,
and did all: for in fact thus was it expedient
(to do).* For it was one thing to take (effec-


* It has been much disputed whether the charge: ‘“‘ Thou
teachest apostacy from Moses,” etc., was true or not. There
certainly was truth in the charge. Paul maintained that the
Mosaic law, as such, was not binding upon Christians. But it
was against those who made it a yoke of bondage upon be-
lievers, that he waged a polemic. Where there was no imposi-
tion of the law as necessary to salvation, Paul in no way
antagonized it, but rather trusted to the free working of the
principles of the gospel to gradually accomplish the abolition
of its rites and forms. The truth seems to be that Paul was
tolerant of Judaism where it did not impose burdens upon be-
lievers or threaten the completeness and sufficiency of the
gospel; he even accommodated himself to Jewish require-
ments, as in shaving his head at Cenchrea and circumcising
Timothy. He never unnecessarily opposed the law of Moses,
¢ So far as he
accommodated himself to its ceremonies, it was only that he
enor prejudice and so win the Jews to Christ.—


HomiLy XLVL.] THE Acts: (OF


THE


APOSTLES. 279


tual) measures for clearing himself, and
another to have done these things without
the knowledge of any (of the parties). It was
a step open to no suspicion, the fact of his
even bearing the expenses. “Then Paul
took the men, and the next day purifying him-
self with them entered into the temple, sig-
nifying the accomplishment of the days of
purification, until that an offering should be
offered for every one of them.” (v. 26.)
“« Signifying,” dvayyéAdov, il. @. xatayyéAdwv, pub-
licly notifying : so that it was he who made
himself conspicuous. ‘‘ And when the seven
days were about to be completed, the Jews
from Asia”—for (his arrival) most keeps
times with theirs '—‘‘ when they saw him in
the temple, stirred up all the people, and
laid hands on him, crying out, Men of Israel,
help: This is the man, that teacheth all men
everywhere against the people, and the law,
and this place: and further brought Greeks
also into the temple, and hath polluted this
holy place.’”’ (v. 27, 28.) Mark their habitual
conduct, how turbulent we everywhere find it,
how men who with or without reason make a
clamor in the midst “For they had seen
before with him in the city Trophimus an
Ephesian, whom they supposed that Paul had
brought into the temple. And all the city
was moved, and the people ran together: and
they took Paul, and drew him out of the tem-
ple and forthwith the doors were shut.” (v.
Baga) Men pot Israel,” it Says, svhelp:
this is the man that (teaches) against the peo-
ple, and the law, and this place ””—the things
which most trouble them, the Temple and the
Law. And Paul does not tax the Apostles
with being the cause of these things to him.
“And they drew him,” it says, “out of the
Temple: and the doors were shut.” For
they wished to kill him; and therefore were
dragging him out, to do this with greater
security. ‘And as they went about to kill
him, tidings came unto the tribune of the
cohort, that all Jerusalem was in an uproar.
Who immediately took soldiers and centu-
rions, and ran down unto them: and when
they saw the tribune and the soldiers, they
left beating of Paul. Then the tribune came
near, and took him, and commanded him to
be bound with two chains; and demanded


1 Old text: wadcora yap éxeivors cvyxpoviger, as the comment
On ot awd THs ’Accas “Iovdaior, meaning apparently that Azs ar-
rival at Jerusalem would naturally fall at the same time with
that of the Jews who, like himself, came from the same parts.
Mod. text transfers the comment to the first clause of the
verse, ‘‘ And as the days were about to be fulfilled: opa mas
wartata 6) avtois éyxpoviger,’’ it is not easy to see with what
meaning.

2 Opa Td 700s a’t@y Tmavtaxov Tapax@des, Kal aTAws BowyTwy ev
76 meow. Meaning perhaps that the conduct of these Ephesian
Jews was of a piece with that of their heathen countrymen,
ch. xix. 28.


who he was, and what he had done. And
some cried one thing, some another, among
the multitude.” (v. 31-34.) But the tribune
having come down delivered him, and “ com-
manded him to be bound with two chains: ”
(hereby) appeasing the anger of the people.
“And when he could not know the certainty
for the tumult, he commanded him to be car-
ried into the castle. And when he came
upon the stairs, so it was, that he was borne
of the soldiers for the violence of the people.
For the multitude of the people followed after,
crying, Away with him!” (v. 34-36.) What
means, ‘‘ Away with him?” that is, what they
say with us according to the Roman custom,
To the standards with him!* “ And as Paul
was to be led into the castle, he said unto the
tribune, May I speak unto thee?” (v. 37.)
In the act of being borne along up the stairs,
he requests to say something to the tribune:
and observe how quietly he does it. “ May I
speak unto thee?” he says. ‘ Who said,
Canst thou speak Greek? Art thou not then
that Egyptian, which before these days
madest an uproar, and leddest out into the
wilderness four thousand men that were mur-
derers?” (v. 38.) For (this Egyptian) was a
revolutionary and seditious person. With re-
gard to this then Paul clears himself, and * * +


(Recapitulation.) ‘ Do therefore this that we
say unto thee,’ etc. (v. 23, 24.) He shows
that it was not necessary to do this upon prin-
ciple (xpoyyovnevwc)—whence also they obtain
his compliance—but that it was economy and
condescension.* ‘As touching the Gentiles,”
etc. (v. 25.) Why, then, this was no hin-
drance to the preaching, seeing they themselves


3 ev Tos GLyvots avTOv EuBade. AMmonius in the Catena, “It
was a custom of the Jews to utter this cry against the just, as
they did against the Lord, Aipe avrov/ 1. e. away with Him
from among the living.’’ Hence Gcumen. combining this
with the explanation in the text, *“‘[t was the custom of the
Jews, etc. But some say, That is, what they say with us,” etc.
And so mod. text, “*It was a custom of the Jews to say this
pelea those whom they would condemn, as also in the case
of Christ they appear doing this, and saying, *Apov avrov / that
is, Make him to disappear from among the living. ** Butsome,”’
what among us they say according to the Roman custom, ‘Ev
Tols giyvots avTov éuBade, the same is the Alpe avrov.

4 Mod. text supplies the evident /acua with, ** And by what
he says, takes him off from his suspicion. ‘* But let us look
again at what has been read. ‘ There are,’’ they say, ‘ with
us seven men,”’ etc.

* This vow appears to have been the Nazarite vow described
in Num. vi. 1-21, taken by the apostle as an accommodation to
Jewish prejudices and to allay the suspicions of the legal party
in Jerusalem. This was done upon the recommendation of
James, the ‘‘ Bishop’ of the church, and his associates. The
significance of Paul's paying the expenses, is, perhaps, that
the period during which the others’ vow had run was on this
condition reckoned to his account also. It is noticeable that
the party of James distinctly admits that adherence to the legal
ceremonies is not required of the Gentile Christians; it is
equally important to notice that Paul yielded to the advice
to take this view, as a concession in a matter of indifference,
since he was living for the time as a Jew among Jews, that he
might give no needless offence and might win the more. It
was not a compromise, but an expedient concession to con-


victions and prejudices which it was not wise or necessary
| to oppose or increase.—-G. B. S.


280


legislated for them to this effect. Why,
then,’ in his taking Peter to task he does not
absolutely (dx2ac) charge him with doing
wrong: for precisely what he does on this
occasion himself, the same does Peter on that
occasion, (merely) holding his peace, and es-
tablishing his doctrine. (Gal. fitters): And
he says not, For why? it is not right to teach
those among the Gentiles. “It is “not enough
to have not (so) preached there, but there
was need also to do something more, that
those may be persuaded that thou observest
the law. The affair is one of condescension,
be not alarmed.” They do not advise him
(to this course) sooner, until they have first
spoken of the economy and the gain. “And
besides, the doing this in Jerusalem, i is a thing
to be borne. ‘ Do thou this thing therefore’
here, that it may be in thy power abroad to do
the other.” (4) “ The next day,” it says, “ he
fook them. "(v. *26) =)’ he deferred it’ “not;
for when there is economy in the case, this is
the way of it. (@) “Jews from Asia having
seen him,” for it was natural that they were
spending some days there, “in the Temple.”
(v. 27.) (¢) Mark the economy (of Provi-
dence) that appeared (in this). (p. 27g, note ?.)
After the (believing) Jews had been persuaded
(concerning him), then it is that those (Jews of
Asia) set upon him in order that those (be-
lieving Jews) may not also set upon him.
feips say they, “ve! men of- Israel!" as
though it were some (monster) difficult to be
caught, and hard to be overcome, that has
fallen into their hands. “ All men,” they say,
“everywhere, he ceaseth not to teach;
not here only. And then the accusation (is)
more aggravated by the present circum-
stances. ‘“ And yet more,” say they, ‘he has
polluted the temple, having brought into it
men who are Greeks.” (v. 28.) And yet in
Christ’s time there “came up (Greeks) to
worship” (John xii. 20): true,
speaks of Greeks who had no mind to wor-
Ship. =“ And. they seized Paul” ete... (v.\ 30-
35.) They no longer wanted laws nor courts
of justice: they also beat him. But he for-
bore to make his defence then; he made it
afterward: with reason; for they would not
even have heard him then. Pray, why did
they cry, “ Away with him?” (v. 36.) They
feared he might escape them. Observe how
submissively Paul speaks to the tribune.
““ May I speak unto thee? Then art not thou
that Egyptian?” (v. 37, 38.) This Egyptian,
namely, was a cheat and impostor, and the


1 Mod. text, ‘‘ Using this economy then, he himself at a
later time (?) accuses Peter, and he does not do this amAas.’
St. Chrysostom’s view of St. Peter’s dissimulation at Antioch
as an “economy,” is most fully given in his exposition of the
passage, Comzzent. ix Gal. cap. li. §. 4, 5


THE WORKS. OF ST. CHRY¥S0OsTOM


but here it |
|God we live, not to men:


|Homity XLVI.


devil expected to cast a cloud over (the Gos-
pel) through him, and implicate both Christ
and His Apostles i in the charges pertaining to
those (imposters): but he prevailed nothing,
nay the truth became even more brilliant, be-
ing nothing defeated by the machinations of
the devil, nay rather shining forth all the
more. Since if there had not been impostors,
and then these (Christ and His Apostles)
had prevailed, perhaps some one might have
laid hold upon this: but when those impos-
tors did actually appear, this is the wonder.
“Tn order,’ says (the Apostle), “that they
which are approved may be made manifest.”
(1 Cor. xi. 19.) And Gamaliel says, “ Before
these days stood up Theudas.”? ‘Then let us
not grieve that heresies exist, seeing that
false Christs wished to attack even Christ
both before this and after; with a view to
throw Him into the shade, but on every
occasion we find the truth shining out trans-
parent. So it was with the Prophets: there
were false prophets, and by contrast with
these they shone the more: just as disease
enhances health, and darkness light, and
tempest calm. ‘There is no room left for the
Greeks to say that (our teachers) were im-
postors and mountebanks: for those (that
were such) were exposed. It was the same
in the case: of | Moses: “God suffered: the
magicians, on purpose that Moses might not
be suspected to be a magician: He let them
teach all men to what length magic can go
in making a fantastic show: beyond this
point they deceived not, but themselves con-
fessed their defeat. Impostors do ws no
harm, rather do us good, if we will apply our
mind to the matter. What then, you will
say, if we are partners with them in common
estimation? The estimation is not among us,
but with those who have no judgment. Let
not us greatly care for the estimation of the
many, nor mind it more than needs. To
in heaven we have
our conversation, not on earth: fhere lie the
awards and the prizes of our labors, thence


2 Mod. text adds, ‘‘ But as for the szcariz, some say they
were a kind of robbers, so called from the swords they bore,
which by the Romans are called s#e@. others, that they were
of the first sect among the Hebrews. For there are among them
three sects, generally considered (aipécets ai yevixat): Phari-
sees, Sadducees, and Essenes who are also called oavot, for that
is the meaning of the name ‘ Essenes,’ on account of. their
reverend manner of life: but the same (?) are also called
sicar?i, because of their being zealots.’’ Fora further illustra—
tion of the way in which the modern text was formed, espe-
cially in respect of its use of the Cateza (see p. 279, note 4),
compare the latter with C£cumenius on this passage. The
Catena, namely, cites from Origen: “ Among the Jews are
Tpeis alpéoers -yevirat Pharisees, Sadducees, Essenes: these
(last) exercise a more reverend manner of life, being lovers.
one of another and temperate: whence also they are called
Essenes, i. €. oovoc: but others called them (?) szcar7z, i. e.
zealots.” (CEcumen. using the Catena, makes a continuous
exposition from Chrys., Origen, and Josephus. Mod. text
from the same materials, interpolates the text of Chrys. as
above.


HomiLty XLVI.]


Pre ACTS (OF -THE APOSTLES,


281


we look for our praises, thence for our crowns.
Thus far let us trouble ourselves about men—
that we do not give and afford them a handle
against us. But if, though we afford none,
those choose to accuse us thoughtlessly and
without discrimination, let us laugh, not!
weep. “Provide” thou “things honest be-
fore the Lord and before men” (2. Cor. viii.
21): if, though thou provide things honest,
that man derides, give thyself no more con-
cern (for that). Thou hast thy patterns in
the Scriptures, For, saith he, “do I now
persuade men or God?” (Gal. i. 10) and
again, ““We persuade men, but we are
made manifest unto God.” (2 Cor. v. 11.)
And Christ (spoke) thus of them that take
enence: “Let them ‘aleme; they be. ‘blind
guides of the blind (Matt. xv. 14);
again, “Woe unto you, when all men speak
well of you” (Luke vi. 26): and again, “ Let
your works shine, that men may see, and
glorify your Father which is in heaven.”
(Matt. v. 16.) And, “ Whoso shall offend
one of these little ones, it were better for
him that a millstone were hanged about his


neck, and he were drowned in the depths of |


the sea.” (Matt. xviii. 6.) These sayings are
not contrary, nay, they are exceedingly in
accord. For when the offence is with us,
then woe unto us, but when not with us, not
so. And again, Woe to (that man) through
whom “the name of God is blasphemed.”
(Rom. ii. 24.) How then if I do what is
right in anything, but another blasphemes ?
That is nothing to me, but only to him: for
through him (God) was blasphemed. “ And
how is it possible to do what is right in any-
thing, and yet give a handle to the rest >”
Whence will ye ‘that I bring examples—from
present, or from old times? Not to be easily
scared (yogodeeic), shall we speak to the very
point now in hand? Paul judaized in Jerusa-
lem, but in Antioch not so: he judaized, and
they were offended (p. 282, note 3),- but
those had no right to be offended. He is
said to have saluted both Nero’s cupbearer
and his concubine:2 what, think ye, must
they have said against him because of this?
But they had no right to do so. Since, if he
drew them to him for® loose living or any
wicked acts, one might well be offended:
but if in order to right living, what is there to
be offended at? Let me mention something


1 B. alone of our Mss, gives the negative which the sense re-
quires ; restored to the text by Ed. Par. Ben. 2.


2 The cupbearer may be Narcissus (Rom. xvi. rr): the
name of the concubine is not mentioned. In one of his earliest
Vite Monast. i. § 3. t. 1. p. 59. D. St.


works, Adv. Oppugn.
Chrys. relates iat Nero cast St. Paul into prison, and in the
end beheaded him, in his rage at the loss of a favorite con-
cubine, converted by him to the faith.


3 Ben. nonagato, which is the reading of D. only: all the | 1
' with any moral hurt or loss to the men of *


rest €meozacaro.


and |


that happened to one of my acquaintance.
The wrath of God once fell upon (a city), and
he being. very young (was) in the order of
deacon. The bishop was absent at the time,
and of the presbyters none took thought for
the matter, but indiscriminately they ‘caused
in one night immense numbers? of people to
be baptized all at once, and they did indis-
criminately receive baptism, all of them igno-
rant of everything: these he took apart by a
hundred or two hundred together, and dis-
coursed to them, not upon any other subject,
but only on the sacraments, so that the un-
baptized also were not allowed to be present.
Many thought he did this because he coveted
rule. . But he cared not for that: neither
however did he continue the thing for a


(longer) time, but immediately desisted.
When then? Was he the cause of the scan-
dal? I think not. For if indeed he had


done this without cause, they might with
reason have ascribed it to him: and so again,
if he had continued to do so. For when
aught of what is pleasing to God is hindered
by another’s taking offence, it is right to take
no notice: but then is the time to mind it,
when we are not forced because of him to
offend God. For, say, if, while we are dis-
coursing and putting drunkards to shame
(oKarrévTw), any one take offence—am I to
give over speaking } ? Hear Christ say, ‘ Will
ye also go away?” (John vi. 67.) So then,
the right “thing i is, neither to take no notice,
nor to take too much, of the weakness of the
many. Do we not see the physicians acting
thus : how, when it may be done, they humor
the whims of their patients, but when the
gratification does harm, then they will not
spare? Always it is good to know the right
mean. Many reviled, because a certain
beautiful virgin stayed, and they railed upon
those who catechised (her). | What then ?
Was it their duty to desist for that? By no
means. For let us not look to this only,
whether some be offended, but whether they
are justly offended, and® so that it is no hurt
to ourselves (to give way). “If meat,” saith
(Banal), <° offend my brother, I will eat no meat
as long as the world lasts.” (1 Cor. viii. 13.)
With reason : for the not eating did (him) no
harm. If however it offend him, that I wish
to renounce (azoragacHa) (the world), it is not
right to mind him. And whom, you will ask,


4 In the original, wvptadas moAAas. The deacon is probably
Chrys. himself ; the bishop, Flavian.
5 Kal uN meta THS NMETEpAS BAaBns.
uy, which is ambiguous. ** The thing to be considered is,
whether they are offended Sixawws cai wn meta T. 7. B. justly,
and not with concomitant hurt to ourselves should we give
wav.’ As in the case afterwards mentioned, the sitting at
meat in an idol’s temple; the *‘ weak brothers”’ were offended
écxaiws. and to abstain from such conduct was not attended

knowledge.”


Mod. text and Edd. xai et


282


does this offend? Many, to my knowledge.
When therefore the hindrance is a thing in-
different, let (the thing) be done’. Else, if
we were to look only to this, many are the
things we have to desist from: just as, on the
other hand, if we should despise (all objec-
tions), we have to destroy many (brethren).
As in fact Paul also took thought beforehand
concerning offence: “ Lest,”’ he says, “in this
liberality which is administered by us :” for
it was attended with no loss (to him) to obvi-
ate an ill surmise. But when we fall into
such a necessity as that great evils should
ensue through the other’s taking offence,? let
us pay no heed to that person. He has to
thank himself for it, and we are not now
accountable, for it was not possible to spare


THE: WORKS OF ST. CHR¥S0S1Gre


[HomiLy XLVILI.


him without hurt (to ourselves), Some were
offended, because certain believers sat down
to meat in (heathen) temples. It was not
right to sit down: for no harm came of this
(their not doing it), They were offended,
because Peter ate with the Gentiles. But he
indeed spared them, but (Paul)? not so. On
all occasions it behooves us in following
the laws of God to take great pains that
we give no matter of offence; that both
ourselves may not have to answer for it, and
may have mercy vouchsafed us from God,
by the grace and loving-kindness of His
only-begotten Son, with Whom to the Father
and Holy Ghost together be glory, dominion,
honor, now and ever, world without end.
Amen.


10 WEE pe Vie


ACTS XXI. 39, 40.


* But Paul said, I am a man which am a Jew of Tarsus,
a city in Cilicia, a citizen of no mean city: and I
beseech thee, suffer me to speak unto the people.
And when he had given him license, Paul stood on
the stairs, and beckoned with the hand unto the
people. And when there was madea great silence,
he spake unto them in the Hebrew tongue, say-
ing.”’


OxsERVE how, when he discourses to those
that are without, he does not decline availing
himself of the aids afforded by the laws.
Here he awes the tribune by the name of his
city. And again, elsewhere he said, ‘‘ Openly,
uncondemned, Romans as we are, they have
cast us into prison.” (ch. xix. 37.) For since
the tribune said, “ Art thou that Egyptian? ’”’
he immediately drew him off from that sur-
mise: then, that he may not be thought to
deny his nation, he says at once, “I am a
Jew:” he means his religion.* (6) What


1 6rav Toivuy adtadopor 7 To KwAvMa, yrverOw. Ben. guando
igitur indifferens est, abstineatur. But the céAvua (which is
overlooked in this rendering) seems to mean, the hindrance to
the arotagaovar, which ijatter will be the subject to yivertdw.
For instance, if the impediment urged by others against
a person’s taking the monastic vows be a thing indifferent, let
him take them. Else, if we were to look to this only—viz.
that this or that man is offended—moAA@v éxouev arooTHvar—
many are the right undertakings we should have to forego or
desist from: as on the other hand were we to make it a rule to
despise all considerations of offence, we should have to be the
ruin of many a brother.

2 Namely, ina matter where the duty of persisting in our
course is plain—viz. where the other is offended ov dtxatws, and
to give way would be eta tis nuetépas BAaBys—then, even
though great evils to him or others result from our not giving
way, we must take no notice of the offence, must allow it no
weight.

3 altos 5€ ox ert. Here, as above, p. 118, it seems to be as-
sumed that St. Paul’s judaizing at Jerusalem gave offence to
the Gentile brethren in his company.

4 Eita wa pH vourcOy To EBvos Iovdatos, Aéyet THY OpyoKetav:
cat yap kat aGAAaxov Evvowoy EauTov XpioTov Kadcc,


The (Ay Byes


then? he did not deny (that he was a Chris-
tian): God forbid: for he was both a Jew


and a Christian, observing what things he


ought: since indeed he, most of all men, did
obey the law: (a) as in fact he elsewhere
calls himself, “Under the law to Christ.”
(1 Cor. ix, 21.) What is qhis Eopray 2a)
The man ® that believes in Christ. And when
discoursing with Peter, he says: “We, Jews
by nature.—But I beseech thee, suffer me to
speak unto the people.” (Gal. ii. 15.) And
this is a proof, that he does not speak lies,
seeing he takes all as his witnesses. Observe
again how mildly he speaks. This again is a
very strong argument that he is chargeable
with no crime, his being so ready to make his
defence, and his wishing to come to discourse
with the people of the Jews. See a man
well-prepared = (rerayvévov avdpa) !—Mark the
providential ordering of the thing: unless the


add otv, Cat. 6) trodro eat ; (Mod. text adds, IavaAos pevdera ;
"Amaye) Ti otv ; ovK npvnoato; k.7.A. The sense is confused
by omission and transposition. It seems to be this: He gives
the tribune to understand that he isa Roman: but because he
would not have the Jews to suppose that he was not a Jew,
therefore he declares his religion, that he isa Jew. And here-
in was no denial of his Christianity, etc. See below on v. 3.
va wn Tad. vouigwar TO EBvos aAAo, THY OpnoKElay erHyayev.
Hence we restore the sense as in the text.—Cécumen. gives it,
‘* He immediately drew him off from this surmise, cat 70 €8vos
kat TH Opnokeiay eimwy, as in fact he elsewhere calls himself,
Under the law to Christ.”

5 Mod. text omits the article. “O ta XpioTo miaTevwv, as we
take it, is the answer to the question, tt 6y tovT6 eotww; In the
next sentence (which Edd. separate from this only by a
comma) he says: in the same sense he calls himself and Peter,
dice Iovdaior, ‘born Jews (not proselytes,) and Jews still.’’
But Ammonius in the Catena: ‘“\] am aman which am a Jew:
for we Christians are ¢vget “Iovdator, as confessing the true
faith: which is what the name Judah signifies.”


Homi.y XLVII.]


tribune had come, unless he had bound him,
he would not have desired to speak for his
defence, he would not have obtained the silence
hedid. ‘Standing on the stairs.” Then there
was the additional facility afforded by the
locality, that he should have a high place to
harangue them from—in chains too! What
spectacle could be equal to this, to see Paul,
bound with two chains, and haranguing the
people ! (To see him,) how he was not a whit
perturbed, not a whit confused ; how, seeing
as he did so great a multitude all hostility
against him, the ruler standing by, he first of
all made them desist from their anger: then,
how prudently (he does this). Just what he
does in his Epistle to the Hebrews, the same
he does here: first he attracts them by the
sound of their common mother tongue: then
by his mildness itself. “He spake unto
them,” it says, ‘in the Hebrew tongue, say-
ing, Men, brethren, and fathers, hear ye my
defence which I make now unto you.” (ch.
xxii. 1.) Mark his address, at once so free
from all flattery, and so expressive of meek-
ness. For he says not, “Masters,” nor
“ Lords,” but, ‘‘ Brethren,” just the word they
most liked: “I am no alien from you,” he
says, nor “against you.” ‘ Men,” he says,
“brethren, and fathers:” this, a term of
honor, that of kindred. ‘“ Hear ye,’ says he,
“my ”—he says not, “teaching,” nor “ha-
rangue,” but, ‘‘my defence which I now make
unto you.” He puts himself in the posture
of a suppliant. ‘And when they heard that
he spake in the Hebrew tongue to them, they
kept the more silence.” (v. 2.) Do you ob-
serve how the using the same tongue subdued
them? In fact, they had a sort of awe for
that language. Observe also how he pre-
pares the way for his discourse, beginning
thus: “I am verily a man which am a Jew,
born in Tarsus, a city in Cilicia, yet brought
up in this city at the feet of Gamaliel, and
taught according to the perfect manner of the
law of the fathers, and was zealous toward
God, as ye allarethis day.” (v.3.) “Iama
man,” he says, “which am a Jew:” which
thing they liked most of all to hear; “born
in Tarsus, a city of Cilicia.” That they may
not again think him to be of another nation,
he adds his religion : “ but brought up in this
city.” (p. 282, note *.) He shows how great
was his zeal for the worship, inasmuch as
having left his native city, which was so great
and so remote too, he chose to be brought up
here for the Law’s sake. See how from the
beginning he attached himself to the law.*


b


* The whole purpose of Paul’s defence here is to appease
the prejudice against him as an apostate from Moses. He
addresses the people of Jerusalem in their own tongue and as


ti polo OPT HE APROSTHES. 283


But this he says, not only to defend himself
to them, but to show that not by human intent
was he led to the preaching of the Gospel,
but by a Divine power: else, having been so
educated, he would not have _ suddenly
changed. For if indeed he had been one of
the common order of men, it might have been
reasonable to suspect this: but if he was of
the number of those who were most of all
bound by the law, it was not likely that he
should change lightly, and without strong
necessity. But perhaps some one may say:
“To have been brought up here proves noth-
ing : for what if thou camest here for the pur-
pose of trading, or for some other cause ?”
Therefore he says, “ at the feet of Gamaliel :”
and not simply, “by Gamaliel,” but “at his:
feet,” showing his perseverance, his assiduity,
his zeal for the hearing, and his great rever-
ence for the man. ‘Taught according to the
perfect manner of the law of the fathers.”
Not simply, “the law,” but “the law of the
fathers ;”’? showing that he was such from the
beginning, and not merely one that knew the
Law. All this seems indeed to be spoken on
their side, but in fact it told against them,
since he, knowing the law, forsook it.
“Ves, but what if thou didst indeed know the
law accurately, but dost not vindicate it, no,
nor love it?” “ Being a zealot,” he adds:
not simply (one that knew it). Then, since
it was a high encomium he had passed upon
himself, he makes it theirs as well as his,
adding, “As ye all are this day.” For. he
shows that they act not from any human
object, but from- zeal for God, gratifying
them, and preoccupying their minds, and get-
ting a hold upon them in a way that did no
harm. Then he brings forward proofs also,
saying, ‘ and I persecuted this way unto the
death, binding and delivering into prisons
both men and women. As also the high
priest doth bear me witness, and all the estate
of the elders” (v. 4, 5): ‘‘ How does this


appear.”’ As witnesses he brings forward the
high-priest himself and the elders. He says
indeed, “ Being a zealot, as ye” (Hom.


xix. p. 123): but he shows by his actions,
that he went beyond them. “For I did not
wait for an opportunity of seizing them: I
both stirred up the priests, and undertook


“brethren.” He shows them that although born in a Greek
city, he had received his education in Jerusalem, under one of
their most famous Rabbis. He sketches his history as a zeal-
ous adherent of Judaism. After his conversion he did not
desert the religion of his fathers. It was while praying in the
temple that the call of God came to him which summoned him
to go as an apostle to the Gentiles. From this apology, it
would be seen how far Paul was from despising the Mosaic
law and also, how manifestly providential had been the call
by which he had been set apart to a distinct work among the
Gentiles. It isa guarded defence which neither antagonizes
the law, nor admits its binding force over the apostle or his
converts.


284


THE ‘WORKS OF ‘ST. (CHRYSOSiI Gre


[Homity XLVII


journeys: I did not confine my attacks, as ye
did, to men, I extended them to women also:
“both binding, and casting into prisons both
men and women.” ‘This testimony is incon-
trovertible ; the (unbelief) of the Jews (is left)
without excuse. See how many witnesses he
brings forward, the elders, the high-priest,
and those in the city. Observe his defence,
how it is not of cowardly fear (for himself,
that he pleads), no, but for teaching and
indoctrination. For had not the hearers been
stones, they would have felt the force of what
he was saying. For up to this point he had
themselves as witnesses: the rest, however,
was without witnesses: ‘‘ From whom also I
received letters unto the brethren, and went
to Damascus, to bring them which were there
bound unto Jerusalem, for to be punished.
And it came to pass, that, as I made my jour-
ney, and was come nigh unto Damascus
about noon, suddenly there shone from
heaven a great light round about me. And I
fell unto the ground, and heard a voice saying
unto me, Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou
Me? And I answered, Who art Thou, Lord?
And he said unto me, I am Jesus of Nazareth,
Whom thou persecutest.” (v. 6, 7,8.) Why
then, these very things ought to have been
held worthy of credit, from those that went
before: otherwise he would not have under-
gone such a revolution. How if he is only
making a fine story of it, say you? Answer
me, Why did he suddenly fling away all this
zeal? Because he looked for honor? And
yet he got just the contrary. But an easy
life, perhaps? No, nor that either. Well,
but something else? Why it is not in the
power of thought to invent any other object.
So then, leaving it to themselves to draw the
inference, he narrates the facts. ‘As I came
nigh,”’ he says, ‘‘ unto Damascus, about noon-


day.” See how great was the excess of the
light. What if he is only making a fine story,
say you? Those who were with him are


witnesses, who led him by the hand, who saw
the light. ‘“ And they that were with me saw
indeed the light, and were afraid; but they
heard not the voice of Him that spake to
me.’ (v. 9g.) But in another place he says,
““Hearing the voice, but seeing no man.”
(Acts ix. 7.) It is not at variance: no, there
were two voices, that of Paul and the Lord’s
voice: in that place, the writer means Paul’s
voice. (Hom... xix., p. 124,, mote | .2)- as: ain
fact (Paul) here adds, “The voice of Him
that spake unto me. Seeing no man:” he
does not say, that they did not see the light:
but, “no man,” that is, “none speaking.”
And good reason that it should be so, since
it behooved him alone to have that voice


voice of Him that spake to me.


vouchsafed unto him. For if indeed they
also had heard it, (the miracle) would not
have been so great. Since persons of grosser
minds are persuaded more by sight, those
saw the light, and were afraid. In fact,
neither did the light take so much effect on
them, as it did on him: for it even blinded
his eyes: by that which befel him, (God)
gave them also an opportunity of recovering
their sight, if they had the mind. It seems
to me at least, that their not believing was
providentially ordered, that they might be
unexceptionable witnesses. ‘And he said
unto me,” it says, “Iam Jesus of Nazareth,
Whom thou persecutest.” (comp. ch. ix. 5.)
Well is the name of the city (Nazareth) also
added, that they might recognize (the Per-
son): moreover, the Apostles also spoke thus.
(ch. ii. 22; iv. 10; x. 38.) And Himself bore
witness, that they were persecuting Him.
‘“‘ And they that were with me saw indeed the
light, and were afraid, but they heard not the
And “I ‘sara:
What shall I do, Lord? And the Lord said
unto me, Arise, and go into Damascus; and
there it shall be told thee of all things which
are appointed for thee to do. And when I
could not see for the glory of that light, being
led by the hand of them that were with me, I —
came into Damascus. And one Ananias, a
devout man according to the law, having a
good report of all the Jews which dwelt there,
came unto me, and stood, and said unto me,
Brother Saul, receive thy sight. And the
same hour I looked up upon him. Enter into
the city,” it says, ‘‘and there it shall be
spoken to thee of all that is appointed for
thee to do.” (v. 10-13.) Lo! again another
witness. And see how unexceptionable he
makes him also. ‘‘And one Ananias,” he
says, ““a devout man according to the law,”
—so far is it from being anything alien !—
“having a good report of all the Jews that
dwelt” (there). ‘“ And I in the same hour
received sight.” Then follows the testimony
borne by the facts. Observe how it is inter-
woven, of persons and facts; and the persons,
both of their own and of aliens: the priests,
the elders, and his fellow-travellers : the facts,
what he did and what was done to him: and
facts bear witness to facts, not persons only.
Then Ananias, an alien ;? then the fact itself,
the recovery of sight; then a great prophecy.
“* And he said, The God of our fathers hath
chosen thee, that thou shouldest know His
will, and see That Just One.” (v. 14.) It is
well said, ‘Of the fathers,” to show that they


1 Perhaps it should be, ‘* And he too, not an alien:” viz.
being a ‘devout man according to the Law:”’ as above, he says
of Ananias, oUtws ovdév adAotpiov éote.


Homity XLVII.]


Tit ACTS: OF THE -AROSILES:


285


were not Jews, but aliens from the law, and
that it was not from zeal (for the law) that
they were acting. “That thou shouldest
know His will.” Why then His will is this.
See how in the form of narrative it is teach-
ing. ‘ And see That Just One, and hear the
voice of His mouth. For thou shalt be His
witness unto all men of what thou hast seen
and heard. And see,” he says, “ that Just
One.” (v. 15.) For the present he says no
more than this: if He is Just, they are guilty.
“And hear the voice of His mouth.” See
how high he raises the fact! ‘For thou
shalt be His witnmess—for this, because thou
wilt not betray the sight and hearing (i.e.
“ prove false to’) —“ both of what thou hast
seen, and of what thou hast heard:” by
means of both the senses he claims his faith.
fulness—‘“ to all men. And now why tarriest
thou? arise, and be baptized, and wash away
thy sins, calling on His name.” (v. 16.)
Here it is a great thing he has uttered. For
he said not, “ Be baptized in His name:”
pot “calling on, the’ mame of Christ.’ It
shows that He is God: since it is not lawful
to “call upon” any other, save God. Then
he shows also, that he himself was not com-
pelled : for, “‘I said,” says he, “ What must
Ido?” Nothing is (left) without witness:
no; he brings forward the witness of a whole
city, seeing they had beheld him led by the
hand. But see the prophecy fulfilled. ‘To
all men,” it is said. For he did become a
witness to Him, and a witness as it ought to
be; by what he suffered, by what he did,
and by what he said. Such witnesses ought
we also to be, and not to betray the things
we have been entrusted withal: I speak not
only of doctrines, but also of the manner of
life. For observe: because he had seen,
because he had heard, he bears witness to all
men, and nothing hindered him. We too
bear witness (Mod. text “have heard”) that
there is a Resurrection and numberless good
things: we are bound to bear witness of this
to all men. ‘ Yes, and we do bear witness,”
you will say, ‘‘and do believe.” How, when
ye act the contrary? Say now: if any one
should call himself a Christian, and then hav-
ing apostatized should hold with the Jews,
would this testimony suffice? By no means:
for men would desire the testimony which is
borne by the actions. Just so, if we say that
there is a Resurrection and numberless good
things, and then despise those things and
prefer the things here, who will believe us?


Not what we say, but what we do, is what all |


“Thou shalt be a witness,”
Not, Omi to. the


men look to.
it says, “unto all men:


friendly, but also to the unbelievers: for this |


is what witnesses are for; not to persuade
those who know, but those who know not.
Let us be trustworthy witnesses. But how
shall we be trustworthy? By the life we lead.
The Jews assaulted him : our passions assault
us, bidding us abjure our testimony. But let
us not obey them: we are witnesses from
God. (Christ) is judged that He is not
God:* He has sent us to bear witness to
Him. Let us bear witness and persuade
those who have to decide the point: if we do
not bear witness, we have to answer for their
error also. But if in a court of justice, where
worldly matters come in question, nobody
would receive a witness full of numberless
vices, much less here, where such (and so
great) are the matters to be considered. We
say, that we have heard Christ, and that we
believe the things which He has promised :
Show it, say they, by your works: for your
life bears witness of the contrary—that ye do
not believe. Say, shall we look at the money-
getting people, the rapacious, the covetous?
the people that mourn and wail, that build
and busy themselves in all sorts of things, as
though they were never to die? “Ye do not
believe that ye shall die, a thing so plain and
evident : and how shall we believe you when
ye bear witness?” For there are, there are
many men, whose state of mind is just as if
they were not to die. For when in a length-
ened old age they set about building and
planting, when will they take death into their
calculations ? It will be no small punishment
to us that we were called to bear witness,
but were not able to bear witness of the
things that we have seen. We have seen
Angels with our eyes, yea, more clearly than
those who have (visibly) beheld them. We
shall be (Mod. text “Then let us be”) wit-
nesses to Christ: for not those only are “ mar-
tyrs,” (or witnesses, whom we so Call), but
ourselves also. This is why they are called
martyrs, because when bidden to abjure (the
faith), they endure all things, that they may
speak the truth: and we, when we are bidden
by our passions to abjure, let us not be over-
come. Gold saith: Say that Christ is not
Christ. Then listen not to it as to God, but
despise its biddings. The evil lusts* “ pro-
fess that they know God, but in works they
deny Him.” (Tit. i. 16.) For this is not to
witness, but the contrary. And indeed that
others should deny (Him) is nothing wonder-
ful: but that we who have been called to
bear witness should deny Him, is a grievous


1 Kpiverac tap avipwrots (tTiviv 6 Meds add. mod. text) OTe ovK
éott Meds. The subject, not expressed, is Christ. He is
brought before the bar of men’s judgment for trial whether
He be God: so below Tovs dtxagovtas.

2 Mod. text adds: **say the same: but be not thou seduced, but
stand nobly that it may not be said of us also, They profess,’’ etc.


286


and a heinous thing: this of all things does
the greatest hurt to our cause. “It shall be
to (your)selves for a testimony.” (Luke xxi.
13), He saith: but (this is) when we our-
selves stand to it firmly. If we would all
bear witness to Christ, we should quickly per-
suade the greater number of the heathen. It
is a great thing, my beloved, the life (one
leads). Let aman be savage as a beast, let
him openly condemn thee on account of thy
doctrine! yet he secretly approves, yet he
will praise, yet he will admire. For say,
whence can an excellent life proceed? From
no source, except from a Divine Power work-
ing in us. “ What if there be heathen also
of such acharacter?”’ If anywhere any of
them be such, it is partly from nature, partly
from vainglory. Wilt thou learn what a
brilliancy there is in a good life, what a force
of persuasion it has? Many of the heretics
have thus prevailed, and while their doctrines
are corrupt, yet the greater part of men out
of reverence for their (virtuous) life did not
go on to examine their doctrine: and many
even condemning them on account of their
doctrine, reverence them on account of their
life : not rightly indeed, but still so it is, that
they do thus feel (towards them). This has
brought slanders on the awful articles of our
creed, this has turned everything upside down,
that no one takes any account of good living:
this is a mischief to the faith. We say that
Christ is God; numberless other arguments
we bring forward, and this one among the
rest, that He has persuaded all men to live
rightly: but this is the case with few. The
badness of the life is a mischief to the
doctrine of the Resurrection, to that of the
immortality of the soul, to that of the Judg-
ment: many other (false doctrines) too it
draws on with itself, fate, necessity, denial of
a Providence. For the soul being immersed
in numberless vices, by way of consolations
to itself tries to devise these, that it may not
be pained in having to reflect that there is a
Judgment, and that virtue and vice lie in our
own power. (Such a) life works numberless
evils, it makes men beasts, and more irra-
tional than beasts: for what things are in
each several nature of the beasts, these it has
often collected together in one man, and
turned everything upside down. This is why


p=)


the devil has brought in the doctrine of Fate :
this is why he has said that the world is with-


out; a ‘Providence ‘(Hom. ii. ‘p.° 1) .githis™is


THE.WORKS -OF ST.) CHERYSOSTO@a:


|Homity XLVIL


why he advances his hypothesis of good
natures, and evil natures, and his hypothesis
of evil (uncreated and) without beginning,
and material (in its essence): and, in short,
all the rest of it, that he may ruin our life.
For it is not possible for a man who is of
such a life either to recover himself from cor-
rupt doctrines, or to remain in a sound faith:
but of inevitable necessity he must receive all
this. For I do not think, for my part, that of
those who do not live aright, there could be
easily found any who do not hold numberless
satanical devices—as, that there is a nativity
(or birth-fate) (yéveovc), that things happen at
random, that all is hap-hazard and chance-
medley. Wherefore I beseech you let us
have a care for good living, that we may not
receive evil doctrines. Cain received for
punishment that he should be (ever) groaning
and trembling. (Gen. iv. 14.) Such are the
wicked, and being conscious within them-
selves of numberless bad things, often they
start out of their sleep, their thoughts are full
of tumult, their eyes full of perturbation ;
everything is fraught for them with misgiv-
ings, everything alarms them, their soul. is
replete with grievous expectation and cow-
ardly apprehension, contracted with impotent
fear and trembling. Nothing can be more
effeminate than such a soul, nothing morc
inane.” Like madmen, it has no self-pos-
session. For it were well for it that in the
enjoyment of calm and quiet it were enabled
to take knowledge of its proper nobility.
But when all things terrify and throw it into
perturbation, dreams, and words, and gest-
ures, and forebodings, indiscriminately, when
will it be able to look into itself, being thus
troubled and amazed? Let us therefore do
away with its fear, let us break asunder its
bonds. For were there no other punishment,
what punishment could exceed this—to be
living always in fear, never to have confidence,
never to be at ease? Therefore knowing
these things assuredly, let us keep ourselves
in a state of calm and be careful to practise
virtue, that maintaining both sound doctrines
and an upright life, we may without’ offence
pass through this life present, and be enabled
to attain unto the good things which God
hath promised to them that love Him, through
the grace and mercy of His only-begotten
Son, with Whom to the Father and the Holy
Ghost together be glory, might, honor, now
and ever, world without end. Amen.


1 Kav davepas ov kataywwwoky (B. C. -ev) dca To S6ypya, add’
amodééxeTar x. T. A. Ben. retains this, in the sense, sadtem aperte
non damnabit propter dogma: taking xav in different senses in
this and the former clause. Ed. Par. Ben. 2, Legendum vide-
tur pavepas ovv katay. Licet sit guispiam valde efferus, licet
aperte ob dogma condemnet, at clam.etc. Erasm. Etiam st
per doguia non condemnetur. The emendation is sure and
easy: Kav davep@s TOY xataywwornn. So beiow,. IoAdor d€ cai
KaTayivwokovTes avtwy dra TO Soya, acdovvtar dca Toy Biov.


2 Old text €£ny6tepov: a word unknown to the Lexicons, and
of doubtful meaning. If we could suppose a comparative of
the perfect participle in kws (analogous to the comparison of
éppwmuevos and acuevos), ekeatnkoTepov would suit the sense very
well: but such a form seems to be quite unexampled.—Mod.
text avontétepov. Then: ‘‘ Even as madmen have no self-pos-
session, so this has no self-possession. When therefore is this
to come to consciousness of itself, having such a dizziness:
which it were well,”’ etc.


Homity XLVIIL.]


Pike ACS OF THE APOSTLES.


287


POM MEY 1s V FLT:


ACTS XXII.


“ And it came to pass, that, when I was come again to
Jerusalem, even wnile I prayed in the temple, I
was in a trance; and saw him saying unto me,
Make haste, and get thee quickly out of Jerusalem:
for they will not receive thy testimony concerning
me. And I said, Lord, they know that I impris-
oned and beat in every synagogue them that
believed on thee: and when the blood of thy mar-
tyr Stephen was shed, I also was standing by, and
consenting unto his death, and kept the raiment of
them that slew him.”


SEE how he thrusts himself (into danger).
I came, he says, after that vision, “to Jerusa-
lem. I was ina trance,” etc. Again, this
is without witness: but observe, the witness
follows from the result. He said, ‘“‘ They will
not receive thy testimony:” they did not
receive it. And yet from calculations of
reason the surmise should have been this, that
they would assuredly receive him. For I was
the man that made war upon the Christians :
so that they ought to have received him.
Here he establishes two things: both that
they are without excuse, since they perse-
cuted him contrary to all likelihood or calcu-
lation of reason; and, that Christ was God, as
prophesying things contrary to expectation,
and as not looking to past things, but fore-
knowing the things to come. How then does
He say, “‘ He shall bear My name before the
Gentiles and kings and children of Israel?”
(Acts ix. 15.) Not, certainly persuade. Be-
sides which, on other occasions we find the
Jews were persuaded, but here they were not.
Where most of all they ought to have been
persuaded, as knowing his former. zeal (in
their cause), here they were not persuaded.
“And when the blood of Thy martyr Ste-
phen,” etc. See where again his discourse
terminates, namely, in the forcible main point
(eic 70 tayupdov Kegaaaov): that it was he that perse-
cuted, and not only persecuted but killed, nay,
had he ten thousand hands (wpiace yepoiv
avapov) would have used them all to kill Ste-
phen. He reminded them of the murderous
spirit heinously indulged (by him and them),
Then of course above all they would not endure
him, since this convicted them ; ; and truly the
prophecy was having its fulfilment: great the
zeal, vehement the “accusation, and the Jews
themselves witnesses of the truth of Christ!


‘gratify them :


17-20.


“And he said unto me, Depart: for I will
send thee far hence unto the Gentiles. And
they gave him audience unto this word, and
then lifted up their voices, and said, Awa
with such a fellow from the earth: for it is
not fit that he should live.” (v. 21, 22.) The
Jews’ would not endure to hear out all his
harangue,* but excessively fired by their wrath,
they shouted, it says, “ Away with him ; for it
is not fit that he should live. And as they
cried out, and cast off their clothes, and threw
dust into the air, the tribune commanded him
to be brought into the castle, and bade that
he should be examined by scourging; that he
might know wherefore they cried so against
him.” (v. 23, 24.) Whereas both the tribune
ought to have examined whether these things
were so—yes, and the Jews themselves too
—or, if they were not so, to have ordered him
to be scourged, he “bade examine him by
scourging, that he might know for what cause
they so clamored against him.” And yet he
ought to have learnt from those clamorers,
and to have asked whether they laid hold upon
aught of the things spoken: instead of that,
without more ado he indulges his arbitrary
will and pleasure, and acts with a view to
for he did not look to this, how
he should do a righteous thing, but only how
he might stop their rage unrighteous as it was.
“And as they bound him with thongs,t Paul
said unto the centurion that stood by, Is it


1 The sense is confused in old text by misplacing the por
tions of sacred text. Mod. text ‘‘ witnesses of the truth of
Christ speaking boldly. But the Jews, oy ak V. 21-24, which
verses are followed in old text by grow: € avTov ov yap
KabyKer avTov Cnv. Below, mod. text *‘ or A Jews themselves
also,” and omits “or if it were not so, to have ordered him to
be scourged.’

* The “words, ‘“*T will send thee to the Genfrles,’’ were those
at which the Jews took offence. That a word ‘should come
from heaven to Paul in the Temple, commanding him to leave
the chosen people and the Holy City and go to the uncircum-
cised heathen, was a statement verging upon blasphemy. This
admission they would regard as proof of Paul's apostasy trom
Moses. It implied that he regarded the heathen as standing
upon the same plane as themselves. The th: ught roused al]
their native bigotry. Beyond ‘this word”’ they would not
hear him, nor did they think that one who should so estimate
the privileges and character of Le Jews as compared with the
Gentiles was fit to live.—G. B.

+ Ilpoérewvay avrov Tots maou | is s commonly rendered, as here,
‘‘ When they stretched him out, or bound him with thongs.
But this rendering seems to overlook the force of mpo in the
verb and the force of the article tots. The preferable inter-
pretation seems to be, (Thayer’s Lex.): ‘When they had
stretched him out for the thongs, i. e. to receive the blows of
the thongs. by tying him up to a beam or pillar.’ (So
Meyer, DeWette, Lechler, Gloag).—G. B.S


THE )WORKS (OF, Si.7 CHR SOSTenE


|Homity XLVIII.


|


lawful for you to scourge a man that is a
Roman, and uncondemned?” (vy. 25.) Paul
lied not, God forbid: for he was a Roman :!?
if there was nothing else, he would have been
afraid (to pretend this), lest he should be
found out, and suffer a worse punishment.
(See Sueton. Vit. Claud..$ 25.) And observe,
he does not say it peremptorily (d7/éc), but,
“Ts it lawful for you?” The charges brought
are two, both its being without examination,
and his being a Roman. They held this asa
great privilege at that time: for they say that
(it was only) from the time of Hadrian that all2
were named Romans, but of old it was not so.
He would have been contemptible had he
been scourged: but as it is, he puts them
into greater fear (than they him). Had they
scourged him, they would also have dismissed 8
the whole matter, or even have killed him;
but as it is, the result is not so. See how
God permits many (good results) to be
brought about quite in a human way, both in
the case of the Apostles and of the rest (of
mankind). Mark how they suspected the
thing to be a pretext,’ and that in calling him-
self a Roman, Paul lied: perhaps surmising
this from his poverty. ‘When the centurion
heard that, he went and told the tribune, say-
ing, Take heed what thou doest: for this man
is a Roman. Then the tribune came, and
said unto him, Tell me, art thou a Roman?
He said, Yea. And the tribune answered,
With a great sum obtained I this freedom.
And Paul said, But I was free born. Then
straightway they departed from him which
should have examined him: and the tribune
also was afraid, after he knew that he wasa
Roman, and because he had bound him.”
(v. 26-29.)—‘ But I,” he says, “was free


1 Mod. text entirely mistaking the sense, interpolates, ‘‘On
which account also the tribune fears on hearing it. And why,

ou will say, did he fear?” as if it meant, The tribune would
paee been afraid to be condemned for this, etc.

2 Meaning that all provincial subjects of the Roman Empire
came to be called Romans, only in the time of this Emperor:
therefore in St. Paul’s time it was a great thing to be able to
call one’s self a Roman. If it means, ‘‘ All the citizens of Tar-
sus,’’ the remark is not apposite. Certain it is that Tarsus, an
urbs libera by favor of M. Anthony, enjoyed neither 7zs colon-
Zarum nor jus civitat7s until long afterwards, and the Apostle
was not a Roman because a citizen of Tarsus. This however
is not the point of St. Chrysostom’s remark. In the.Catena
and CEcumen. it will be seen, that in later times the extended
use of the name ‘‘Roman”’ as applied to all subjects of the
Roman Empire made a difficulty in the understanding of this
passage. Thus Ammonius takes it that St. Paul was a ‘‘ Ro-
man,’ because a native of Tarsus which was subject to the
Romans (so (c.): and that the Jews themselves for the like
reason were Romans; but these scorned the appellation as a
badge of servitude; Paul on the contrary avouched it, setting
an example of submission to the powers that be.—After this
sentence mod. text interpolates, ‘‘Or also he called himself a
Roman to escape punishment: for,”’ etc.

3 rapememWav av: mod. text (after Cat.) needlessly alters to
TapeTpeWav,

4 mpdhacww elvac Td mpayua Kal TO ecimery avToV “Pwmatov Tov
TladAov: kat tows. . . . We read To eimety and Kat Wevder@ac Tov
II, tows. Mod. text ‘But the tribune by answering, ‘witha
great sum,’ etc., shows that he suspected it to be a pretext,
Paul’s saying that he wasa Roman: and perhaps he surmised
this from Paul’s apparent insignificance.”


So then his father also was a Roman.
What then comes of this? He bound him,
and brought him down to the Jews. “ On the
morrow, because he would have known the
certainty whereof he was accused of the
Jews, he loosed him from his bands, and com-
manded the chief priests and all their council
to appear, and brought Paul down, and set
him before them.” (v. 30.) He discourses
not now to the multitude, nor to the people.
“And Paul, earnestly beholding the council,
said, Men and brethren, I have lived in all
good conscience before God until this day.”
(ch, xxiii. 1.) ‘What he means/is this; 1 am
not conscious to myself of having wronged you
at all, or of having done anything worthy of
these bonds. What then said the high priest ?°
Right justly, and ruler-like, and mildly: “ And
the high priest Ananias commanded them that
stood by him to smite him on the mouth.
Then said Paul unto him, God shall smite
thee, thou whited wall: for sittest thou to judge
me after the law, and commandest me to be
smitten contrary to the law? And they that
stood by said, Revilest thou God’s high
priest? Then said Paul, I wist not, brethren,
that he was the high priest: for it is written,
Thou shalt not speak evil of the ruler of thy


born.”’


people.”” (v. 3-5.) Because “I knew not that.


”)


he was high priest.” Some say, Why then
does he defend himself as if it was matter of
accusation, and adds, “Thou shalt not speak
evil of the ruler of thy people?” For if he
were not the ruler, was it right for no better
reason than that to abuse (him or any) other?
He says himself, ‘ Being reviled, we bless;
being persecuted, we suffer it”? (1 Cor. iv. 12);
but here he does the contrary, and not only
reviles, but curses.8 They are the words of
boldness, rather than of anger; he did not
choose to appear in a contemptible light to
the tribune. For suppose the tribune himself
had spared to scourge him, only as he was
about to be delivered up to the Jews, his
being beaten by their servants would have
more emboldened him: this is why Paul does
not attack the servant, but the person who
gave the order. But that saying, “Thou


5 Mod. text interpolates: “So far was it from being a false-
hood, his saying, etc., that he also gained by it, being loosed
from his chains. And in what way, hear.’’ And below, alter-
ing the sense: ‘‘ He no longer speaks to the tribune, but to the
multitude and the whole people.”

6 Mod. text ‘‘ When he ought to have been pricked to the
heart, because (Paul) had been unjustly bound to gratify
them, he even adds a further wrong, and commands him to be
beaten: which is plain from the words subjoined.”

7 Mod. text ‘Now some say, that he knowing it speaks
ironically (or feigns ignorance, eipwrevetar); but it seems to
me, that he did not at all know that it was the high priest:
otherwise he would even have honored him: wherefore,” etc.
In old text tives Pact, placed before ore ov Hderv, K. T. A. Te-
quires to be transposed.

8 Mod. text ““ Away with the thought: he appears to have
done neither the one nor the other: but to one accurately con-
sidering it, the words,” etc.


Homity XLVIII.]


hiweAetie OP THE APOSTLES.


289


whited wall, and dost thou sit to judge me
after the law?” (is) instead of, Being (thy-
self) a culprit: as if he had said, And (thyself)
worthy of stripes without number. See
accordingly how greatly they were struck with
his boldness; for whereas the point was to
have overthrown the whole matter, they rather
commend him.’ (fra, v. 9.) “For it is
written,’ etc. He wishes to show that he
thus speaks, not from fear, nor because
(Ananias) did not deserve to be called this,
but from obedience to the law in this point
also. And indeed I am fully persuaded that
he did not know that it was the high priest,?
since he had returned now after a long inter-
val, and was not in the habit of constant
intercourse with the Jews; seeing him too in
the midst among many others: for the high
priest was no longer easy to be seen at a
glance, there being many of them and di-
verse.* So, it seems to me, in this also he
spoke with a view to his plea against them:
by way of showing that he does obey the law;
therefore he (thus) exculpates himself.


(Recapitulation.) (4) But let us review
what has been said, (a) “ And when I was
came again to Jerusalem,” etc. (v. 17.) How
was it,’ that being a Jew, and there brought
up and taught, he did not stay there? Nor
did he abide there, unless he had a mind to
furnish numberless occasions against him:


1 Tlapacvovar, all our Mss. But Erasm. debacchantur, and
all the Edd. rapocvovorv, contrary to the sense.

2 Other interpretations are given in the Catena and Cecum.
* Anonym.: The high priest being a hypocrite deserved to be
called a ‘ whited wall.’ Whence also Paul says he did not even
know him as high priest, since it is the work of a high priest to
save the flock put under his charge: but this man made havoc
upon it, etc. Severus: Paul justly reproached him, but then,
as if repenting, said: ‘I knew not,’ etc. Not know that
he was high priest? Then how saidst thou, ‘And sittest thou
to judge me? ’—But he pretends ignorance : an ignorance which
does no harm, but is an ‘economy’ (otxovosodeav): for reserve
(weTaxerpiaos) may be more forcible than speaking out
(mappynora) : an unseasonable wappyaca often hinders the truth:
a seasonable petax. as often advances it.”

* Other methods of dealing with Paul’s much debated state-
ment: ‘*I did not know that he was the high priest,’’ besides the
view given in the text (with which agree Beza, Wolff, Lechler,
et al.) are: (1) Paul did not perceive who it was that addressed
him and thus did not know that it was the high priest whom
he rebuked (Alford). (2) Paul did not acknowledge Ananias
to be high priest ; he would not recognize so unjust a man as
a real high priest (Calvin, Meyer, Stier). (3) Ananias was not
high priest at this time (Lightfoot, Whiston, Lewin). (4) Paul
did not recollect or consider that it was the high priest whom
he was addressing (Bengel, Olshausen, Neander, Schaff,
Hackett, Conybeare and Howson, Gloag). In this view Paul
apologizes for his rash words, spoken inadvertently and with-
out reflection, by adding: ‘‘ for it is written, Thou shalt not
speak evil of the ruler of thy people.’’ Baur and Zeller sup-

ose that the apostle never said what he is reported as say-
ge Same choice appears to lie between views (2) and (4).—

3 Mod. text omits the whole of the portion marked (a). The
sense is: St. Paul is concerned to explain how it was that hav-
ing been bred and taught in Jerusalem, he did not remain
there. It was by command of Christ in a vision that he de-
parted. In fact he could not stay there unless, etc. Accord-
ingly we find him everywhere fleeing about from place to
place, like one exiled from his own land. The words which
are corrupt, are: ov« éxet Euevev; ovde exer SretpiBev (ovd5e yap
éfnv éxet SuatpiBerv ?) et wy mupia Kat avTw@v (avTov A) KaTtac-
kevacat (Sic) 79eA€ TavTaxov: Kabarep Tis buyas Tepibvywr.


19


everywhere just like an exile, fleeing about
from place to place. (c¢) “While I prayed in
the temple,” he says, ‘‘ it came to pass that I
was in a trance.” (To show) that it was not
simply a phantom of the imagination, there-
fore “while he prayed” (the Lord) stood by
him. And he shows that it was not from fear
of their dangers that he fled, but because
they would “not receive” his ‘“ testimony.”
(v. 18.) But why said he ‘“ They know I
imprisoned ?”’ (v. 19.) Not to gainsay
Christ, but because he wished to learn this
which was so contrary to all reasonable ex-
pectation. Christ, however, did not teach him
(this),* but only bade him depart, and he
obeys: so obedient is he. ‘And they lifted
up their voices,” it says, “and said, Away
with him: it is not fit that this fellow should
live.” (v. 22.).. Nay, ye. are the persons not
fit to live; not he, who in everything obeys
God. O villains and murderers! “And
shaking out their clothes,” it says, “they
threw dust into the air” (v. 23), to make
insurrection more fierce, because they wished
to frighten the governor.f And _ observe;
they do not say what the charge was, as in
fact they had nothing to allege, but only
think to strike terror by their shouting.
“The tribune commanded,” etc. and yet he
ought to have learnt from the accusers,
“wherefore they cried so against him. And
as they bound him, etc. And the chief cap-
tain was afraid, after he learnt that he was a
Roman.” Why then it was no falsehood.
“On the morrow, because he would know the
certainty wherefore he was accused of the
Jews, etc., he. brought him down before the
council.” (v. 24-30.) This he should have
done at the outset... He brought him in,
loosed. This above all the Jews would not
know what to make of.* “And Paul,” it
says, “earnestly beholding them.” It shows
his boldness, and how it awed them (ra évrper-
rixév). “Then the high priest Ananias,” etc.
(ch, xxiii. 1, 2.) Why, what has he said that


4 7d ovTw mapadofov, viz. that the Jews would not receive the
testimony of one, who from his known history had, of all men,
the greatest claim to be heard by them: *‘** Lord, they know,’
etc., therefore surely they will listen to me.”’ (SoSt. Chrysostom
constantly interprets these words: see Cat. 7 /oco.) But Christ
did not gratify his wish for information on this point: He only
bade him depart.—The innovator, who has greatly disfigured
this Homily by numerous interpolations, has here: ‘‘did not
teach him what he must do.”

+ Better: ‘they cast off their clothes’’ as a signal of their
anger and readiness to stone Paul. Others understand it to
mean: waving their garments as a signal of their assent to the
exclamations against Paul of those who were near.-—G. B. S.

5 rovTo wadtoTta Hrépynaoav av oi ‘Iovéaio: i. e. perhaps “ they
would be at a loss to know the reason of his being brought
before them loosed, not knowing what had passed between
him and the tribune.’’ Mod. text amplifies: ** This he ought to
have done at the outset, and neither to have bound him, nor
have wished to scourge him, but to have left him, as having
done nothing such as that he should be put in bonds. ‘And
he loosed him,’ it says, etc. This above all the Jews knew not
what to make of.”


290


THE WORKS OF) ST. CHRYSOSIT Oe,


[Homity XLVIII.


was affronting? What is he beaten for?
Why what hardihood, what shamelessness!
Therefore (Paul) set him down (with a rebuke)
“God shall smite thee thou whited wall.”
(v. 3.) Accordingly (Ananias) himself is put
to a stand, and dares not say a word: only
those about him could not bear Paul’s_ bold-
ness. They saw a man ready to die’ * * *
for if this was the case, (Paul) had but to
hold his peace, and the tribune would have
taken him, and gone his way; he would have
sacrificed him to them. He both shows that
he suffers willingly what he suffers, and thus
excuses himself before them, not that he
wished to excuse himself to them—since as
for those, he even strongly condemns them—
but for the sake of the “people. 2 “ Violating
the law, commandest thou me to be beaten?”
Well may he say so: for to kill aman who
had done (them) no injury, and that an inno-
cent person, was a violating of the law. For
neither was it abuse that was spoken by him,
unless one would call Christ’s words abusive,
when He says, ‘“‘Woe unto you, Scribes and
Pharisees, for ye are like unto whited walls.”
(Matt. xxiii. 27.) True, you will say: but if
he had said it before he had been beaten, it
would have betokened not anger, but bold-
ness. But I have mentioned the reason of
this.? And (at this rate) we often find Christ
Himself “speaking abusively” to the Jews
when abused by them; as when He says,
“Do not. think that I -will; accuse you.”
(John v. 45.) But this is not abuse, God for-
bid. See, with what gentleness he addresses
these men: “I wist not,” he says, “that he
was God’s high priest” (v. 4, 5): and, (to
show) that he was not dissembling (cipwvetera:),
he adds, “ Thou shalt not speak evil of the
ruler of thy people.” He even confesses him
to be still ruler. Let us also learn the gentle-
ness also, * that in both the one and the other
we may be perfect. For one must look nar-


1 eidov avOpwTrov Bavarw@vTa ei yap TOUTO iv, kav eatynoev: Kat
AaBav avtov amnAGev: Kav e&edwkev avTov avTois 6 xLALapxos.
The meaning (see above p. 289.) may be: ‘‘ The wrong was not
to be put up with, for to hold his peace under such treatment
would have been to embolden the tribune to sacrifice him to
his enemies, as a person who might be insulted with impunity.’
But the passage 1s corrupt: perhaps it should be ov« (mod.
text has oUtws) cidov avOp. Gav. ‘* They did not see before them
one who was willing to die, i. e. to let them take away his life.
For if this were the case, he had but to hold his peace, and the
tribune would,”’ etc. Mod. text ‘‘ In such wise saw they a
man ready to die; and they would not endure it. ‘I knew not
that he was the high priest.’ Why then: the rebuke was of
ignorance. For if this were not the case, kav AaBwv avrTov
amjrde Kai ovK €alynce, Kav efedwkev, Koy Tac

2 Mod. text quite perverting the sense: ‘‘ Obeying the law,
not from a wish to show (évdeCEao dau) to them: for those he
had even strongly condemned. For the law’s sake, therefore,
he defends himself, not for the sake of the people, with rea-
son, etc.

3 Viz. it was because he did not choose to let the tribune
despise him, p. 289. And so mod. text adds, ort ovx e€BovAeTo
katadbpovndqvat.

4 Matwuev cal Thv emetkeray, i. e. Paul’s, as well as his
mappyota. Mod. text ‘* Let us then also learn gentleness.”


rowly into them, to learn what the one is and
what the other: narrowly, because these
virtues have their corresponding vices hard
by them: mere forwardness passing itself off
for boldness, mere cowardice for gentleness :*

and need being to scan them, lest any person
possessing the vice should seem to have the
virtue: which would be just as if a person
should fancy that he was cohabiting with the
mistress, and not know that it was the ser-
vant-maid. What then is gentleness, and
what mere cowardice? When others are
wronged, and we do not take their part, but
hold our peace, this is cowardice: when we
are the persons ill-treated, and we bear it,
this is gentleness. What is boldness? Again
the same, when others are the persons for
whom we contend. What forwardness?
When it is in our own cause that we are will-
ing to fight. So that magnanimity and bold-
ness go together, as also (mere) forwardness
and (mere) cowardice. For he that (does not)
resent on his own behalf,® will hardly but
resent on behalf of others: and he that does
not stand up for his own cause, will hardly
fail to stand up for others. For when our
habitual disposition is pure from passion, it
admits virtue also. Just as a body when free
from fever admits strength, so the soul, unless"
it be corrupted by the passions, admits
strength. It betokens great strength, this
gentleness; it needs a generous and a gal-
lant soul, and one of exceeding loftiness, this
gentleness. Or, think you, is it a small thing
to suffer ill, and not be exasperated ? Indeed
one would not err if in speaking of the dispo-
sition to stand up for our neighbors, one
should call it the spirit of manly courage.
For he that has had the strength to be able to
overcome so strong a passion (as this of
selfishness), will have the strength to dare
the attack on another. For instance, these
are two passions, cowardice and anger: if
thou have overcome anger, it is very plain
that thou overcomest cowardice also: but


thou gettest the mastery over anger, by being


gentle: therefore (do so) with cowardice also,
and thou wilt be manly. Again, if thou hast
not got the better of anger, thou art become


5 ore TapuperTagty avTais ui KaKtat, T ev Tappyota OpacvtTns.
Ty O€ emcecketa avavdpta. It is seldom possible to match the
ethical terms of one language with exact equivalents in


a“


another. Here dpacvT7s, as opposed to Tappyota ‘* courage in
speaking one’s mind,’’ is not merely ‘‘ audacity,’ a or ‘“hardi-
hood,” or “* pugnacity,” or ‘‘the spirit of the bully,” though it


may be applied to all these. On the whole, ‘‘ forwardness”’
seems to be most suitable for the antithesis: the one character
comes forward boldly and speaks up in the cause of truth and
justice: the other thrusts itself forward, in its own cause, for
resentment of wrongs done to one’s self. Below, in connection
w ith avavépia it means what we call ** bullying.’

6 Allour Mss. 6 yap uxép cavtov wh adyav, dvoKdAws Urép
éTépwv adynoer, but Sav. marg. ovK adyjoer: which we adopt
as indispensable to the sense. Inthe next sentence, C. omits
the «7 before auvvwy, and A. the ov« before auvvetrac.


Homity XLVIII.]


2


Bike ACTS


OF THE AVOSTIEES.


291


forward (and pugnacious); but not having
got the better of this, neither canst thou
get the better of fear; consequently, thou
wilt be a coward too: and the case is the
same as with the body; if it be weak, it is
quickly overcome both by cold and heat: for
such is the ill temperament, but the good
temperament is able to stand all (changes).
Again, greatness of soul is a virtue, and hard
by it stands prodigality: economy is a virtue,
the being a good manager; hard by it stands
parsimony and meanness. Come, let us again
collate and compare the virtues (with their
vices). Well, then, the prodigal person is not
to be called great-minded. How should he?
The man who is overcome by numberless pas-
sions, how should he be great of soul? For
this is not despising money; it is only the
being ordered about by other passions: for
just as a man, if he were at the beck and
bidding of robbers to obey their orders, could
not be free (so it is here). His large spend-
ing does not come of his contempt of money,
but simply from his not knowing how to dis-
pose of it properly: else, were it possible
both to keep it and to lay it out on his pleas-
ure, this is what he would like. But he that
spends his money on fit objects, this is the
man of high soul: for it is truly a high soul,
that which is not in slavery to passion, which
accounts money to be nothing. Again, econ-
omy is a good thing : for thus that will be the
best manager, who spends in a proper manner,
and not at random without management.
But parsimony is not the same thing with
this. ° For the former* indeed, not even
when an urgent necessity demands, touches
the principal of his money: but the latter will
be brother to the former. Well, then, we will
put together the man of great soul, and the
prudent economist, as also the prodigal and
the mean man: for both of these are thus
affected from littleness of soul, as those others
are (from the opposite). -Let us not then call
him high-souled, who simply spends, but him
who spends aright: nor let us call the eco-
nomical manager mean and _ parsimonious,
but him who is unseasonably sparing of his
money. What a quantity of wealth that rich
man spent, “‘who was clothed in purple and


1 “Exeivos mév yap ovdé avaykaias atatTovons xXpelas, THS OVTLaS
amTeTat TOY XpHUaTwy, oTOs 5é Exelvou yevorto av adeApds. We
feave this as it stands, evidently corrupt. Something is want-
ing after obros de. ‘* The former, the otkovoutxos, is careful not
to touch his principal or capital, but will confine his outlay
within his income: the latter,’ etc. But ovdé avayx. am. xpelas
is hardly suitable in the former case, and should rather come

5 2 CS

after otros dé ‘“‘the latter, the niggard, though the need be
ever so urgent, has not the heart to touch either principal or
income ’’—or something to that effect. Then perhaps, rws obdv
ovTos Exetvou yevotto av adeAdos; Mod. text ‘‘ For the former
spends all upon proper objects; the latter, not even when
urgent need requires, touches the principal of his money. The
oixov. therefore will to brother to the peyadow.”’


fine linen?” (Luke xvi. 19.) But he was
not high-souled: for his soul was possessed
by an unmerciful disposition and by number-
less lusts: how then should it be great?
Abraham had a great soul, spending as he
did for the reception of his guests, killing the
calf, and, where need was, not only not spar-
ing his property, but not even his life. If
then we see a person having his sumptuous
table, having his harlots and his parasites, let
us not call him a man of a great mind, but a
man of an exceedingly little mind. For see
how many passions he is enslaved and subject
to—gluttony, inordinate pleasure, flattery:
but him who is possessed by so many, and
cannot even escape one of them, how can any
one call magnanimous? Nay, then most of
all let us call him little-minded, when he
spends the most: for the more he spends, the
more does he show the tyranny of those pas-
sions: for had they not excessively got the
mastery over him, he would not have spent to
excess. Again, if we see a person, giving
nothing to such people as these, but feeding
the poor, and succoring those in need, him-
self keeping a mean table—him let us call an
exceedingly high-souled man: for it is truly a
mark of a great soul, to despise one’s own
comfort, but to care for that of others. For
tell me, if you should see a person despising
all tyrants, and holding their commands of no
account, but rescuing from their tyranny those
who are oppressed and evil entreated; would
you not think thisa great man? So let us
account of the man in this case also. The
passions are the tyrant: if then we despise
them, we shall be great: but if we rescue
others also from them, we shall be far greater,


|as being sufficient not only for ourselves, but


for others also. But if any one, at a tyrant’s
bidding, beat some other of his subjects, is
this greatness of soul? No, indeed: but the
extreme of slavery, in proportion as he is
great. And now also there is set before us
(péxecrar) a soul that is a noble one and a
free: but this the prodigal has ordered to be
beaten by his passions: the man then that
beats himself, shall we call high-souled? By
no means. Well then * *, but let us see
what is greatness of soul, and what prodi-
gality ; what is economy, and what meanness ;
what is gentleness, and (what) dulness and
cowardice; what boldness, and what forward-
ness: that having distinguished these things
from each other, we may be enabled to pass
(this life) well-pleasing to the Lord, and to
attain unto the good things promised, through
the grace and mercy of our Lord Jesus Christ,
to Whom be the glory for ever and ever.
Amen.


THE WORKS ‘OF( ST.) GEPRY¥SGS1T OnE


[Homity XLIX.


MOMITLY XLII Xs


ACTS XXIII. 6-8.


“ But when Paul perceived that the one part were Sad-
ducees, and the other Pharisees, he cried out in
the council, Men and brethren, I am a Pharisee,
the son of a Pharisee: of the hope and resurrection
of the dead I am called in question. And when he
had so said, there arose a dissension between the
Pharisees and the Sadducees: and the multitude
was divided. For the Sadducees say that there is
no resurrection, neither angel, nor spirit: but the
Pharisees confess both.”


Acain he discourses simply as man, and
he does not on all occasions alike enjoy the
benefit of supernatural aid. “I am a Phar-
isee, the son of a Pharisee:”? both in this,
and in what comes after it, he wished to di-
vide the multitude, which had an evil unanim-
ity against him. And he does not speak a
falsehood here either: for he was a Pharisee
by descent from his ancestors. “Of the hope
and resurrection of the dead I am called in
question.” For since they would not say for
what reason they arraigned him, he is com-
pelled therefore to declare it himself. ‘“ But
the Pharisees,” it says, “ confess both.” And
yet there are three things: how then does he
say both? “ Spirit and Angel” is put as one.’
When he is on their side, then they plead for
him. ‘And there arose a great cry: and the
scribes that were of the Pharisees’ part arose,
and strove, saying, We find no evil in this
man: but” (what) “if a spirit has spoken to
him, or an angel?”** (v.g.) Why did they


1 This Homily is wanting in C. The mod. text swarms with
interpolations. hone

2 Kai év TovTw, viz. in saying ‘‘I am a Pharisee,’’ kai ev To
peta Tavta, i. e. ‘*Of the hope of resurrection,’ etc. Mod.
text ‘‘ but is also permitted to contribute somewhat of himself,
which also he does and kal ev T., kat €v T@ w. T. both on this oc-
casion and on that which followed (?) he pleads for himself,
wishing,”’ etc.

3 Mod. text ‘* Either because spirit and angel is one, or be-
cause the term audorepa is taken not only of two but of three.”’
(This is taken from Ammonius in the Catena. The innovator
adds): ‘‘the writer therefore uses it kataypyotik@s, and not
according to strict propriety.”’

4 The last clause in the Vulgate text, wy Ocouax@mer, is un-
known to St. Chrys., being in fact quite a modern addition.
Chrys. interprets it as an aposiopesis—viz. motov éyxAnpa; St.
Isidore of Pelusium in the Cat. 70 yap ei 4» éote: TOUT EoTLV, H
mv. eAaAngev avTo 7H ayyeAos. Ammonius ibid. ‘‘ Either the sen-
tence is left incomplete, viz. but whether a spirit or an angel
has spoken to him. . . is not certain: or, it is to be spoken as
on the part of the Pharisees, Eide (?) mv. x. tT. A. that is, Behold,
he is manifestly asserting the resurrection, taught (xatnxnGets)
either by the Hay Ghost or by an angel the doctrine of the
resurrection.’’ Mod. text using the latter: ‘‘ Where is the
crime, if an angel has spoken to him, if a spirit, and taught
(katnxnOets) by him, he thus teaches the doctrine of the resur-
rection?’ (and then, adopting the modern addition uy Oeon.),
““then let us not stand off from him, lest warring with him,
we be found also fighting against God.”’

* The Pharisees were uniformly more favorably inclined to


?


not plead for him before this? Do you ob-
serve, how, when the passions give way, the
truth is discovered? Where is the crime, say
they, if an angel has spoken to him, or a
spirit? Paul gives them no handle against
him. “ And when there arose a great dissen-
sion, the tribune, fearing lest Paul should
have been pulled in pieces of them, com-
manded the soldiers to go down, and to take
him by force from among them, and to bring
him into the castle.” (v. 10.) The tribune
is afraid of his being pulled in pieces, now
that he has said that he is a Roman: and the
matter was not without danger. Do you ob-
serve that Paul had a right to profess himself
a Roman? Else, neither would (the tribune)
have been afraid now. So it remains that the
soldiers must bear him off by force. But
when the wretches saw all to be without
avail, they take the whole matter into their
own hands, as they would fain have done
before, but were prevented: and their wicked-
ness stops nowhere, though it received so
many checks: and yet how many things were
providentially ordered, on purpose that they
might settle down from their rage, and learn
those things through which they might possi-
bly recover themselves! But none the less
do they set upon him. Sufficient for proof of
his innocence was even this, that the man was
saved when at the point to be pulled in pieces,
and that with these so great dangers about
him, he escaped them all. “And the night
following the Lord stood by him, and said, Be
of good cheer, Paul: for as thou hast testified
of Me in Jerusalem, so must thou bear witness
also at Rome. And when it was day, certain
of the Jews banded together, and bound them-
selves under a curse, saying that they would
neither eat nor drink till they had killed Paul.


Christianity than the rival sect of the Sadducees. The latter,
as disbelieving in the resurrection and the spirit-world, would
be especially prejudiced against a system which made these
tenets so central. The Pharisees, on the other hand, agreed on
these points with Christianity. It is evident that in his
defence here before the Sanhedrin Paul wishes to conciliate
the Pharasaic party so far as can be done by emphasizing his
own agreement with them respecting the resurrection. They,
as believers in this doctrine, would have less prejudice against
Paul’s teaching concerning Christ’s resurrection. In asserting
his Pharasaic ancestry, Paul wishes to establish a point of
connection with them and thus gain a foothold for the defence
of his central truth of Christ’s resurrection, which justifies him
in being His disciple and servant.—G. B. S.


HomiLy XLIX.]


AE CACTS) OF: THE <AlPOST LES: 293


And they were more than forty which had
made this conspiracy.” (v. 11-13.) “ They
bound themselves under a curse,” it says.
See how vehement and revengeful they are in
their malice! What means, “ bound under a
curse?’”?* Why then those men are accused
forever, seeing they did not kill Paul. And
forty together. For such is the nature of that
nation: when there needs concerting together
for a good object, not even two concur with
each other: but when it is for an evil object,
the entire people does it. And they admit
the rulers also as accomplices. ‘And they
came to the chief priests and elders, and said,
We have bound ourselves under a great curse,
that we will eat nothing until we have slain
Paul. Now therefore ye with the council sig-
nify to the tribune that he bring him down
unto you to-morrow, as though ye would en-
quire something more perfectly concerning
him: and we, or ever he come near, are ready
to kill him. And when Paul’s sister’s son
heard of their lying in wait, he went and en-
tered into the castle, and told Paul. Then
Paul called one of the centurions unto him,
and said, Bring this young man unto the
tribune: For he hath a certain thing to tell
him. So he took him, and brought him to
the tribune, and said, Paul the prisoner called
me unto him, and prayed me to bring this
young man unto thee, who hath something to
say unto thee. Then the tribune took him by
the hand, and went with him aside privately,
and asked him, What is that thou hast to tell
me? And he said, the Jews have agreed to
desire thee that thou wouldest bring down
Paul to-morrow into the council, as though
they would enquire somewhat of him more
perfectly. But do not thou yield unto them:
for there lie in wait for him of them more than
forty men, which have bound themselves with
an oath, that they will neither eat nor drink
till they have killed him: and now are they
ready, looking for a promise from thee. So
the tribune then let the young man depart,
and charged him, See thou tell no man that
thou hast showed these things to me.” (vy.
14-22). Again he is saved by man’s fore-
thought. And observe: Paul lets no man
learn this, not even the centurion, that the
matter might not become known. And the
centurion having come, reported to the trib-
une. And it is well done of the tribune also,
that he bids him keep it secret, that it might
not become known: moreover he gives his
orders to the centurions only at the time
when the thing was to be done: and so Paul


1 To this question mod. text interpolates for answer from
Ammonius in the Catena, ‘*that is, they declared themselves
to be out of the pale of the faith to Godward,
not do that which was determined against Paul.’


if they should


| embarrassed by the request, not liking


is sent into Caesarea, that there too he might
discourse in a greater theatre and before a
more splendid audience: that so the Jews
may not be able to say, “ If we had seen Paul,
we would have believed—if we had heard him
teaching.” Therefore this excuse too is cut
off from them. ‘And the Lord,” it said,
“stood by him, and said, Be of good cheer:
for as thou hast testified of Me in Jerusalem,
so must thou bear witness also at Rome.”
(Yet) even after He has appeared to him, He
again suffers him to be saved by man’s means.
And one may well be astonished at Paul ;? he
was not taken aback, neither said, ‘“ Why,
what is this? Have I then been deceived-by
Christ?” but he believed: yet, because he
believed, he did not therefore sleep: no;
what was in his own power by means of human
wisdom, he did not abandon. ‘ Bound them-
selves by a curse:” it was a kind of necessity
that those men fastened on themselves by the
curse. “That they ‘would neither eat nor
drink.” Behold fasting the mother of mur-
der! Just as Herod imposed on himself that
necessity by his oath, so also do these. For
such are the devil’s (ways): under the
pretext forsooth of piety he sets his traps,
“And they came to the chief priests,” etc.
And yet they ought to have come (to the trib-
une), ought to have laid a charge, and
assembled a court of justice: for these are not
the doings for priests, but for captains of ban-
ditti, these are not the doings for rulers, but
for ruffians. ‘They endeavor also to corrupt
the ruler: but it was providentially ordered, to
the intent that he also should learn of their
plot. For not (only) by their having nothing
to say, but also by their secret attempt, they
convicted themselves that they were naught.
It is likely too that after (Paul was gone) the
chief priests came to (the tribune) making
their request, and were put to shame. For®
of course he would not have liked either to
deny or to grant their request. How came he
to believe (the young man’s tale)? He did
so in consequence of what had already taken
place; because it was likely they would do
this also. And observe their wickedness:
they as good as laid a necessity on the chief
priests also: for if they undertook so great a
thing themselves, and engaged themselves in
the whole risk, much more ought those to do
thus much. Do you observe, how Paul is


2 Kai agcov extrAaynvat Tov TlavAov- (A. and Cat. omit this)
ti Sy TOUTO; OVK €8opuBnOn, ovde elme. Here mod. text rightly
transposes Tt 5n TOUTO.

3 Mod. text ‘‘ And with reason the tribune does this (i. e.


| sends Paul awav): for of course | he did not wish either to


But the meaning is: “If
he would have been
to reiuse, nor yet to


gratify (yapioac@ac) or to assent.
he had not been informed of their plot,


grant it.”


204


held innocent by those that are without, as
was also Christ by Pilate? See their malice
brought to naught: they delivered him up, to
kill and condemn him: but the result is just
the contrary; he is both saved, and held inno-
cent. For had it not been so,’ he would have
been pulled in pieces: had it not been so, he
would have perished, he would have been con-
demned. And not only does (the tribune)
rescue him from the rush (made upon him),
but also from much other? (violence): see how
he becomes a minister to him, insomuch that
without risk he is carried off safe with so large
aforce. “And he called unto him two cen-
turions, saying, Make ready two hundred sol-
diers to go to Casarea, and horsemen three-
score and ten, and spearmen two hundred, at
the third hour of the night; and provide them
beasts, that they may set Paul on, and bring
him safe unto Felix the governor. And he
wrote a letter after this manner: Claudius
Lysias unto the most excellent governor Felix
sendeth greeting. This man was taken of the
Jews, and should have been killed of them:
then came I with an army, and rescued him,
having understood that he was a Roman.
And when I would have known the cause
wherefore they accused him, I brought him
forth into their council: whom I perceived to
be accused of questions of their law, but to
have nothing laid to his charge worthy of
death or of bonds. And when it was told me
how that the Jews laid wait for the man, I
sent straightway to thee, and gave command-
ment to his accusers also to say before thee
what they had against him. Fare ye well.”
(v. 23-30). See how the letter speaks for
him as a defence—for it says, “ I found noth-
ing worthy of death,” but as accusation
against them (rather) than against him.
** About to have been killed of them:” so set
upon his death were they. First, “I came
with the army, and rescued him:” then also
“T brought him down unto them:” and not
even so did they find anything to lay to his
charge: and when they ought to have been
stricken with fear and shame for the former
act, they again attempt to kill him, insomuch
that again his cause became all the more
clear. ‘ And his accusers,” he says, “I have
sent unto thee:” that at the tribunal where
these things are more strictly examined, he
may be proved guiltless.


bf


-(Recapitulation.) Let us look then to what
has been said above. “I,” he says, “am a
Pharisee:” then, that he may not seem to


Cat. otros: ‘“‘but for this man (the


lel yap wn ovTw.
tribune.)”’
2 Mod. text omits adAAa Kat GAAns TOAARS* Opa Tas.


THE WORKS :OF ST.) CHRYSOSTORE


[Homity XLIX.


pay court, he adds, ‘‘ Of the hope and resur-
rection of the dead it is, that I am called
in question.” (v. 6.) From this charge and
calumny he commends himself. ‘For the
Sadducees indeed,” etc. The Sadducees have
no knowledge of anything incorporeal, per-
haps not even God; so gross (rayeic) are they :
whence neither do they choose to believe that
there is a Resurrection. ‘“ And the scribes,”
etc. Look; the tribune also hears that the
Pharisees have acquitted him of the charges,
and have given sentence (Mss. and Edd,
éwndicatv, “he gave sentence”) in his favor,
and with greater confidence carries him off by
force. Moreover all that was spoken (by
Paul) was full of right-mindedness (@ioc0¢/ac).
“And the night following the Lord stood by
him,” etc. See what strong consolation!
First he praises him, “ As thou hast testified
to My cause in Jerusalem;” then He does
not leave him to be afraid for the uncertain
issue of his journey to Rome: for thither also,
He saith, thou shalt not depart alone (xévoc,
Cat. and Edd. jévov), but thou shalt also have
all this boldness of speech. Hereby it was
made manifest, not (only) that he should be
saved, but that (he should be so) in order
to great crowns in the great city. But why


did He not appear to him before he fell ©


into the danger? Because it is evermore
in the afflictions that God comforts us; for
He appears more wished-for, while even in
the dangers He exercises and trains us. Be-
sides, he was then at ease, when free from
bonds ; but now great perils were awaiting
him. “ We have bound ourselves,” they say,


1 . .
“under a curse, that we will not eat nor drink.”


(v. 14.) What is all this zeal? “That he
may bring him down,” it says, “unto you, as
though ye would enquire into his case more
perfectly.” (v. 15.) Has he not twice made
a speech unto you? has he not said that he is
a Pharisee? What (would ye have) over and
above this? So reckless were they and afraid
of nothing, not tribunals, not laws: such their
hardihood which shrunk from nothing. They
both declare their purpose, and announce the
way of carrying it into effect. ‘‘ Paul’s sister’s
son heard of it.” (v. 16.) This was of God’s
providence, their not perceiving that it would
be heard. What then did Paul? he was not
alarmed, but perceived that this was God’s do-
ing: and casting all upon Him, so he acquits
himself (from further concern about it:)
“having called one of the centurions,” etc.
(v. 17.) He told of the plot, he was believed ;
heissaved. If he was acquitted of the charge,
why did (the tribune) send the accusers?
That the enquiry might be more strict: that
the man might be the more entirely cleared.


Homity XLIX.]


THE SAC fs, OF) THE: APOSTLES:


295


Such are God’s ways of ordering: the very
things by which we are hurt, by these same
are we benefited. Thus it was with Joseph:
his mistress sought to ruin him: and _ she
seemed indeed to be contriving his ruin, but
by her contriving she placed him in a state of
safety: for the house where that wild beast
(of a woman) was kept was a den in compari-
son with which the prison was gentle. (Gen.
xxxix. 1-20.) For while he was there, although
he was looked up to and courted, he was in
constant fear, lest his mistress should set upon
him, and worse than any prison was the fear
that lay upon him: but after the accusation
he was in security and peace, well rid of that
beast, of her lewdness and her machinations
for his destruction: for it was better for him
to keep company with human creatures in
miserable plight, than with a maddened mis-
stress. Here he comforted himself, that for
chastity’s sake he had fallen into it: there he
had been in dread, lest he should receive a
death-blow to his soul: for nothing in the
world is more annoying than a woman in love
can be to a young man who will not (meet her
advances): nothing more detestable (than a
woman in such case), nothing more fell: all
the bonds in the world are light to this. So
that the fact was not that he got into prison,
but that he got out of prison, She made his
master his foe, but she made God his friend ;
brought him into closer relation to Him Who
is indeed the true Master; she cast him out of
his stewardship in the family, but made him a
familiar friend to that Master. Again, his
brethren sold him (Gen. xxxvii. 18); but they
freed him from having enemies dwelling in
the same house with him, from envy and
much ill will, and from daily machinations for
his ruin: they placed him far aloof from them
that hated him. , For what can be worse than
this, to be compelled to dwell in the same house
with brethren that envy one; to be an object of
suspicion, to be a mark for evil designs? So
that while they and she were severally seeking
to compass their own ends, far other were the
mighty consequences working out by the
Providence of God for that just man. When
he was in honor, then was he in danger ; when
he was in dishonor, then was he in safety. The
eunuchs did not remember him, and right well
it was that they did not, that the occasion of
his deliverance might be more glorious : that
the whole might be ascribed, not to man’s
favor, but to God’s Providence (Gen. xl. 23):
that at the right moment, Pharaoh, reduced to
need, might bring him out; that not as con-
ferring but as receiving a benefit, the king
might release him from the prison. (ib. xli.
40.) It behooved to be no servile gift, but


that the king should be reduced to a necessity
of doing this: it behooved that it should be
made manifest what wisdom was in _ him.
Therefore it is that the eunuch forgets him,
that Egypt might not forget him, that the king
might not be ignorant of him. Had he been
delivered at that time, it is likely he would
have desired to depart to his own country:
therefore he is kept back by numberless con-
straints, first by subjection to a master, sec-
ondly by being in prison, thirdly by being over
the kingdom, to the end that all this might be
brought about by the Providence of God.
Like a spirited steed that is eager to bound
off to his fellows, did God keep him back
there, for causes full of glory. For that he
longed to see his father, and free him from his
distress, is evident from his calling him thither.
(Gen. xlv. 9.)

Shall we look at other instances of evil de-
signing, how they turn out to our good, not
only by having their reward, but also by their
working at the very time precisely what is for
our good? This (Joseph’s) uncle (Esau) had
ill designs against his father (Jacob), and drove
him out of his native land: what then? (Gen.
XXvll. 41.) He too set him (thereby) aloof
from, the danger ; for he too got (thereby) to
be in safety. He made him a wiser and a
better man (¢@:Aocoddrepov) ; he was the means
of his having that dream (Gen. xxviii. 12.)
But, you will say, he was a slave in a foreign
land? Yes, but he arrives among his own
kindred, and receives a bride, and appears
worthy to his father-in-law. (ib. xxix. 23.) But
he too cheated him? Yes, but this also
turned out to his good, that he might
be the father of many children. But it
was in his mind to design evil against him?
True, but even this was for his good, that he
might thereupon return to his own country;
for if he had been in good circumstances, he
would not have so longed for home. But he
defrauded him of his hire? Aye, but he got
more by the means. (ib, xxxi. 7.) Thus, in
every point of these men’s history, the more
people designed their hurt, the more their
affairs flourished. If (Jacob) had not received
the elder daughter, he would not soon
have been the father of so many children;


he would have dragged out a _ long
period in childlessness, he would have
mourned as his wife did. For she indeed


had reason to mourn, as not having become a
mother (ib. xxx. 1, 2.); but he had his conso-
lation: whence also he gives her a repulse.
Again, had not (Laban) defrauded him of his
hire, he would not have longed to see his own
country; the higher points (:Josooia) of the
man’s character would not have come to light,


296 THE-WORKS (OR
(his wives) would not have become more
closely attached to him. For see what they
say: “With devouring hath he devoured us
and our money.” (Gen. xxxi. 15.) So that
this became the means of riveting their love
to him. After this he had in them not merely
wives, but (devoted) slaves; he was beloved
by them: a thing that no possession can equal :
for nothing, nothing whatever, is more pre-
cious than to be thus loved by a wife and to
love her. “And a wife,” Scripture says,
“that agrees with her husband.” (Ecclus.
xxv. 1. “A man and a wife that agree to-
gether.” E. V.) One thing this, as the Wise
Man puts it, of the things for which a man is
to be counted happy ; for where this is, there
all wealth, all prosperity abounds: as also,
where it is not, there all besides profits noth-
ing, but all goes wrong, allis mere unpleasant-
ness and confusion. ‘Then let us seek this be-
fore all things. He that seeks money, seeks
not this. Let us seek those things which can
remain fixed. Let us not seek a wife from
among the rich, lest the excess of wealth on
her side produce arrogance, lest that arrogance
be the means of marringall. See you not what
God did? how He put the woman in subjec-
tion? (Gen. iii. 16.) Why art thou ungrateful,
why without perception? The very benefit
God has given thee by nature, do not thou
mar the help it was meant to be. So that it
is not for her wealth that we ought to seek a
wife: it is that we may receive a partner of
our life, for the appointed order of the pro-
creation of children. It was not that she
should bring money, that God gave the
woman ; it was that she might be an helpmate.
But she that brings money, becomes, instead


oT. CHRYSOSTOR.


[Homity L.


of a wife, a setter up of her own will (ézifovioc),
a mistress—it may be a wild beast instead of
a wife—while she thinks she has a right to
give herself airs upon her wealth. Nothing
more shameful than a man who lays himself
out to get riches in this way. If wealth itself
is full of temptations, what shall we say to
wealth so gotten? For you must not look to
this, that one or another as a rare and unusual
case, and contrary to the reason of the thing,
has succeeded : as neither ought we in other
matters to fix our regards upon the good which
people may enjoy, or their chance successes,
out of the common course: but let us look to
the reason of the thing as it is in itself, and
see whether this thing be not fraught with
endless annoyance. Not only you bring your-
self into a disreputable position ; you also dis-
grace your children by leaving them poor, if it
chance that you depart this life before the
wife: and you give her incomparably more
occasions for connecting herself with a
second bridegroom. Or do you not see that
many women make this the excuse
for a second marriage—that they may
not be despised; that they want to
have some man to take the management of
their property? Then let us not bring about
so great evils for the sake of money; but let
us dismiss all (such aims), and seek a beauti-
ful soul, that we may also succeed in obtain-
ing love. This is the exceeding wealth, this
the great treasure, this the endless good
things: whereunto may we all attain by the
grace and loving kindness of our Lord Jesus
Christ, with Whom to the Father and the Holy
Ghost together be glory, dominion, honor, now
and ever, world without end. Amen.


PAVE Teej lye


ACTS XXIII. 31,


“ Then the soldiers, as it was commanded them, took
Paul, and brought him by night to Antipatris. On
the morrow they left the horsemen to go with him,
and returned to the castle: who, when they came
to Czsarea, and delivered the epistle to the gov-
ernor, presented Paul also before him.’’


Like some king whom his body-guards
escort, so did these convey Paul; in such
numbers too, and by night, for fear of the
wrath of the people.1. Now then you will say


1 tov Syjov THY Opyny THS Opens. “Emet ovv THs TOAEWS avTOY
é£€Badov, tote adiotavtar. So Edd. and our Mss. but Cat.
simply thy dpynv. The next sentence, if referred affirmatively
to the Jews, would be untrue, for in fact the Jews ovx aweotynoar.


251/33)


that they have got him out of the city, they
desist from their violence? No indeed. But
(the tribune) would not have sent him off with
such care for his safety, but that while he
himself had found nothing amiss in him, he
knew the murderous disposition of his adver-
saries. ‘“‘And when the governor had


Possibly the scribes took it to refer to the soldiers: but this
is very unsatisfactory. To make sense, it must be read inter-
rogatively : ‘‘ Well then, at any rate that now, they have got
him out of the city, they desist from further attempts? By no
means ; and in fact the precautions taken for his safety show
what was the tribune’s view of the matter, both that Paul was
innocent and that ¢Aey were set on murdering him.’”’ We read
adiotavTat THS Opus.


Homiy L.J THE AGTS “OF


THE ‘APOSTLES. 297


read the letter, he asked of what province
he was, And when he understood that
het) was! ore Cilicia?s# I owill) ‘hear~ ‘thee;
said he, when thine accusers are also come.”
Already Lysias has spoken for his exculpa-
tion ; (but the Jews seek to) gain the hearer
beforehand. ‘And he ordered him to be
kept in custody in Herod’s pretorium”
(v. 34, 35): again Paulis put in bonds. “And
after five days came down the high priest
Ananias with the elders.” See how for all
this they do not desist ; hindered as they were
by obstacles without number, nevertheless they
come, only to be put to shame here also.
** And with an orator, one Tertullus.”+ And
what need was there of “an orator? Which
(persons) also informed the governor against
Paul.” (c. xxiv. 1.) See how this man also
from the very outset (2) with his praises seeks
to gain the judge beforehand. ‘And when
he was called forth, Tertullus began to accuse
him, saying, Seeing that by thee we enjoy
great quietness, and that very worthy deeds
are done unto this nation by thy providence,
we accept it always, and in all places, most
noble Felix, with all thankfulness.” (v. 2, 3.)
Then as having much to say, he passes by the
rest: ‘“‘ Notwithstanding, that I be not further
tedious unto thee, I pray thee that thou
wouldest hear us of thy clemency a few words.
For we have found this man a pestilent fellow,
and a mover of sedition among all the Jews
throughout the world.” (a) Asa revolutionary
and seditious person he wishes to deliver him
up. And yet, it might be answered, it is ye
that have done this. (¢) And see how he would
put up the judge to a desire of punishing,
seeing he had here an opportunity to coerce
the man that turned the world upside down!
As if they had achieved a meritorious action,
they make much of it: ‘“ Having found this
fellow,” etc., “a mover of sedition,” say they,
“among all the Jews throughout the world.”
(Had he been such), they would have pro-
claimed him as a benefactor and saviour of
the nation!” “Anda ringleader of the sect
of the Nazarenes.” (v. 4, 5.) They thought
this likely to tell as a reproach—“ of the Naz-
arenes :” and by this also they seek to dam-


1 It has been necessary to rearrange the texts, and also to
transpose the parts mark a, J.—Kat piv wmeis, dyot tovto
memoinxate. The dyat here is hypothetical: ‘* Tertullus wishes
to arraign Paul as a seditious person. And yet, Felix might
say, it is ye Jews that have been the movers of sedition: in
these words ye describe yourselves.”—Mod, text “v. 2, 3, 4.
And yet ye have done this: then what need of an orator? See
how this man, also from the very outset wishes to deliver him
up as a revolutionary and seditious person, and with his praises
preoccupies the judge. Then as having much to Say, he passes
it by, and only says this, But that I be not further tedious
unto thee.”

2 So much was sedition to their taste, they would have been
the last to arraign him for that; on the contrary etc.—But


Mod. text as Avpe@va AouTov Kai KoLvoV €xOpoy Tov EBvoUS StaBaA- |


Aovet,


age him—for Nazareth was a mean _ place.
And, “ we have found him,” say they : see how
maliciously they calumniate him : (found him),
as if he had been always giving them the slip,
and with difficulty they had succeeded in get-
ting him: though he had been seven days in
the Temple! ‘Who also hath gone about to
profane the temple ; whom we took, [and would
have judged according to our law.”] (v, 6.)
See how they insult even the Law; it was so
like the Law, forsooth, to beat, to kill, to lie
in wait! And then the accusation against
Lysias: though he had no right, say they, to
interfere, in the excess of his confidence he
snatched him from us: [* But the tribune
Lysias came upon us, and with great violence
took him away out of our hands, commanding
his accusers to come unto thee] :* by examin-
ing of whom thyself mayest take knowledge of
all these things, where of we accusehim. And
the Jews also assented, saying that these things
were so.” (v. 7-9.) What then says Paul?
“Then Paul; after that the governor had
beckoned unto him to speak, answered, Foras-
much as I know that thou hast been of many
years a just judge unto this nation, I do the
more cheerfully answer for myself.” (Vv. 10.)
This is not the language of flattery, his testify-
ing to the judge’s justice :# no, the adulation
was rather in that speech of the orator, “ By
thee we enjoy great quietness.” If so, then
why are ye seditious? What Paul sought was
justice. “ Knowing thee to bea just judge,
I cheerfully,” says he, ‘answer for myself.”
Then also he enforces this by the length of
time: that (he had been judge) ‘of many
years. Because that thou mayest understand,
that there are yet but twelve days since I
went up to Jerusalem for to worship.” (v. 11.)
And what is this?* (It means), “that I could
not immediately have raised a commotion.”
Because the accuser had nothing to show (as
done) in Jerusalem, observe what he said :
“among all the Jews throughout the world.”
Therefore it is that Paul here forcibly attracts
him—* to worship,” he says, ‘‘ I came up,” so


3 Hence it appears that Chrys. read ov7a ge xpithy Sixacoy in
v. 10, though the old text in the citation omits the epithet,
Cat. retains it.—See p. 299, note ?.

4 As Felix had been many years a judge, he was conversant
enough with the habits of the Jews to be aware that the Pente-
cost which brought Paul to Jerusalem was but twelve days

ast: so that there had not been time to raise a commotion,

fod. text. ‘* And what did this contribute to the proof? A
great point : for he shows that Felix himself knew that Paul
had done nothing of all that he was accused of. But if he had
ever raised an insurrection, Felix would have known it, being
judge, and such an affair would not have scaped his notice.”’—
Below, 6ca rovrTo évtav@a arov EAxeL, We Suppose avTov to be
Felix: Mod. text substitutes évrev@ev adeAxwr, referring it to
the accuser. The meaning is obscure. but it seems to be,
“ draws the attention of his judge to this point,” viz., of his
having come up to worship, and therefore évdtatpiBer tovTw
7@ dixatw lays the stress upon this point, of Felix being a jus?
judge. Perhaps, however, the true reading here is t@ dexadvo,


‘of its being not more than twelve days.”
* The bracketed passage in vv. 6-80m. in A. B. G. H. 8. and
'R. V.—G. B.S.


208


THE WORKS OF (S®. CHRVSOStonE


[Homity L.


faram I from raising sedition—and lays a
stress upon this point of justice, being the
strong point. “And they neither found me
in the Temple disputing with any man, neither
raising up the people, neither in the syna-
gogues, nor in the city”’ (v. 12); which in fact
was the truth. And the accusers indeed use
the term “ ringleader,” as if it were a case of
fighting and insurrection; but see how mildly
Paul here answers. ‘“ But this I confess unto
thee, that after the way which they call heresy,*
so worship I the God of my fathers, believing
all things which are written in the Law and the
Prophets : and have hope toward God, which
they themselves also allow, that there shall be
a resurrection of the dead, both of the just and
unjust.” (v.14, 15.) The accusers were sep-
arating him (as an alien), but he indentifies
himself with the Law, as one of themselves.
“And in this,” says he, “do I exercise’ my-
self, to have always a conscience void of
offence toward God and toward men. Now
after many years I came to bring alms to my
nation, and offerings. In which they found
me purified in the temple, not with multitude,
neither with tumult.” (v. 16, 17, 18.) Why
then camest thou up? What brought thee
hither? To worship, says he; to do alms.
This was not the act of a factious person.
Then also he casts out their person :? “but,”
says he, (they that found me, were) “ certain
Jews from Asia, who ought to have been here
before thee, and object, if they had ought
against me. Or else let these same here say,
if they have found any evil doing in me while
I stood before the council, except it be for
this one voice, that I cried, standing among
them, Touching the resurrection of the dead I
am called in question by you this day.” (v.
19, 20, 21.) For. this is justification in super-
abundance, not to flee from his accusers, but
to be ready to give account to all.f “Of the


* "A.peots in v. 14 has the same meaning asinv.5. The
meaning is therefore obscured by rendering it (as A. V.) in the
former verse by ‘“‘sect’’ and in the latter by “‘ heresy.’ It is
party or sect in both cases, used as a term of reproach. Paul’s
accusers considered him a member of a sect which they con-
temptuously called the Nazarenes. In his defence he takes up
their own word.—G. B. S.

1 Eira cai exBadde avt@v To tpdawrov, rejects their person,
repudiates their pretension. They had said, ‘“‘ We found
him :’’ he answers, ‘‘ There found me, in a condition as far as
possible from that of a mover of sedition—not they, ‘but cer-
tain of the Jews from Asia.’ In the Recapitulation, he says,
xadws de ovdé rodTo exBadder referring to v. 21. Hence one
might conjecture here, eita ov« éxB., to be placed after v. 20;
but see p. 299, note §.—Mod. text é€k8. a. T. mp. Aéywv adtopiatws,
*Ev ols ebpov mé tives Tov x. 7. A. ‘* Saying indefinitely, ‘In
which there found me,’ (and then adding), ‘ certain of the Jews
from Asia,’”’

+ Vv. 5 and 6 had contained the three charges preferred by
Tertullus, viz.: sedition, sectarianism and profanation of the
temple. Paul was charged with creating disturbances among
the Jews(s). To this he replies (rr, 12), that the charge is not
sustained by facts; he worshipped in the temple, but neither
there, nor in the synagogues, nor in the city, did he create a
disturbance or gather a crowd. To the second charge that he


is a ringleader of the sect of the Nazarenes (5), Paul replies by |


conceding that he worships the God of his fathers after a way


resurrection of the dead,” says he, ‘‘ am I this
day called in question.” And not a word
said he of what he had to say, how they had
conspired against him, had violently kept him,
had laid wait for him—for these matters are
course spoken of by the tribune?—but by
Paul, though there was danger, not so: no, he
is silent, and only defends himself, though
he had very much to say. (4) “In which”?
(alms), says he, ‘‘ they found me in course of
purifying in the Temple.” Then how did he
profane it? For it was not the part of the
same man both to purify himself and worship
and come for this purpose, and then to profane
it. This has with it a surmise of the
justice of his cause, that he does not fall into
a long discourse. And he gratifies the judge,
I suppose, by that also (namely, by), making
his defence compendious: (@) seeing that
Tertullus before him did make a long har-
angue. (7) And this too is a proof of mild-
ness, that when one has much to say, in order
not to be troublesome one says but few words.
(c) But let us look again at what has been
said.


(Recapitulation.) ‘Then the soldiers,” etc.
(v. 31-33.) (a) This also made Paul famous
in Czsarea, his coming with so large a force.
—‘“ But,” says Tertullus, ‘that I be not
further tedious,” (ec) showing that (Felix) does
find him tedious (éyxdrrerat) : “1 . beseceh
thee,”’ he does not say, Hear the matter, but,
“hear us of thy’ clenteney/7-) (cha axim eae)
Probably it is to pay court, that he thus lays
out his speech. (g) “For having found this
man, a pestilent fellow, and a mover of sedi-
tion among all the Jews throughout the
world ” (v. 5): how then, it might be said, if
he did this elsewhere (and not here)? No,
says he; among us also he has profaned the
Temple; ‘ attempted,” says he, “to profane
it:’’ but the how, he leaves untold. ‘Whom


which they calla sect, but he denies that this fact involves
rejection or contempt of the law or the prophets (14). To the
third charge that he had attempted to profane the Temple (6),
he replies by alleging that he had, on the contrary, brought
offerings to the Temple service and that he had there peace-
ably taken part in the religious rites of the Nazarites (17, 18).
He concludes by insisting that his whole offence consists in
having stoutly maintained the doctrine of the resurrection of
the dead,—G. B. S.

2 Old text tavdra yap elkétTws mept exetvov A€yeTat, Tapa dé
tovtov. . . We read mapa éxetvov. in the sense, ‘** All that is to
be said on those points comes from Lysias: from Paul, not a
word.’ Mod. text tadta yap map eéxetvwy A€yetar yeverOat-
‘these things are said to have been done by those.”’

3 Here old text has the reading év ais, above it was év ois.—
Here the first Redactor has confused the matter, in conse-

uence of his supposing that at the mention of Tertullus (¢)

hrys. must have gone into the Recapitulation. Hence he
places (c) the formula aAX’ td6wuev «x. T. A. immediately before
this. Accordingly to (@) as being comment on v. 4, he joins
(e), and then supposing the émecxeias of (7) to refer to
emvetketa v. 4, he places this next. The part (4) he keeps in its
place, viz. before the Recapitulation: there remained (a), and
this he prefixes to 4, though its contents clearly show that it


| belongs to the Recapitulation of v. 31.


Homity L.]


Re AES OF THE APOSTLES, 299


also we took,” etc. “But the tribune,” etc.
And while he thus exaggerates what relates to
the tribune,’ see how he extenuates the part
of the accusers themselves. ‘* We took him,”
he says, ‘“‘and would have judged him accord-
ing to our Law.” (v. 6.) He shows that it is
a hardship to them that they have to come to
foreign tribunals, and that they would not
have troubled him had not the tribune com-
pelled them, and that he, having no concern
in the matter, had seized the man by force:
for in fact the wrongs done were against us,
and with us the tribunal ought to have been.
For that this is the meaning, see what follows:
“with great violence” (v. 7), he says. For
this conduct is violence. ‘‘ From whom thou
mayest know.” He neither dares to accuse
him (the tribune)—for the man was indulgent
(forsooth)—nor does he wholly pass it by.
Then again, lest he should seem to be lying,
he adduces Paul himself as his own accuser.
“From whom, by examining him, thou mayest
take knowledge of all these things.” (v. 8.)
Next, as witnesses also of the things spoken,
the accusers, the same persons themselves
both witnesses and accusers: ‘‘ And the Jews
also assented,” etc. (v. 9.) But Paul, “ For-
asmuch as I know that thou hast been of
many years a just judge.” (v.ao.) Why then,
he is no stranger or alien or revolutionary
person, seeing he had known the judge for
many years. And he does well to add the
epithet “just,” ? that he (Felix) might not leok
to the chief priest, nor to the people, nor the
accuser. See, how he did not let himself be
carried away into abuse, although there was
strong provocation. ‘Believing,’ he says,
“that there will be a resurrection:” now a
man who believed a resurrection, would never
have done such things—“ which” (resurrec-
tion) “they themselves also allow. (v. 15.)
He does not say it of them, that they believe
“all things written in the Prophets:” it was
he that believed them all, not they: but how
“all,” it would require a long discourse to
show. And he nowhere makes mention of
Christ. Here by saying, ‘ Believing,” he
does (virtually) introduce what relates to
Christ ; for the present he dwells on the sub-
ject of the resurrection, which doctrine was
common to them also, and removed the sus-
picion of any sedition. And for the cause of
his going up, “I came,” he says, “to bring
alms to my nation and offerings.” (v. 17.)
How then should I have troubled those, for


1 ta meév eéxetvov, evidently the tribune, but Ben. gue
Paulum quidem spectabant.—They made the most of what
the tribune had done, of their own violence they make as
little as possible.

2 See above, p. 197, note 3. The principal authorities for the
Stxacov are Laud’s Cod. Gr. and Cat. of Acts.


|
the bringing offerings to whom I had come so


“Neither with multitude,
nor with tumult.” (v. 18.) Everywhere he
does away the charge of sedition. And he
also does well to challenge his accusers who
were from Agia, ‘‘ Who ought to accuse before
thee,” etc., but he does well also not to reject
this either; * “or else,” says he, “let these same
here say. Touching the resurrection of the
dead,’ etc. (Vv. 19,:20,,20): for imfact it) was
on this account they were sore troubled from
the first, because he preached the Resurrec-
tion. This being proved, the things relating
to Christ also were easily introduced, that He
was risen. ‘‘ What evil doing,” he says, “they
found in me. In the council (ch. iv. 2) he
says: the examination not having taken place
in private. That these things which I say are
true, those witness who bring this charge
against me. ‘“ Having,” he says, “a con-
science void of offence both toward God, and
toward men.” (v.16.) This is the perfection
of virtue, when even to men we give no
handle against us, and are careful to be
void of offence with God. ‘“ That I cried,”
he says, “in the council.” He also shows
their violence.* They have it not to say,
Thou didst these things under the pretext of
alms : for (it was) “not with multitude, nor
with tumult:” especially as upon enquiry
made concerning this thing, nothing further
was found. Do you observe his moderation,
though there were dangers? do you observe
how he keeps his tongue from evil-speaking,
how he seeks only one thing, to free himself
from the charges against himself, not that he
may criminate them, except so far as he might
be obliged to do so while defending himself?
Just as Christ also said: “I have not a devil,
but I honor My Father: but ye do dishonor
Me.” (John viii. 49.)

Let us imitate him, since he also was an im-
itator of Christ. If he, with enemies, who
went even to the length of murder and
slaughter, said nothing offensive to them,
what pardon shall we deserve, who in reviling


long a journey?


3 kadas dé (B.) ovdSé ToUTO exBaddAer. i. e. but while he does
well to challenge the parties who found him viz. the Jews
from Asia, he does well also that he does not cast out or re-
pudiate this particular which he goes on to mention—viz. his
exclamation before the Sanhedrim. This may consist with
what was said above, exBadAct avtwy TO mpogwrorv: (see Pp. 207,
note !) viz. though he does this, and deprives them of the credit
they took to themselves, for it was not that they found him ;
and as to his behavior in the temple, he will not admit their tes-
timony, for they were not present: yet even these he challenges
to testify to that of which they were cognizant.—Mod. text
‘“from Asia, saying, Who ought to accuse me before thee, if
they had aught against me. So confident was he to be clear as
to the matters of which he was accused, that he even challenges
them. But not only those from Asia, nay, those also from
Jerusalem.”

4 Mod. text adds, ‘‘ by saying, "Exexpata: as much as to
say, They have it not,’ etc. But their violence was shown
not by his crying out, but by the fact that they had nothing
more against him than this exclamation.


300


and abuse become infuriated, calling our ene-
mies villains, detestable wretches ? what par-
don shall we deserve, for having enemies at
all? Hear you not, that to honor (another) is
to honor one’s self? So it is: but we disgrace
ourselves. You accuse (some @ne) that he
has abused you: then why do you bring your-
self under the same accusation? Why inflict
a blow on yourself? Keep free from passion,
keep unwounded: do not, by wishing to smite
another, bring the hurt upon yourself. What,
is the other tumult of our soul not enough for
us, the tumult that is stirred up, though there
be none to stir it up—for example, its out-
rageous lusts, its griefs and sorrows, and such
like—but we must needs heap up a pile of
others also? And how, you will say, is it
possible, when one is insulted and abused, to
bear this? And how is it not possible, I ask ?
Is a wound got from words; or do words in-
flict bruises on our bodies? Then where is
the hurt to us? So that,-if we will, we can
bear it. Let us lay down for ourselves a law
not to grieve, and we shall bear it: let us say
to ourselves, “It is not from enmity; it is
from infirmity ”’—for it is indeed owing to an
infirmity, since, for proof that it comes not
from enmity nor from malignity of disposition,
but from infirmity, the other also would fain
have restrained (his anger), although he had
suffered numberless wrongs. If we only have
this thought in our minds, that it is from in-
firmity, we shall bear it, and while we forgive
the offending person, we shall try not to fall
into it ourselves. For I ask all you who are
present: would ye have wished to be able to
exercise such a philosophic temper, as to bear
with those who insult you?? I think so.
Well, then, he insulted unwillingly; he would
rather not have done so, but he did it, forced
by his passion: refrain thyself. Do you not
see (how it is with) the demoniacs (in their
fits)? Just then as it is with them, so with
him: it is not so much from enmity, as from
infirmity (that he behaves as he does) : endure
it. And as for us—it is not so much from the
insults as they are in themselves that we are
moved, as from our own selves: else how is it
that when madmen offer us the same insults,
we bear it? Again, if those who insult us be


1 Old text dpa av nbeAnoate ovTw hirogodery Sivacbar—; Mod.
text dpa av ovTw didogodety SvvnoGe—; and so Ben. a ainst
grammar and the sense. Savile and Ed. Par. Ben. 2, apa av
é€OeAnonre,..... évvac6e; But our Mss. give it as above:
and Savile’s reading does not suit the sense: which is,
** Would not you have wished—? Well, then, so would he.”
Below, aomep ovv exetvos ovK (B., exetvous and om. ovK) amo
€x9pas TOTOUTOV, Ogov aro daevetas, TOUTO Umomevet* ovTw kal
nmecs ovUK amo THs digEews TOV VBpEewY KLvoUMEba, OoOV ad HuaoV
avtwv. The scribes have made nonsense of the passage, and
the Edd. retain it. If for vrouever we read imopeve, this will
answer to EMLOXES in the Preceding sentence : to TOUTO we
supply _Taoxel: SO we read, oorep ob EKELVOL, ovTw Kal oUTOS OUK
470 €, OTOV amo agO, TOUTO TagKeEL* UTOMEVE. Kai yuets etc.


THE: WORKS OF ST:°CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homity L.


our friends, in that case too we bear it: or
also our superiors, in that case also we bear
it: how then is it not absurd, that in the case
of these three, friends, madmen, and superi-
ors, we bear it, but where they are of the
same rank or our inferiors, we do not bear it ?
I have oftentimes said: It is but an impulse of
the moment, something that hurries us away
on the sudden: let us endure it for a little,
and we shall bear the whole thing. The
greater the insults, the more weak the offender.
Do you know when it behooves us to grieve?
When we have insulted another, and he keeps
silence: for then he is strong, and we weak:
but if the contrary be the case, you must even
rejoice : you are crowned, you are proclaimed
conqueror, without having even entered into
the contest, without having borne the annoy-
ance of sun, and heat, and dust, without hav-
ing erappled with an antagonist and let him
close with you; nothing but a mere wish on
your part, sitting or standing, and you have
got a mighty crown: a crown far greater than
those (combatants earn): for to throw an en-
emy standing to the encounter, is nothing like
so great as to overcome the darts of anger.
You have conquered, without having even let
him close with you, you have thrown down
the passion that was in you, have slain the
beast that was roused, have quelled the anger
that was raging, like some excellent herds-
man. ‘The fight was like to have been an in-
testine one, the war a civil war. For, as
those who sit down to besiege from without
(endeavor to), embroil (the besieged) in civil
discords, and then overcome them; so he that
insults, unless he rouse the passion within us,
will not be able to overcome us: unless we
kindle the flame in ourselves, he has no
power. Let the spark of anger be within us,
so as to be ready for lighting at the right mo-
ment, not against ourselves, nor so as to in-
volve us in numberless evils. See ye not how
the fire in houses is kept apart, and not
thrown about at random everywhere, neither
among straw, nor among the linen, nor just
where it may chance, that so there may
not be danger, if a wind blow on it, of its
kindling a flame: but whether a maid-servant
have a lamp, or the cook light a fire, there is
many an injunction given, not to do this in
the draught of the wind, nor near a wooden
panel, nor in the night-time: but when the
night has come on, we extinguish the fire,
fearing lest perchance while we are asleep
and there is none to help, it set fire, and burn
us all. Let this also be done with regard to
anger; let it not be scattered everywhere up
and down in our thoughts, but let it be in
some deep recess of the mind, that the wind


Homity L.] fee ACTA COM


THE APGSVLES: 301


arising from the words of him who is opposing
us may not easily reach to it, but that it
receive the wind (which is to rouse it) from
ourselves, who know how to rouse it in due
measure and with safety. If it receive the
wind from without, it knows no moderation ; it
will set everything on fire: oftentimes when
we are asleep this wind will come upon it,
and will burn up all. Let it therefore be
with us (in safe keeping) in such sort as only
to kindle a light : for anger does kindle a light
when it is managed as it ought to be: and let
us have torches against those who wrong
others, against the devil. Let not the spark
lie anywhere as it may chance, nor be thrown
about; let us keep it safe under ashes: in
lowly thoughts let us keep it slumbering.
We do not want it at all times, but when there
is need to subdue and to make _ tender,
to mollify obduracy, and convict the soul.
What evils have angry and wrathful passions
wrought! And what makes it grievous indeed
is, that when we have parted asunder, we
have no longer the power to come together
again, but we wait for others (to do this) : each
is ashamed, and blushes to come back him-
self and reconcile the other. See, he is not
ashamed to part asunder and to be separated ;
no, he takes the lead as author of the evil:
but to come forward and patch that which is
rent, this he is ashamed to do: and the case is
just the same, as if a man should not shrink
from cutting off a limb, but should be ashamed
to join it together again. What sayest thou,
Oman? Hast thou committed great injuries,
and thyself been the cause of the quarrel?
Why, then, thou wouldest justly be the first to
go and be reconciled, as having thyself fur-
nished the cause. But he did the wrong, he is
the cause of the enmity? Why then, for this
reason also thou must do it, that men may the
more admire thee, that in addition to the
former, thou mayest get the first prize in the
latter also: as thou wast not the cause of the
enmity, so neither of its being extended fur-
ther, Perhaps also the other, as conscious
within himself of numberless evils, is ashamed
and blushes. But he is haughty ? On this
account above all, do not thou hesitate to run
and meet him: for if the ailment in him be
twofold, both haughtiness and anger, in this
thou hast mentioned the very reason why
thou oughtest to be the first to go to him, thou
that art the one in sound health, the one who
is able to see: as for him, he is in darkness:
for such is anger and false pride. But do
thou, who art free from these and in sound
health, go to him—thou the physician, go to
the sick. Does any of the physicians say,


Because such an one is sick, I do not go to!


him? No, this is the very reason above all
why they do go, when they see that he is not
able to come to them. For of those who are
able (to come) they think less, as of persons
not extremely ill, but not so of those who lie
at home sick. Or are not pride and anger,
think you, worse than any illness? is not the
one like a sharp fever, the other like a body
swollen with inflammation? Think what a
thing it is to have a fever and inflammation :
go to him, extinguish the fire, for by the
grace of God thou canst: go, assuage the
heat as it were with water. “ But,” you will
say, “how if he is only the more set up by my
doing this very thing?” This is nothing to
thee: thou hast done thy part, let him take
account for himself: let not our conscience
condemn us, that this thing happens in con-
sequence of any omission of what ought to
have been done on our part. ‘In so doing,”
says the Scripture, ‘thou shalt heap coals of
fire on his head.”’ (Rom. xii. 20, cf. Hom. in
Z, xxii. § 3.) And yet, for all that this is the
consequence, it bids us go and be reconciled
and do good offices—not that we may heap
coals of fire, but that (our enemy) knowing
that future consequence,’ may be assuaged by
the present kindness, that he may tremble,
that he may fear our good offices rather than
our hostilities, and our friendships rather
than our ill designs. For one does not so
hurt his hater by showing his resentment as an
enemy, as by doing him good and showing
kindness. For by his resentment, he has
hurt both himself and perhaps the other also
in some little degree: but by doing good
offices, he has heaped coals of fire on his
head. “Why then,” you will say, “for fear
of thus heaping coals one ought not to do
this (4) but to carry on the enmity to greater
lengths.” By no means: it is not you that
cause this, but he with his brutish disposition,
For if, when you are doing him good, and
honoring him, and offering to be reconciled,
he persists in keeping up the enmity, it is he
has kindled the fire for himself, he has set his
own head on fire; you are guiltless. Do not
want to be more merciful than God (4), or
rather, if you wish it, you will not be able,
not even in the least degree. How should
you? “As far as the heaven is from the
earth,” Scripture says, ‘“‘so far are My coun-
sels from your counsels” (Isa. xlv. 8): and
again, “If ye,” He says, “being evil, know
how to give good gifts unto your children,
how much more your heavenly Father” (Matt.


1B. C. twa eidws éexetvo (mod. text éxetvos) tovTo (we read
TovTw) katacTéAAntat. Here, as often, éxetvo refers to the other
world, rovro to this life : ‘* knowing what will come of it there,
(i. e. the coals of fire) he may,”’ etc.


THE’ WORKS: GF


302


ST. .CHRYSOSTG@M,


[Homity LI.


But in fact this talk is mere pretext
Let us not prevaricate with
God’s commandments. ‘And how do we
prevaricate,” you will say? He has said, “In
so doing, thou wilt heap coals of fire on his
head:” and you say, I do not like to do this.
(a) But are you willing to heap coals after
another fashion, that is upon your own head ?
For in fact this is what resentment does: (c)
since you shall suffer evils without number.
(ec) You say, “I am afraid for my enemy, be-
cause he has done me great injuries:” in
reality is it this you say? But how came
you to have an enemy? But how came you to
hate your enemy? You fear for him that has
injured you, but do you not fear yourself ?
Would that you had a care for yourself! Do
not act (the kindness) with such an aim as
this: or rather do it, though it be but with
such an aim. But you do it not at all. I say
not to you, “thou wilt heap coals of fire: ”’ no,
I say another and a greater thing: only do it.
For Paul says this only by way of summoning
thee (if only), in hope of the vengeance, to
put an end to the enmity. Because we are
savage as wild beasts in disposition, and would
not otherwise endure to love our enemy, unless
we expected some revenge, he offers this as a
cake, so to say, to a wild beast. For to the
Apostles (the Lord) says not this, but what
says He? “That ye may be like to your
Father which is in heaven.” (Matt. v. 45.)


vii. 11)?
and subterfuge.


And besides, it is not possible that the bene-
factor and the benefited should remain in
enmity. This is why Paul has put it in this
way. Why, affecting a high and generous
principle in thy words, why in thy deeds dost
thou not even observe (common) moderation ?
(It sounds) well; thou dost not feed him, for
fear of thereby heaping upon him coals of
fire: well then, thou sparest him? well then,
thou lovest him, thou actest with this object
in view? God knows, whether thou hast this
ojbect in so speaking, and are not? palming
this talk upon us as a mere pretence and sub-
terfuge. ‘Thou hast a care for thine enemy,
thou fearest lest he be punished, then would-
est thou not have extinguished thine anger?
For he that loves to that degree that he over-
looks his own interest for the sake of the
other’s advantage, that man has no enemy.
(Then indeed) thou mightest say this. How
long shall we trifle in matters that are not to
be trifled with, and that admit of no
excuse ? Wherefore I beseech you, let us
cut off these pretexts;. let us not despise
God’s laws: that we may be enabled with
well-pleasing to the Lord to pass this life
present, and attain unto the good things pro-
mised, through the grace and mercy of our
Lord Jesus Christ, with Whom to the Father
and the Holy Ghost together be glory, might,
honor, now and ever, world without end.
Amen.


SUC) isk aes A be


INCAS PXOXGL =. 22,22;


“And when Felix heard these things, having more
perfect knowledge of that way, he deferred them,
and said, When Lysias the tribune shall come
down, I will know the uttermost of your matter.
And he commanded a centurion to keep Paul, and
to let him have liberty, and that he should forbid
none of his acquaintance to minister or come unto
him.”


SEE how much close investigation is made
by the many in a long course of time, that it
should not be said that the trial was hurried
over. For, as the orator had made mention
of Lysias, that he took “him away with vio-
lence, Felix,” he says, “deferred them. Hav-
ing knowledge of that way:” that is, he put
them off on purpose: not because he wanted
to learn, but as wishing to get rid of the Jews.
On their account, he did not like to let him


2 kaiwn... Modtext cai wyyv ... ‘And yet thou art,” etc.


go: to punish him was not possible; that
would have been (too) barefaced. ‘“ And to
let him have liberty,* and to forbid none of
his acquaintance to minister to him.” So
entirely did he too acquit him of the charges,
Howbeit, to gratify them, he detained him,
and besides, expecting to receive money, he
called for Paul. “And after certain days,
when Felix came with his wife Drusilla, which
was a Jewess, he sent for Paul, and heard him


a


* "Aveots is better rendered ‘relaxation’ or “indulgence”
(R. V.) than “liberty” (A. V.). Meyer understands by this
that he was to be allowed ves/, ‘‘to be spared all annoyance.”
Others (DeWette, Lange) suppose aveors to refer to release
from chains, the so-called custodia dibera of the Romans in
which the prisoner went free on bail or upon the responsibility
of some magistrate. This view is, however, inconsistent with
the fact that Felix committed Paul to the keeping of a cen-
turion (23) as well as with his leaving Paul bound (27). The
custody was doubtless the custodia mniilitaris and aveows de-
notes the relaxation of the rigors of his imprisonment.—G.B.S.


Homity LI.]


THE’ ACTS -OF THE APOSTLES.


393


concerning the faith in Christ. And as he
reasoned of righteousness, temperance (i. e.
self-control or chastity), and judgment to
come, Felix trembled, and answered, Go thy
way for this time; when I have a convenient
season, I will call for thee. He hoped also
that money should have been given him of
Paul, that he might loose him; wherefore he
sent for him the oftener, and communed with
him. But after two years Porcius Festus
came into Felix’s room: and Felix, willing to
show the Jews a pleasure, left Paul bound.”
(v. 24-27.) See how close to the truth are the
things written. But he sent for him fre-
quently, not that he admired him, nor that he
praised the things spoken, nor that he
wished to believe, but why? ‘‘ Expecting,” it
says, “that money should have been given
him.”’ Observe how he does not hide here
the mind of the judge. “Wherefore he sent
for him,” etc. And yet if he had condemned
him, he would not have done this, nor have
wished to hear a man, condemned and of evil
character. And observe Paul, how, though rea-
soning with a ruler, he says nothing of the sort
that was likely to amuse and entertain, but (“‘he
reasoned,” it says,) “of righteousness, and of
the coming judgment,” and of the resurrection.
And such was the force of his words, that they
even terrified the governor.* This man is
succeeded in his office by another, and he
leaves Paul a prisoner: and yet he ought not
to have done this; he ought to have put an
end to the business: but he leaves him, by
way of gratifying them. They however were
so urgent, that they again besought the judge.
Yet against none of the Apostles had they set
themselves thus pertinaciously; there, when
they had attacked, anon they desisted. So
providentially is he removed from Jerusalem,
having to do with such wild beasts. And
they nevertheless request that he might be
brought again there to be tried. ‘* Now when
Festus was come into the province, after three
days he ascended from Ceesarea to Jerusalem.
Then the high priest and the chief of the
Jews informed him against Paul, and_be-
sought him, and desired favor against him,
that he would send for him to Jerusalem,
laying wait in the way to kill him.” (ch. xxv.
1-3.) Here now God’s providence inter-
posed, not permitting the governor to do this:
for it was natural that he having just come to


* Paul’s reasoning ‘‘ concerning righteousness ”’ was directed
against the well-known injustice of a prince of whom Tacitus
says that he acted as if there were no penalty for villainy.
His reasoning ‘concerning self-control’? (é€xpareta) was in
Opposition to his sensuality. He had unlawfully married
Drusilla who was the wife of Azizus, the king of Emesa (Jos.
Ant. xx. 7,2). His references to the judgment to come might
well have been directed against the governor’s murder of
Jonathan, the high priest.—G. B. S.


the government would wish to gratify them:
but God suffered him not, ‘But Festus an-
swered, that Paul should be kept at Caesarea,
and that he himself would depart shortly
thither. Let them therefore, said he, which
among you are able, go down with me, and
accuse this man, if there be any wickedness
in him. And when he had tarried among
them more than ten days, he went down unto


Czsarea; and the next day sitting on the
judgment seat commanded Paul to be
brought.” (v. 4-6.) But after they came


down, they forthwith made their accusations
shamelessly and with* more vehemence: and
not having been able to convict him on
grounds relating to the Law, they again
according to their custom stirred the question
about Cesar, being just what they did in
Christ’s case. For that they had recourse to
this is manifest by the fact, that Paul defends
himself on the score of offences against Caesar.
“And when he was come, the Jews which
came down from Jerusalem stood round about,
and laid many and grievous complaints against
Paul, which they could not prove. While he
answered for himself, Neither against the law
of the Jews, neither against the temple, nor
yet against Cesar, have I offended anything
at all. But Festus, willing to do the Jews a
pleasure, answered Paul, and said, Wilt thou
go up to Jerusalem, and there be judged of
these things before me”? (v. 7-9.) Where-
fore he too gratifies the Jews, the whole
people, and the city. Such being the case,
Paul terrifies him also, using a human weapon
for his defence. ““ Then said Paul, I stand at
Cesar’s judgment seat, where I ought to be
judged; to the Jews have I done no wrong, as
thou very well knowest. For if I be an
offender, or have committed anything worthy
of death, I refuse not to die: but if there be
none of these things whereof these accuse me,
no man may deliver me unto them. I appeal
unto Cesar.” (vy. 10-11.) Some one might
say, How is it, that having been told, “Thou
must also bear witness of Me in Rome,” (ch.
xxiii, 11), he, as if unbelieving, did this?
God forbid: nay, he did it, because he so
strongly believed. For it would have been a
tempting of God to be bold on account of that
declaration, and to cast himself into number-
less dangers, and to say: “Let us see if God
is able even thus to deliver me.” But not so
does Paul; no, he does his part, all that in
him lies, committing the whole to God.
Quietly also he reproves the governor: for,
“Tf, says he, I am an offender, thou doest
well: but if not, why dost thou give me up?”
‘‘No man,” he says, “may sacrifice me.” He
put him in fear, so that even if he wished, he


304.


THE! WORKS OF ST: CHka Osi Gir


[Homi Ly LI.


could not sacrifice him to them; while also as
an excuse to them he had Paul’s appeal to
allege. ‘Then Festus, when he had con-
ferred with the council, answered, Hast thou
appealed unto Caesar? unto Caesar shalt thou
go. And after certain days king Agrippa and
Bernice came unto Cesarea to salute Festus.”
(v. 12, 13.) Observe, he communicates the
matter to Agrippa, so that there should be
other hearers once more, both the king, and
the army, and Bernice. Thereupon a speech
in his exculpation. “And when they had
been there many days, Festus declared Paul’s
cause unto the king, saying, There is a certain
man left in bonds by Felix: about whom,
when I was at Jerusalem, the chief priests and
the elders of the Jews informed me, desiring
to have judgment against him. To whom I
answered, It is not the manner of the Romans
to deliver any man to die, before that he
which is accused have the accusers face to
face, and have license to answer for himself
concerning the crime laid against him.
Therefore, when they were come hither, with-
out any delay on the morrow I sat on the
judgment seat, and commanded the man to
be brought forth. Against whom when the
accusers stood up, they brought none accusa-
tion of such things as I supposed: but had
certain questions against him of their own
superstition, and of one Jesus, which was
dead, whom Paul affirmed to be alive. And
because I doubted of such manner of ques-
tions, I asked him whether be would go to
Jerusalem, and there be judged of these
matters. But when Paul had appealed to be
reserved unto the hearing of Augustus, I
commanded him to be kept till I might send
him to Cassar. Then Agrippa said unto Fes-
tus, I would also hear the man myself. To-
morrow, said he, thou shalt hear him.” (v.
14-22.) And observe a. crimination of the
Jews, not from Paul, but also from the govern-
or. “ Desiring,” he says, “to have judgment
against him.” To whom [f[ said, to their
shame, that “it is not the manner of the
Romans,” before giving an opportunity to
speak for himself, “to sacrifice a man.” But
I did give him (such opportunity), and I
found no fault in him. ‘“ Because I doubted,”’
says he, of “such manner of questions: he
casts a veil also over his own wrong. Then
the other desires tosee him. (4) But let us
look again at what has been said.?


(Recapitulation.) ‘ And when Felix,” etc.


1 This formula is placed by C and mod. text just before the
text ‘‘ Go thy way,” etc., v. 25, as if what is said of the wife
also hearing, etc., related to the hearing before Agrippa and
his wife Bernice.


(v. 22.) Observe on all occasions how the
governors try to keep off from themselves the
annoyance of the Jews, and are often com-
pelled to act contrary to justice, and seek
pretexts for deferring: for of course it was
not from ignorance that he deferred the cause,
but knowing it. And his wife also hears,
together with the governor. (v. 24.) This
seems to me to show great honor. For he
would not have brought his wife to be present
with him at the hearing, but that he thought
great things of him. . It seems to me that she
also longed for this. And observe how Paul
immediately discourses not only about faith, nor
about remission of sins, but also about prac-
tical points of duty. ‘‘ Go thy way,” he says,
“for this time: when I have a convenient
season, I will call for thee.” (v. 25.) Observe
his hardness of heart: hearing such things,
“he hoped that he should receive money from
him!” (v. 26.) And not only so, but even
after conversing with him—for it was towards
the end of his government—he left him
bound, “ willing to show the Jews a pleasure ”
(v. 27): so that he not only coveted money,
but also glory. How, O wretch, canst thou
look for money from a man who preaches the
contrary? J5ut that he did not get it, is evi-
dent from his leaving him bound; he would.
have loosed him, had he received it. ‘‘ Of tem-
perance,” it says, he reasoned; but the other
was hankering to receive money from him who
discoursed these things! And to ask indeed
he did not dare: for such is wickedness: but
he hoped it. “And when two years were
completed,” etc., so that it was but natural
that he showed them a pleasure, as he had
been so long governor there. ‘‘ Now when
Festus was come into the province,” etc.
(ch. xxv. 1, 2.) At the very beginning, the
priests came to him, who would not have hesi-
tated to go even to Caesarea, unless he had
been seen immediately coming up, since im-
mediately on his arrival they come to him.
And he spends ten days, in order, I suppose,
to be open to those who wished to corrupt
him with bribes. But Paul was in the prison.
“They besought him,” it says, ‘“ that he would
send for him:” why did they desire it as a
favor, if he was deserving of death? But thus
their plotting became evident even to him, so
that discoursing of it (to Agrippa), he says,
“desiring to have judgment against him.”
They wanted to induce him to pass sentence
now immediately, being afraid of Paul’s tongue.
What are ye afraid of? What are ye in


2 Mod. text ‘ And having gone down in Czsarea, he spends
ten days.’’ Which is evidently false, but so Edd. have it.—
wate eyyevérbar, seemingly, ** to give them an opportunity of
buying him.”’ Fen., wt prostaret ets gut. vellent ipsum cor-
rumpere.


Homizy LI.]


tre Aes OF THE. APOSsrLeEs. 305


such a hurry? In fact, that expression, “ that
he should be kept ’’! (v. 4), shows this. Does
he want to escape? “Let them therefore,”
he says, “which among you are able, accuse
him.” (v. 5.) Again accusers, again at
Cesarea, again Paul is brought forth. And
having come, immediately “he sat on the
judgment-seat”” (v. 6); with all his haste:
they so drove, so hurried him. While as yet
he had not got acquainted with the Jews, nor
experienced the honor paid to him by them, he
answered rightly: but now that he had been
in Jerusalem ten days, he too wants to pleas-
ure them (by sacrificing Paul to them): then,
also to deceive Paul, ‘ Wilt thou,” says he,
“be judged there of these things by me?”
(v.9.) Iam not giving thee up to them—but
this was the fact—and he leaves the point to
‘his own choice, that by this mark of respect
he might get him to yield: since his was
the sentence,” and it would have been too
barefaced, when he had been convicted of
nothing here, to take him back thither. ‘ But
Paul said, At Czesar’s tribunal am I standing,”
etc. (v. 10): he did not say, I will not, lest
he should make the judge more vehement, but
(here) again is his great boldness: They cast
me out once for all, themselves, and by this
they think to condemn me, by their showing
that I have offended against Cesar: at his
bar I choose to be judged, at the bar of the
injured person himself. ‘‘To the Jews have
I done no wrong, as thou also very well
knowest.” Here now he reproved him, that
he too wished to sacrifice him to the Jews:
then, on the other hand, he relaxes (the stern-
ness of) his speech: “ifthen I be an offender,
or have committed anything worthy of death,
I refuse not to die.” I utter sentence against
myself. For along with boldness of speech
there must be also justness of cause, so as to
abash (the hearer). ‘“ But if there be nothing
in the things whereof these accuse me, no
man ”—however he may wish it—‘‘no man
may sacrifice me to please them.” He said,
not, Iam not worthy of death, nor, I am worthy
to be acquitted, but, Iam ready to take my
trial before Cesar. At the same time too,
remembering the dream, he was the more
confident to appeal. (ch. xxili. 11.) And he


1 70, ‘‘ pvAdtrecOar;”’ this seems to refer to xxiii. 35: in v. 4,
the expression is typeta@ar. Perhaps Chrys. said, ‘‘ He was
safe in custody, for Felix had ordered him vAartea@a, and
there he was still. Then what needs this fresh order that he
should typeto@ac? Heis not attempting to escape, is he? It
shows the spirit of the governor: ‘we have him safe; come
down and accuse him.’ ”’ ;

2 érerdy Hv Kai y amddacis. Mod. text and Sav. omit the «ai,
Ben, éredy et hv aropacts, with no authority of Mss. We have
marked the clause as corrupt. Possibly, xaAn mpodaais is
latent in the words, with the sense ‘“‘since some handsome

retext was necessary ’’ (or the like): or, perhaps, erecdy Kai
gapos| Hv » amddacis, as comment upon the clause, "Emi tov
Byuatos Katcapos cotws cine.


20


said not, Thou (mayest not), but, neither any
other man may sacrifice me, that it might be
noaffronttohim. ‘Then Festus, when he had
conferred with the council ”—do you observe
how he seeks to gratify them? for this is favor
—‘ having conferred,” it says, ‘‘ with the coun-
cil, he said, Hast thou appealed unto Cesar?
unto Caesar shalt thou go.” (v. 12.) See how
his trial is again lengthened out, and how
the plot against him becomes an océasion for
the preaching: so that with ease and in safe
custody he should be taken away to Rome, *
with none to plot evil against him: for it was
not the same thing his simply coming there,
and his coming on such a cause. For, in fact
this was what made the Jews come together
there. (ch. xxviii. 17.) Then again, some
time passes while he tarries at Jerusalem, that
you may learn, that, though some time passed,
the evil design against him prevails nothing,
God not permitting it. But this king Agrippa,
who was also a Herod, was a different Agrip-
pa, after him of James’ time, so that this is
the fourth (Herod). See how his enemies
cooperate with him against their will. To
make the audience large, Agrippa falls into a
desire of hearing: and he does not simply
hear, but with much parade. And see what a
vindication (azojvyiav)! So writes Festus, $
and the ruthlessness of the Jews is openly
made a show of : for when it is the governor
that says these things, he is a witness above
all suspicion : so that the Jews are condemned
by him also. For, when all had pronounced
sentence against them, then, and not sooner,
God brings upon them the punishment. But
observe: Lysias gave it against them, Felix
against them, Festus against them—although
he wished to gratify them°—Agrippa against
them. What further? The Pharisees—even
they gave it against themselves. No evil, says
Festus, “‘of such things as I supposed: no
accusation did they bring against him.” (v.
18.) And yet they did bring it: true, but they
did not prove it: for their evil design and
daring plot against him gave cause to surmise
this, but the examination brought out noth-
ing of the kind. “ And of one Jesus,” he says,
‘‘ which was dead.” (v. 19.) He says natur-
ally enough, “of one’’ (Jesus), as being a
man in office, and not caring for these things.


3 eis Ta "IepogoAvpa all our Mss., and so Edd. without re-
mark. Yet the sense plainly requires eis ‘Pwuny, and in fact
the Catena has preserved the true reading. In the next sen-
tence, he seems to be commenting upon the mActovs nuépas of
v. 14 to this effect: ‘‘ See how his cause _is lengthened out by
all these delays: the time (ten days) of Festus’ stay at Jerusa-
lem ; then the second hearing ; now again, wAetous nmépas: but
for all this, his enemies are not able to effect their design.


4 Alluding to v. 26, 27 (which mod. text inserts here): i. e.
‘to this same effect Festus also writes, in his report to the
Emperor.”


5 For xai ot xaptCouevor avtois, Mss. and Edd. we restore
from the Catena xairou xapiCouevos avrTots.


306


THE WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM


[Homity LI.


“ And not knowing, for my part, what to make
of the enquiry concerning these things” (v.
20)—of course, it went beyond a judge’s
hearing, the examining into these matters. If
thou art ata loss, why dost thou drag him to
Jerusalem ? But the other would not deign
tis: no, “To Czsar”” (Says -he)i; as-im fact
it was touching Cesar that they accused him.
Do you hear the appeal? hear the plotting of
the Jews? hear their factious spirit? All
these things provoked him to a desire (of hear-
ing him): and he gives them the gratification,
and Paul becomes more renowned. For such,
as I said, are the ill designs (of enemies).
Had not these things been so, none of these
rulers would have deigned to hear him, none
would have heard with such quietness and
silence. And he seems indeed to be teaching,
he seems to be making a defence; but he
rather makes a public harangue with much
orderliness. Then let us not think that ill
designs against us are a grievous thing.
So long as we do not make ill designs
against ourselves, no one will be able
to have ill designs against us: or rather,
people may do this, but they do us no hurt;
nay, even benefit us in the highest degree : for
it rests with ourselves, whether we shall
suffer evil, or not suffer evil. Lo! L testify,
and proclaim with a loud voice, more piercing
even than the sound of a trumpet—and were
it possible to ascend on high and cry aloud, I
would not shrink from doing it—him that is a
Christian, none of all the human beings that
inhabit the earth will have power to hurt.
And why do I say, human beings? Not even
the Evil Spirit himself, the tyrant, the Devil,
can do this, unless the man injure himself ; be
what it may that any one works, in vain he
works it. For even as no human being could
hurt an angel, if he were on earth, so neither
can one human being hurt another human be-
ing. But neither again will he himself be able
to hurt another, solong as he is good. What
then can be equal to this, when neither to be
hurt is possible, nor to hurt another? For
this thing is not less than the former, the not
wishing to hurt another. Why, that man is a
kind of angel, yea, like God. For such is God;
only, He indeed (is such) by nature, but this
man, by moral choice: neither to be hurt is
possible (for either), nor to hurtanother. But
this thing, this “ not possible,’ think not that
it is for any want of power—for the contrary
to this is want of power—no, I speak of
the morally incompatible (rd dvevdexréy). For
the (Divine) Nature is neither Itself suscep-
tible of hurt, nor capable of hurting another:
since this very thing in itself is a hurt. For
in no other way do we hurt ourselves, than by


hurting another, and our greatest sins become
such from our doing injury to ourselves. So
that for this reason also the Christian cannot
be hurt, namely, because neither can he hurt.
But how in hurting others we hurt ourselves,
come, let us take this saying in hand for exam-
ination in detail. Let a man wrong another,
insult, overreach ; whom then has he hurt ? is
it not himself first? This is plain to every one.
For to the one, the damage is in money, to
himself, it is in the soul; to destruction, and
to punishment. Again, let another be envious:
is it not himself he has injured? For such is
the nature of injustice : to its own author first
it does incalculable hurt. ‘‘ Yes, but to
another also?” ‘True, but nothing worth con-
sidering : or rather, not even a little—nay, it
even benefits him. For let there be,—as the
whole matter lies most in these examples,—let
there be some poor man, having but little pro-
perty and (barely) provided with necessary
food, ? and another rich and wealthy, and hay-
ing much power, and then let him take the poor
man’s property, and strip him naked, and give
him up to starvation, while he shall luxuriate
in what he has unjustly taken from the other :
not only has he not hurt that man at all—he
has even benefited him, while himself he has
not only not benefited, but even hurt.
how should it be otherwise? In the first
place, harassed by an evil conscience, and day
by day condemning himself and being con-
demned by all men: and then, secondly, in
the judgment to come. But the other, how is
he benefited? Because to suffer ill and bear
it nobly, is great gain: for it is a doing away
of sins, this suffering of ill, it is a training to
philosophy, it is a discipline of virtue. Let us
see which of the two is in evil case, this man
or that. For the one, if he be a man of
well-ordered mind, will bear it nobly : the other
will be every day in a constant tremor and
misgiving : which then is hurt, this man or
that? ‘ You talk idly,” say you: “ for when
a man has nothing to eat, and is forced to
bewail himself and to feel himself very
wretched, or comes and begs, and gets nothing,
is not that a ruining of both soul and body ?”
No, it is you that talk idly: for I show facts in
proof. For say, does none of the rich feel
himself wretched ? What then? Is poverty
the cause of hiswretchedness? ‘“‘ But he does
not starve.” And what ofthat? The greater
is the punishment, when having riches he does
1’AAAG Kai Erepov: GAA’ ovdev agiomictov- maddAov dé ovde
pxpov, adAAa Kat whdAec. So B. C.; in A. all this is omitted,
Mod. text—‘‘incalculable mischief, but little to another, or
rather not even a little does it hurt, nay even benefits. But I
have said nothing worthy of belief aad’ ovdév aftomarov cipyxa.
Well then, let there be,” etc.
xXpjwata Exwy OAlya Kal THS avaykalas EVTOPaY Tpodys, ETEPOS


5& mAovatos Kai eUmopos. So the Mss. and Edd. without com-
ment. We assume it to be amopwr.


For —


Homi.y LI.] THE


AGS? OF
this. For neither does wealth make a man
strong-minded, nor poverty make him weak :
otherwise none of. those living in wealth would
pass a wretched life, nor would any of those in
poverty (not) curse his fate. But that yours
is indeed the idle talk, I will make manifest to
you from hence. Was Paul in poverty or in
wealth ? did he suffer hunger, or did he not?
You may hear himself saying, “ In hunger and
thirst.” (2 Cor. xi. 27.) Did the prophets
suffer hunger, or did they not? They too
had a hard time of it. ‘“ Again, you fetch up
Paul to me, again the prophets, some ten or
twenty men.” But whence shall I bring
examples? ‘Show me from the many some
who bear ills nobly.” But? the rare is ever
such: however, if you will, let us examine the
matter as it is in itself. Let us see whose is
the greater and sharper care, whose the more
easy to be borne. The one is solicitous about
his necessary food, the other about numberless
matters, freed from that care. The rich man
is not afraid on the score of hunger, but he is
afraid about other things: oftentimes for his
very life. The poor man is not free from anx-
iety about food, but he is free from other anx-
ieties, he has safety, has quietness, has security.

If to injure another is not an evil, but a
good, wherefore are we ashamed? wherefore
do we cover our faces? Wherefore, being
reproached, are we vexed and disconcerted ?
If the being injured is not a good thing,
wherefore do we pride ourselves, and glory
in the thing, and justify ourselves on its
account? Would you learn how this is better
than that? Observe those who are in the
one condition, and those who are in the other.
Wherefore are laws? Wherefore are courts
of justice? Wherefore punishments? Is it
not, on account of those men, as being dis-
eased and unsound? But the pleasure lies
great, you will say. Let us not speak of the
future: let us look into the present. What is
worse than aman who is under such a sus-
picion as this? what more precarious? what
more unsound ? is he not always in a state of
shipwreck? Even if he do any just thing, he
is not credited, condemned as he is by all on
account of his power (of injuring): for in all
who dwell with him he has accusers: he
cannot enjoy friendship: for none would
readily choose to become the friend of a man
who has such a character, for fear of becom-
ing implicated with him in the opinion held of
him. As if he were a wild beast, all men
turn away from him; as from a pest, a foe, a
man-slayer, and an enemy of nature, so they
shrink from the unjust man. If he who has
wronged another happen to be brought into a


1 “AAAG TO oTmavioy aei TorovTov. One would expect "AAAG


o7aviov aet TO TOLOUTOY.— Mod. text adds, Kai OAcyot of KaAot.


THE <AROsGE ES:


307


court of justice, he does not even need an
accuser, his character condemns him in place
of any accuser. Not so he who is injured ;
he has all men to take his part, to condole
with him, to stretch out the hand of help: he
stands on safe ground. If to injure another
be a good and a safe thing, let any one con-
fess that he is unjust: but if he dares not do
this, why then does he pursue it as a good
thing? But let us see in our own persons, if
oa same be done there, what evils come of

: (I mean,) if any of the parts or functions
ae us having overstepped its proper
bounds, grasp at the office of some other.
For let the spleen, if it will, have left its
proper place, and seize on the part belonging
to some other organ along with its own, is not
this disease? The moisture within us, let it
fill every place, is it not dropsy and gout ?* is
not this to ruin itself, along with the other?
Again, let the bile seek for a wide room, and
let the blood be diffused throughout every
part. But how is it in the soul with anger,
lust, and all the rest, if the food exceed its
proper measure? Again in the body, if the
eye wish to take in more, or to see more than
is allotted to it, or admit a greater light than
is proper. But if, when the light is good, yet
the eye is ruined, if it choose to see more
than is right : consider what it must be in the
case of an evil thing. If the ear take ina
(too) loud voice, the sense is stunned: the
mind, if it reason about things above itself, it
is overpowered: and whatever is in excess,
mars all. For this is zieovegia, the wanting to
have more than what is marked off and
allotted. So teo in respect of money; when
we will needs put upon (us) more burdens
(than is meet), although we do not perceive it,
to our sore hurt we are nourishing within our-
selves a wild beast; much having, yet much
wanting, numberless the cares we entangle
ourselves withal, many the handles we furnish
the devil against ourselves. In the case of
the rich, however, the devil has not even need
of labor, so surely do their very concerns of
business of themselves ruin them. Wherefore
I beseech you to abstain from the lust of
these things, that we may be enabled to
escape the snares of the evil one, and having
taken hold of virtue, to attain unto the good
things eternal, through the grace and mercy of
our Lord Jesus Christ, with Whom to the
Father and the Holy Ghost together be glory
forever. Amen.


2 Kai nodadyia; ovxt €auTov guvdiedBeipe eT EKELVOU; 7 XoAn
maAty evpyXwpLav Gntettw. Mod. text “is not this dropsy? mer”
exetvou 7 xoAn K, tT. A. and below €av vmepBy 76 METpOV, ovxe
éavTov cuvdcepOetpe; ovTwW Kain Tpody. adding, “if it be taken
beyond what can be digested, it involves the body in diseases.
For whence comes the gout? whence the paraly zing and com-
motion of the body? Is it not from the immediate quantity of
aliments? Again in the body,” etc.


THE WORKS OF ST. (\CHERYSOST ORE


[Homity LII.


BMOoMILY. LL,


ACTS XXV. 23.


“ And on the morrow, when Agrippa was come, and
Bernice with great pomp, and was entered into the
place of hearing, with the chief captains, and prin-
cipal men of the city, at Festus’ commandment
Paul was brought forth.


SEE what an audience is gathered together
for Paul. Having collected all his guards,
the governor is come, and the king, and the
tribunes, “with the principal men,” it says,
“of the city.” Then Paul being brought
forth, see how he is proclaimed as conqueror.
Festus himself acquits him from the charges,
for what says Festus? ‘And Festus said,
King Agrippa, and all men which are here
present with us, ye see this man, about whom
all the multitude of the Jews have dealt with
me, both at Jerusalem, and also here, crying
that he ought not to live any longer. But
when I found that he had committed nothing
worthy of death, and that he himself hath
appealed to Augustus, I have determined to
send him. Of whom I have no certain thing
to write unto my lord. Wherefore I have
brought him forth before you, and especially
before thee, O king Agrippa, that, after exam-
ination had, I might have somewhat to write.
For it seemeth to me unreasonable to send a
prisoner, and not withal to signify the crimes
laid against him.” (v. 24-27.) Mark how he
accuses them, while he acquits him. O what
an abundance of justifications! After all
these repeated examinations, the governor
finds not how he may condemn him. They
said he was worthy of death. On this account
he said also: ‘When I found,” says he “ that
he had committed nothing worthy of death.—
Of whom I have no certain thing to write to
my lord.” This too is a proof of Paul’s spot-
lessness, that the judge found nothing to say
concerning him. ‘Therefore I have brought
himir forth,” heisays, “before: youtemsan) it
seemeth to me unreasonable to send a pris-
oner, and not withal to signify the crime laid
against him.” Such were the great straits
into which the Jews brought themselves and
their rulers! What then? ‘Agrippa said to
Paul, Thou art permitted to speak for thy-
self.” (ch. xxvi.1.) From his great desire to
hear, the king permits him to speak. But
Paul speaks out forthwith with boldness, not |


flattering, but for this reason saying that he is
happy, namely, because (Agrippa) knew all.
“Then Paul stretched forth the hand, and
answered for himself, I think myself happy,
king Agrippa, because I shall answer for my-
self this day before thee touching all the
things whereof I am accused of the Jews.
Especially because I know thee to be expert
in all questions which are among the Jews:
wherefore I beseech thee to hear me
patiently.” (v. 2, 3.) And yet, had he been
conscious of guilt, he should have feared at
being tried in the presence of one who knew
all the facts: but this is a mark of a clear
conscience, not to shrink from a judge who
has an accurate knowledge of the circum-
stances, but even to rejoice, and to call him-
self, happy. *I-beseech thee,’ hei says, “\to
hear me patiently.” Since he is about to
lengthen out his speech, and to say something
about himself, on this account, he premises an
entreaty, and (then) says: “My manner of
life from my youth, which was at the first
among mine own nation at Jerusalem, know
all the Jews: which knew me from the begin-
ning, if they would testify, that after the most
straitest sect of our religion I lived a Phar-
isee.” (v. 4, 5.) Then how should I have
become a seditious person, who when young
was (thus) testified of by all? Then too from
his sect: ‘‘ after the most straitest sect,” says
he, “of our religion I lived.” ‘ What then, if
though the sect indeed be worthy of admira-
tion, thou art evil?” Touching this also I
call all to witness—touching my life and con-
versation. ‘And now I stand and am
judged for the hope of the promise made of
God unto our fathers: unto which promise
our twelve tribes, instantly serving God day
and night, hope to come. For which hope’s
sake, king Agrippa, I am accused of the Jews.
Why should it be thought a thing incredible
with you, that God should raise the dead?”
(v. 6-8.) Two arguments he lays down for
the Resurrection : one, the argument from the
prophets: and he does not bring forward any
prophet (in particular,) but the doctrine itself
as held by the Jews: the other and stronger
one, the argument from the facts—(especially
from this,) that Christ Himself held discourse


Homi.y LII.]


foie owes OF THE APOSTLES.


>


309


with him. And he lays the ground for this
by (other) arguments, relating accurately his
former madness. Then too, with high com-
mendation of the Jews, he says, ‘‘ Night and
day,” says he, “serving (God) look to attain
unto.” So that even if I had not been of
unblemished life, it is not for this (doctrine)
that I ought to be brought to trial :—“‘ for
which hope, king Agrippa, I am accused of
the Jews.” And then another argument:
“Why should it be thought a thing incredible
with you, that God should raise the dead?”
Since, if such an opinion had not existed, if
they had not been brought up in these dog-
mas, but they were now for the first time
brought in, perhaps? some one might not have
received the saying. Then he tells, how he
persecuted: this also helps the proof: and
he brings forward the chief priests as wit-
nesses, and the “strange cities,” and that he
heard Him saying to him, “It is hard for
thee to kick against the pricks,” and shows
the mercifulness of God, that, though being
persecuted He appeared (to men), and did
that benefit not to me only, but also sent me
as teacher to others: and shows also the
prophecy, now come to pass, which he then
heard, “ Delivering thee from the people, and
from the Gentiles, unto whom I send thee.”
Showing all this, he says: “I verily thought
with myself, that I ought to do many things
contrary to the name of Jesus of Nazareth.
Which thing I also did in Jerusalem: and
many of the saints did I shut up in prison,
having received authority from the chief
priests; and when they were put to death, I
gave my voice against them. And I pun-
ished them oft in every synagogue, and com-
pelled them to blaspheme ; and being exceed-
ingly mad against them, I persecuted them
even unto strange cities. Whereupon as I
went to Damascus with authority and com-
mission from the chief priests, at midday, O
king, I saw in the way a light from heaven,
above the brightness of the sun, shining
round about me and them which journeyed
with me. And when we were all fallen to the
earth, I heard a voice speaking unto me, and
saying in the Hebrew tongue, Saul, Saul, why
persecutest thou Me? it is hard for thee to
kick against the pricks. And I said, Who art
Thou, Lord? And he said, I am Jesus whom
thou persecutest; but rise, and stand upon
thy feet: for I have appeared unto thee for
this purpose, to make thee a minister and a
witness both of these things which thou hast


seen, and of those things in the which I will)


appear unto thee: delivering thee from the


1 Old text omits tows, and puts it as a question, ‘‘ Who
would not have received the saying ?”’


people, and from the Gentiles, unto whom
now I send thee, to open their eyes, and to
turn them from darkness to light, and from
the power of Satan unto God, that they may
receive forgiveness of sins (v. g-18):—observe *
how mildly he discourses—God, he says,
said (this) to me, “that they may receive
forgiveness of sins, and inheritance among
them which are sanctified by faith that is
in Me.” By these things, says he, I was
persuaded, by this vision He drew me to
Himself, and so persuaded me, that I made
no delay. ‘“‘Whereupon, O king Agrippa, I
was not disobedient unto the heavenly vision:
but showed first unto them of Damascus, and
at Jerusalem, and throughout all the coasts of
Judea, and then to the Gentiles, that they
should repent and turn to God, and do works
meet for repentance.” (v.19, 20.) I there-
fore, who instructed others also concerning
the most excellent way of living, how should I
myself have become the author of sedition
and contention? ‘“ For these causes the Jews
caught me in the temple, and went about to
kill me. Having therefore obtained help of
God, I continue unto this day, witnessing
both to small and great, saying none other
things than those which the prophets and
Moses did say should come.” (v. 21, 22.)
See how free from flattery his speech is, and
how he ascribes the whole to God. Then his
boldness—but neither do I now desist: and
the sure grounds—for it is from the prophets
that’? I urge’* the “question,” “ Whether the
Christ was to suffer: then® the Resurrection
and the promise, ‘‘ Whether He, as the first
to rise from the dead, should show light unto
the people and to the Gentiles.” (v. 23.)
Festus saw the boldness, and what says he?
For Paul was all along addressing himself to
the king—he was in a manner annoyed, * and
says to him, “Thou art beside thyself, Paul :”
for, “while he thus discoursed, Festus said
with a loud voice, Paul, thou art beside thy-
self: much learning doth make thee mad.”
(v. 24.) What then says Paul? With gentle-
ness, “I am not mad,” says he, “ most noble
Festus; but speak forth the words of truth


2 This is the comment on ‘forgiveness of sins:*’ the
ETMLELKES consisting in the not enlarging upon the greatness and
aggravation of their sins. In the Mss. and Edd. this is placed
at the end of v. 18, and then, ‘‘God said to me, I have
appeared to thee,’ and the rest repeated to ‘‘ forgiveness of
sins.

3 Mod. text ‘‘ Whether He (as) first to rise from the dead
should declare light: as if he had said, Christ as the first that
rose dieth no more.’’ It is manifest from the declaring this
to all, that they also (have to) expect it for themselves. Then
Festus seeing the boldness, since he all along addressed him-
self to the king, not once ceasing to look full towards him,
was as annoyed (womep érae 71), and says, ** Thou art mad,
Paul.”’ And that he says this in annoyance (or passion), hear
from what follows. ‘ And as he thus discoursed,” etc.

4 womep exade 7. This is explained in the Recapitulation:

“with a loud voice—ov7w Aumov hy Kal dpyjs.


310


and soberness.” (v. 25.) Then too he gives
him to understand why, turning from him, he
addressed his speech to the king: “ For the
king knoweth of these things, before whom
also I speak freely: for I am persuaded that
none of these things are hidden from him:
for this thing was not done in a corner.”
(v. 26.) He shows, that (the king) knows all
perfectly ; at the same time, all but saying to
the Jews, And ye indeed ought to have known
these things—for this is the meaning of that
which he adds, “ For this thing was not done
in a corner. And Agrippa, said to Paul,
‘Ey 62iy thou persuadest me to be a Chris-


tian.” What is évédi7o?! “Within a little,
rapa uxpov. ‘*And Paul said, I could pray to
God,” kai év dAiyw Kai év TOAAG, (that 1S)n 7k could


se


pray to God,” for my part, not ‘in little”
(but “in much”): he does not simply pray,
he prays (not briefly, but) with largeness—
“that not only thou, but also all that hear me
this day, were such as I am.”* Then he


* Old text: “iv. 27-29. Evéauuny av, dyoiv, Eywye ovK ev
OAtyw, TL €oTL; Tapa ptxpov. Kai ovx amAws evxeTar GAA Kai
emiteTauévws. From the Recapitulation it appears that Chrys.
supposes that Paul, as an idwrys, i. e. not conversant with the
elegancies of Greek style, ovx évoynoev zt eat Ev OALy@ arn’
evouger Ore €€ OACyou . did not perceive what Agrippa’s phrase
meant (viz. as here explained, Tapa w.txpov), but supposed it to
be the same as e& oAcyov,.’”’ ** With little ado ’’—i. e. thou makest
short work to persuade me, as if this were an easy thing, to
be done in brief: therefore Paul answers, Be it in little, or be
it in much, I could pray to God, with no brief and hasty
prayer, but ETLTETAMLEVWS, much and earnestly. —For kal ovx
amAws, We read kat €v moAA@: ovx a. and transpose Ti éoTw ev
oAty ; Tapa pixpdy, to its fitting place. Mod. text ovx ey
OAty ey" TOUTEOTL, pLkpov, OMitting mapa, meaning this as the
exple anation of St. Paul’s evé. ev dAC ye. Of the Edd., Commel.
Sav. Ben. give mapa, and so Par. Ben. 2, who however rejects
the ovk.

* The correct interpretation of v. 28, 29 depends upon the


ff. points: (r) Whether the remark of ‘Agrippa, is sincere or
ironical. (2) Whether the true text in v. 29 is €vy moAA@ or ev
fepadw. (3) What noun, if any, is to be supplied with the


adjectives oAtyw and peyadAw (or woAA@). Regarding the first
question, the considerations in favor of the view that Agrip-
pa’s remark is zronxzca/ are (a) the frivolous character of the
man, (4) the current use of Chrzst7an among Jews and Romans
as a term of reproach and contempt. Touching the second
point, we find that peyadw is favored by 8 A.B. Syr. Copt.
Aram. Vulg., as against G. H. for moAAw. The former read-
ing is adopted by Tischendorf, Lachmann, Meyer, Westcott
and Hort, and most modern critics, and the evidence in its
favor may be considered decisive. Whether any noun is to
be supplied to oAtyw and weyadAw (as most) or not (as Meyer) is
not important. In any case the sense must be completed.
What do ‘‘in little’’ and ‘“‘in great’? mean? The sense may
be completed by supplying (a) the idea of time—‘‘in a little
time,’”’ i.e. almost. In this case, év peyary would have to be
rendered ‘‘ wholly” or ‘‘altogether,’”’ a meaning which ev
peyadw cannot well convey. Another rendering which might
be derived from supplying the idea of time—differing but
slightly from the foregoing—would be: ‘‘in a little time thou
art persuading me!”’ i. e. dost thou think so soon to persuade
me? and Paul replies : **‘ Whether in a little time or in a long
time—whether soon or late—I could wish,” etc. The first inter-
pretation lays emphasis upon the state of Agrippa’s mind—
persuaded a/szost—persuaded altogether; the second upon the
element of time required to accomplish the persuasion (ironi-
cally spoken of). (4) The idea of labor, trouble or argument
may be supplied thus: ‘‘ Easily—with few words—or with
little trouble—thou persuaded me!’’ and Paul's answer is:
Whether with little (labor) or with much, I would to God that,”
etc. This view we prefer. because, (2) it harmonizes best
with the natural meaning of év peyady which (if the true read-
ing) requires taking both phrases in a quantitative sense.
(6) It is favored by the ev idently zroxzcaZ character of Agrip-
pa’s remark. There is no ground for the opinion of Chrys.
(followed by Calvin) tnat ev dAcyw is used in different senses in
the language of Agrippa and Paul, much less for the idea that
Paul did not understand what ev oAcyw meant !—G. B. S.


THE WORKS “OF, Si. CHESSGs One


|Homity LII.


adds, “except these bonds;” and yet it was
matter of glory; true, but looking to their
notion of it, therefore says he, “ except these


bonds.” (v. 27-29.)
(Recapitulation.) |“ And on the morrow,”
etc. (v. 23.) The Jews desisted ever since


Paul exercised his right of appeal.? Then
also for him the theatre becomes a splendid
one: “with great pomp” they were present.
“And -Festus ‘said, erces (The Swiole
multitude of the Jews—” not some of them
only, and others not so— both at Jerusalem,
and also here,” they said “that he ought not
to live any longer.” (v. 24.) ‘And I hav-
ing found,” etc. It shows that he did right
in appealing to Casar. For if*® though they
had no great matter to allege against him, yet
those (at Jerusalem) were mad against him,
with good reason may he go to Cesar.
“That after examination had by you,” he
says, “I may get somewhat to write.” Observe
how the matter is repeatedly put to the test.
The Jews therefore may thank themselves for
this vindication * (of Paul), which would come
to the ears of those also who were at Rome.
See how they become the unwilling heralds
both of their own wickedness and of Paul’s
virtue, even to the emperor himself: so that
Paul was carried away (to Rome) with more
renown than if he had gone thither without
bonds: for not as an impostor and a deceiver,
after so many judges had acquitted him, was
he now carried thither. Quit therefore of
all charges,® among those with whom he was
bred and born, and not only so, (but) thus
free from all suspicion, he makes his appear-
ance at Rome... “theny Paul?’ ete, een


2 "Anéotyoav Aoumov of "I. TH adeoet ypnoapevou éxetvov A. B.
(C. has lost a leaf here). Mod. text eféoer. Cat. "Ereotnoav
Aoov oi "I tH ef€oer xXpynoapuevor execvov. If this be the true
reading, it should seem to belong to mav to mA, tv Iové., viz.

‘concerning whom all the multitude of the Jews besought
me:’ the Jews thereupon hhad set upon him, using his,
Festus’ permission. But ameor. and epea=t give a better
sense aS comment on V. 23, i. e. ‘* No mention now of the Jews
—they had left him, when he had made his appeal.” —Then,
meTa TOAANS avr. (mod. text adds o 0 BactAevs kal) av TO 7AIO0s
tav I, rapnoav ovx ot wev ot 6€ ov. Which is not true, for it
could not be said that all the Jews were present at this hear-
ing before Agrippa. We read meta 7. >. tapjoav. Then
from v. 24, " Tav 70 m7 80s” SG: eveTuXoV ‘Mot,

3 Ei yap ovdév prev etxov dervov eimerv. i. e.
the matter of accusation was concerned, he knew that
he had nothing to fear: éxetvor dé emennverav, but the
people yonder (at Jerusalem) were mad against him: therefore
elkOTws em’ eéxelvoy épxeTat, no wonder he is for going to
Cesar.”

4 The amodoyta is Festus’ written report of the hearings
before him, which would be sent to Rome, and would at once
oy to Paul’s innocence, and to the malignity of the

ews.

5 Ilavra totvuv anodvaapevos, not as Ben. ‘‘omnzbus ergo
relictis, apud guos natus, etc.’ but in the sense of the phrase
arodver Oat (éyxAnuata) which is frequent in Chrys. That is,

‘** the consequence is that Paul makes his first appearance at
Rome, not merely as one who has cleared himself of all
charges brought against him at home, but, after these
repeated examinations, clear from all suspicion.” —Below olare
KUpLov ouK 6vTwy Tov KatadixaCovTwy avTov - the sense intended
may be, ‘seeing they were not his judges, even if they wished
to condemn him.’


““As far as


Homity LII.]


SHEW AGS: /OF THE. APOSELEs.


311


xxvi. 1-3.) And he said not, Why is this?
once for all I have appealed to Cesar: I
have been tried many times: when will there
be anend of this? but what did he? Again
he is ready to render an account, and that,
before the man who was the best informed on
the subject; and with much boldness, seeing
they were not his judges to condemn him:
but still, though they were not his judges,
since that declaration was in force, ‘* Unto
Cesar shalt thou go, he renders an account
and gives full answers, “touching all the
things,” and not merely on one and another
here and there. They accuse me of sedition,
accuse me of heresy, accuse me that -I have
profaned the temple: “touching all these
things I answer for myself:” now that these
are not things in accordance with my ways,
my accusers themselves are witnesses: “ my
manner of life from my youth,” etc. (v. 4.)
which is what he says on a former occasion
“Being a zealot.” (ch. xxii. 3.) And when
the whole people was present, then he chal-
lenges their testimony: not? before the trib-
unal, but before Lysias, and again here, when
more were present: whereas in that hearing
there needed not much vindication of himself,
since Lysias’ letter exculpated him. ‘* Know
all the Jews,” he says, “ which knew me from
the beginning.” And he does not say what
kind of life his was, but leaves it to their own
conscience, and lays the whole stress on his
sect, as he would not have chosen that sect,
if he had been a man of evil disposition and
bad character (x TOVHPOC Kal uoxOypoc). “ But, for
this hope”’ (Mss. and Edd. aipécewe) he says,
“I stand and am judged.” (v. 6, 7.) This
hope is honored among themselves also, be-
cause of this they pray, because of this they
worship, that unto this they may attain: this
same do I show forth. Why then, it is act-
ing like madmen, to be doing all things for
the sake of attaining to this, and yet to per-
secute him who believes in the same. “I
indeed thought with myself,” that is, I deter-
mined, “to do many things contrary to the
name of Jesus of Nazareth.” (v. 9.) I was
not one of Christ’s disciples : among those who
fought against Him, was I. Whence also he
is a witness who has a right to be believed,
because he, a man who was doing numberless
things, makes war on the believers, persuad-
ing them to blaspheme, stirring up all against
them, cities, rulers, and by himself doing all


1 Mod. text ‘“‘But not before the tribunal of Lysias alone
does he this, but also before Festus, and again here.’’ Ben.
cites the old text only to condemn it. Inconsiderately: for
it was in the hearing émt Avoiov xxii. 3-5. (Lysias had no
**tribunal’’) and here, that St. Paul thus challenged the
testimony of the Jews: not before Felix, which is what is
meant by exet, still less before Festus.


this of his own accord, was thus suddenly
changed. Then again the witnesses, those
who were with him: next he shows what just
cause he had to be persuaded, both from the
light, and from the prophets, and from the re-
sults, and from the things which have now
faken place. See accordingly, how both from
the prophets, and from these } particulars, he con-
firms the proof to them. For that he may not
seem to be broaching some novelty, although he
had great things to say, yet he again takes ref-
uge with the prophets, and puts this as a ques-
tion for discussion.2. Now this had a stronger
claim upon belief, as having actually come to
pass: but since he alone saw (Christ), he
again fetches proof of it from the prophets.
And see how he does not discourse alike
in the court of justice, and in the assembly
(of his own people); there indeed he says,
“ve slew Him:” but here no such thing, that
he might not kindle their anger more: but
he shows the same thing, by saying,
“Whether the Christ was to suffer.” He so
frees them from _ accusations: for the
prophets, he says, say this. Therefore re-
ceive ye also the rest. Since he has men-
tioned the vison, he then without fear goes
on to speak also of the good wrought by it.
“To turn them from darkness to light, and
from the power of Satan unto God. For to
this end have I appeared unto thee” (v. 16-
18), not to punish, but to make thee an
Apostle. He shows the evils which possess
unbelievers, “Satan, darkness;” the good
things belonging to believers, light, God,
“the inheritance of the saints. Whereupon,
O king Agrippa,” etc. (v. 1g, 20.) He not
only exhorts them to repent, but also to show
forth a life worthy of admiration. And see
how everywhere the Gentiles are admitted
into connection with the people (Israel): for
those who were present were of the Gentiles.
‘“‘ Testifying,” he says, “both to great and
small,” (v. 22) that is, both to distinguished
and undistinguished. This is also for the


soldiers. Observe: having left the post of
defendant, he took up that of teacher—and


therefore also it is that Festus says to him,
“Thou art beside thyself”—but then, that
he may not seem to be himself the teacher, he
brings in the prophets, and Moses: ‘‘ Whether
the Christ was to suffer, whether He as
the first to rise from the dead should show
light both to the people, and to the Gentiles.”


2 Kai TOUTO MEégov TLAnat. The innovator not understanding
the phrase, and its reference to Ei ra@nris 0 Xp.aros etc., sub-


stitutes, ‘‘ And puts their (words) in the midst.’-—The mean-
ing is: ‘* He had greater things to say than what the prophets
had said:’’ he could say, ** The Christ whom ye slew is risen,


for I have seen Him: but instead of this, he put it as a subject
for discussion, Did the prophets teach that the Christ was to
suffer and to rise again ?


312 THE: WORKS “OFS? \ChR SOs Orr


(v. 23.) “And Festus said with a loud voice”
—in such anger and displeasure (did he
speak)—“ Paul, thou art beside thyself.”
What then said Paul? ‘I am not mad,”
“For this thing,’ he says, ‘‘was not done in
a corner.” (v, 25, 26.) Here he speaks of the
Cross, of the Resurrection: that the doctrine
was come to every part of the world. ‘“ King
Agrippa,” he says, ‘‘ believest thou ”’—he does
not say, the Resurrection, but—‘“ the
prophets?” .(v.. 27.).. heme hey jforestalls
him, and says: “I know that thou believest.”’
Ey daiyw (i. e. within a little,) “almost thou
persuadeth me to bea Christian.” (v. 28.)
Paul did not understand what the phrase
év odiyw meant: he thought it meant é€ ddryov
(i. e. with little cost or trouble), wherefore
also he answers (as) to this: so unlearned
was he.1 And he said not, I do not wish
(that), but, “I pray that not only thou, but
also all that hear.” Mark how free from
flattery his speech is.—“ I pray that this day
they may be all such gas )1..am,,.exceptathese
bonds.” (v. 29.) He, the man that glories
in his bonds, that puts ‘them forth as a golden
chain, deprecates them for these men: for
they were as yet too weak in their minds, and
it was rather in condescension that he so
spake. For what could be better than those
bonds which always in his Epistles he prefers
(to all things else), saying, “ Paul, a prisoner
of Jesus Christ : ” (Eph. ii. 1) ’and again,
“On this account I am bound with this chain
(Acts xxviii. 20), “but the word of God is
not bound ;” and, “ Even unto bonds, as an
evil-doer.” (2 Tim. iil. 9.) The punishment
was twofold. For if indeed he had been so
bound, as with a view to his good, the thing
would have carried with it some consolation :
but now (he is bound) both “as an evil-doer,”
and as with a view to very ill consequences ;
yet for none of these things cared he. 2

Such is a soul winged with heavenly love.
For if those who cherish the foul (earthly
passion which men call) love, think nothing
either glorious or precious, but those things
alone which tend to gratify their lust, they


>


1 See above, p. 310, note !, and.* Yet some modern commen-
tators assert that ev OALyY@ cannot mean, as Chrys. says, mapa
ucxpov: that this sense requires oAcyou, or oAtyou Setv, or map
oAcyov: so that, in their view, Chrysostom’s remark ovTws
iSiwrns Vv would be quite out of place.—In the next sentence ov
BovAomac, all our Mss. and Edd. But Ben. renders it without
the negative, Et non dixit, Vellem.

2 He is commenting upon 2 Tim, ii.9. ‘‘I suffer trouble as
an evil-doer even unto bonds.’’ To others, this might seem
a twofold aggravation: both that he was treated as a male-
factor, and that his destruction was intended. For if indeed
he was put in bonds s én’ aya@w, the thing bore its comfort
with it, and such was the case to him, but not in their inten-
tion ; which was, that he should be in chains kai ws kakovpyos
Kat ws émi tois Sevois. Of the Mss. A. C. have ws émi tots
Servois aAAovs: add’ ovdSevds ToVTwY eEhpovTigev. B. aAovs: and so
mod. text. But aAdAovs seems to be only the abbreviation of
the following aad’ ovdevos.


[HomiLy LII.


think both glorious and honorable, and their
mistress is everything to them; much more
do those, who have been taken captive by
this heavenly love, think nothing of the cost
(ca émiriuea). But if we do not understand
what I am saying, it is no marvel, while we
are unskilled in this Divine Wisdom. For if
any one be caught with the fire of Christ’s
love, he becomes such as a man would
become who dwelt alone upon the earth, so
utterly careless is he for glory or disgrace:
but just as if he dwelt alone, he would care
for nothing, no more does he in this case.
As for trials, he so despises them, both
scourges and imprisonments, as though the
body in which he suffers these things were
another’s and not his own, or as though he
had got a body made of adamant: while as
for the sweet things of this life, he so laughs
them to scorn, is so insensible to them, as we
are insensible of dead bodies, being ourselves
dead. He is as far from being taken captive
by any passion, as the gold refined in the fire
and purified is free from alloy. For even as
flies would not dart into the midst of a flame,
but fly from it, so the passions dare not even
to come near this man. Would that I could
bring forward examples of ali this from
among ourselves: but since we are at a loss
for such, we must needs betake ourselves to
this same Paul. Observe him then, how he
felt towards the whole world. “The world
is crucified unto me,” he says, “and I unto
the world” (Gal. vi. 14): I am dead to the
world, and the world is dead to me. And
again: “It is no longer I that live, but Christ
lyeth. in} me: jes sane 20.) And, to show
you that he was as it were in solitude, and so
looked upon the things present, hear himself
saying, ‘‘While we look not at the things
which are seen, but at the things which are
not seen.” (2° Cor. “iv:.28.)meeVWbat Psayest
thou? Answer me. And yet what thou
sayest is the contrary; thou seest the things
invisible, and the visible thou seest not.
Such eyes as thou hadst gotten, such are the
eyes which are given by Christ: for as these
bodily eyes see indeed the things that are
seen, but things unseen they see not: so
those (heavenly eyes) do the contrary: none
that beholds the invisible things, beholds the
visible: no one beholding the things seen,
beholds the invisible. Or is not this the case
with us also? For when having turned our
mind inwards we think of any of the unseen
things, our views become raised above the


3 Mod. text adds, ‘‘To say this, belongs to Paul only:
ours it is, who are so far removed from him as the heaven is
from the earth, to hide our faces, so that we dare not even to
open our mouth.”’


Homi Ly LII.]


things on earth.! Let us despise glory : let
us be willing to be laughed at rather than to
be praised. For he indeed who is laughed at
is nothing hurt: but he who is praised is
much hurt. Let us not think much of those
things which terrify men, but as we do in the
case of children, this let us do here: namely,
if we see any one terrifying children, we do
not hold that man in admiration: since in
fact whoever does frighten, only frightens
children; for were it a man, he could not
frighten him. Just as those who frighten
(children in sport), do this either by drawing
up their eyelids, or by otherwise distorting
their face, but with the eye looking naturally
and mild they would not be able to do this:
so these others do this, by distorting their
mental vision (76 OtopatiKov THC dcavoiac). So
that of a mild man and beautiful in soul
nobody would be afraid; on the contrary, we
all respect him, honor and venerate him.
See ye not, how the man who causes terror is
also an object of hatred and abhorrence to
us all? For of those things which are only
able to terrify what do we not turn away
from? Is it not so with wild beasts, with
sounds, with sights, with places, with the air,
such as darkness? Let us uot therefore
think it a great thing, if men fear us. For,
in the first place, no man indeed is fright-
ened at us: and, secondly, it is no great thing
(if they were). Virtue is a great good: and
see how great. However wretched we may
deem the things by means of which it con-
sists, yet we admire virtue itself, and count
them blessed (that have it). For who would
not count the patient sufferer blessed,
although poverty and such like things seem
to be wretched? When therefore it shines
forth through those things which seem to be
wretched, see how surpassingly great this is!
Thinkest thou much, O man, because thou art
in power? And what sort of power? say,
was it conferred by appointment? (If so,)
of men thou hast received power: appoint
thyself to it from within. For the ruler is not
he who is so called, but he who is really so.
For as a king could not make a physician or
an orator, so neither can he make a ruler:
since it is not the (imperial) letters nor the
name that makes a ruler. For, if you will, let
any man build a medicine-shop, let him also
have pupils, let him have instruments too and
drugs, and let him visit those who are sick:
are these things sufficient to make a physi-
cian? By no means: but there is need of art,
and without that, not only do these things


ithe Cus. OF- THE zeBosaLeEs: 313


profit nothing, but they even hurt: since it
were better that he who is not a physician


should not even possess medicines. He that
possesses them not, neither saves nor
destroys: but he that possesses them, de-


stroys, if he knows not how to use them:
since the healing power is not only in the
nature of the medicines, but also in the art of
the person applying them: where this is not,
all is marred. Such also is the ruler: he has
for instruments, his voice, anger, execu-
tioners, banishments, honors, gifts, and
praises; he has also for medicines, the law;
has also for his patients, men; for a place to
practise in, the court of justice; for pupils,
he has the soldiers: if then he know not the
science of healing, all these profit him
nothing. The judge is a physician of souls,
not of bodies: but if this art of healing the
bodies needs so much care, much more that
of healing the soul, since the soul is of more
importance than the body. Then not the mere
having the name of ruler is to be a ruler:
since others also are called by great names: as
Paul, Peter, James, and John: but the names
do not make them that which they are called,
as neither does my name make me (to be that
which John was); I bear indeed the same
name with that blessed man, but I am not the
same thing (Gudvopoc, ov pv ouvevuuoc), I am
not John, but am called so. In the same way
they are not rulers, but are called so. But
those others are rulers even without these
adjuncts, just as also a physician, though he
may not actually practise his science, yet if
he have it in his soul, he is a physician,
Those are rulers, who bear rule over them-
selves. For there are these four things,” soul,
family ; city, world: and the things form a re-
gular progression (6d@ zpofaiver). He therefore
that is to superintend a family, and order it
well, must first bring his own soul into order ;
for it is his family: but if he cannot order
his own family, where there is but one soul,
where he himself is master, where he is
always along with himself, how shall he order
others? He that is able to regulate his own
soul, and makes the one part to rule, the other
to be subject, this man will be able to regu-
late a family also: but he that can do this
by a family, can do it by a city also: and if by
a city, then also by the world. But if he can-
not do this for his own soul, how then shall
he be able to do it for the world? These
things have been spoken by me, that we may
not be excited about offices of rule; that we
may know what ruling is: for this (which is


1 wetéwpor Tov evepyer@y yucv yivovTac acowers. Unable to
discover any meaning in this, (Ben. suddimes nobis sunt -
oferationum oculz), we conjecture Twy emcyetwr,


2 Mss. and Edd., tpia yap tavT& éo7me Wux7n (only F. has
Wux7): “there are for the soul these three subjects.” —Below,


| Mss. and Edd. oixoSouecy for oixovopmery.


314


THE. WORKS OFT ST.) CHER >Osl er


[Homity LIII.


so called) is not ruling, but a mere object af ike as this to be found? for I see you all


derision, mere slavery, and many other names
one might call it by. Tell me, what is pro-
per to aruler? is it not to help one’s sub-
jects, and to do them good? What then, if
this be not the case? how shall he help
others, who has not helped himself? he who
has numberless tyrannies of the passions in
his own soul, how shall he root out those of
others? Again, with respect to “luxury” or
delightful living: the true luxury or delight is
not this (which is so called), but quite another
thing. For as we have shown that the ruler
is not he who is so called, but another (who
has something more than the name), so the
person who lives indeed in delight is another
sort of person (than he whom we so describe).
For “luxury” or delightful living seems
indeed to be, the enjoying pleasure and the
gratifying the belly: yet it is not this thing,
but the contrary: it is, to have a soul worthy
of admiration, and to be in astate of pleas-
ure. For let there be aman eating, drink-
ing, and wantoning ; then let him suffer cares
and loss of spirits: can this man be said to
be in a state of delight? Therefore, it is not
eating and drinking, it is the being in pleasure,
that makes true luxury or delightful living.
Let there be a man who gets only dry bread,
and let him be filled with gladness: is not
this pleasure? Well then, it is the true lux-
ury. Let us see then, to whom this befalls—
whether to the rich, or to those who are not
rich? Neither to the one part altogether,
nor to the other, but to those who so order
their own souls, that they may not have many
grounds for sorrows. And where


is such a] without end.


eager and wishing to hear what this life is
which has no sorrows. Well then, let this be
acknowledged first by you, that this is pleas-
ure, this the true luxury, to have no sorrow to
cause annoyance; and ask not of me meats,
and wine, and sauces, and silken robes, and a
sumptuous table. But if I shall show that
apart from all these sucha life as that is
present (within our reach), then welcome
thou this pleasure, and this life: for the most
part of painful things happen to us from our
not calculating things as we ought. Who
then will have the most sorrows—he that
cares for none of these things, or he that
cares for them? He that fears changes, or
he that does not fear? He that is in dread
of jealousy, of envy, of false accusations, of
plottings, of destruction, or he that stands
aloof from these fears? He that wants many
things, or he that wants nothing? He that
is a slave to masters without number, or he
that is a slave tonone? He that has need of
many things, or he that is free? He that has
one lord to fear, or he that fears despots
innumerable? Well then, greater is the
pleasure here. This then let us pursue, and
not be excited about the things present: but
let us laugh to scorn all the pomp of life, and
everywhere practise moderation, that we may
be enabled so to pass through this life, that
it may be without pain, and to attain unto the
good things promised, through the grace and
mercy of our Lord Jesus Christ, with Whom
to the Father and the Holy Ghost together be
glory, might, honor, now and ever, world
Amen.


HOMILY. Lie


ACTS XXVI. 30-32.


* And when he had thus spoken, the king rose up, and
the governor, and Bernice, and they that sat
with them: and whenthey were gone aside, they
talked between themselves, saying, This man
doeth nothing worthy of death or of bonds.
Then said Agrippa unto Festus, This man
might have been set at liberty, if he had not
appealed unto Ceesar.’’


SEE how again also they pass sentence in his
favor, and after having said, ‘Thou art be-
side thyself,” (v. 24) they acquit him, as un-
deserving not only of death, but also of
bonds, and indeed would have released him
entirely, if he had not appealed to Cesar.
But this was done providentially, that he


should also depart with bonds. “Unto
bonds,” he says, ‘“‘as an evil doer.” (1 Tim. ii.
9.) For if his Lord “was reckoned among
the transgressors” (Mark xv. 28), much
more he: but as the Lord did not share with
them in their character, so neither did Paul.
For in this is seen the marvellous thing, the
being mixed up with such, and yet receiving
no harm from them. ‘And when it was
determined that we should sail into Italy,
they delivered Paul and certain other prison-
ers unto one named Julius, a centurion of
Augustus’ band. And entering into a ship of
Adramyttium, we launched, meaning to sail


Homiry LIII.]


by the coasts of Asia; one Aristarchus, a
Macedonian of Thessalonica, being with us.
And the next day we touched at Sidon.”
(ch, xxvii. 1-3.) See how far Aristarchus
also accompanies Paul. To good and useful

purpose is Aristarchus present, as he would

take back the report of all to Macedonia.

“ And Julius courteously entreated Paul, and

gave him liberty to go unto his friends to

refresh himself. Julius gave Paul liberty,” it

says, acting “courteously, that he might

refresh himself ;’’ as it was but natural that
| he should be much the worse from his bonds,
and the fear, and the being dragged hither
and thither. See how the writer does not
hide this either, that Paul wished “ to refresh
himself. And when we had launched from
thence, we sailed under Cyprus, because the
winds were contrary.” (v. 4.) Again trials,
again contrary winds. See how the life of
the saints is thus interwoven throughout:
escaped from the court of justice, they fall in
with shipwreck and storm. ‘And when we
had sailed over the sea of Cilicia and Pam-
phylia, we came to Myra, a city of Lycia.
And there the centurion found a ship of
Alexandria sailing into Italy; and he put us
therein.” (v. 5,6.) ‘A ship of Alexandria,”
it says. It is likely that both those (in the
former ship) would bear to Asia the report of
what had befallen Paul, and that these!
would do the same in Lycia. See how God
does not innovate or change the order of
nature, but suffers them to sail into the unfav-
orable winds. But even so the miracle is
wrought. That they may sail safely, He did
not let them go out in the (open) sea, but
they always sailed near the land. “ And
when we had sailed slowly many days, and
scarce were come over against Cnidus, the
wind not suffering us, we sailed under Crete,
over against Salmone; and, hardly passing it,
came unto a place which is called The fair
havens; nigh whereunto was the city of
Lasea. Now when much time was spent, and
when sailing was now dangerous, because the
fast was now already past, Paul admonished
fae.” § “(v2 79)" By. “ the fast? “here scl
suppose he means that of the Jews.* For
they departed thence a long time after the
Pentecost, so that it was much about mid-
winter that they arrived at the coasts of
Crete. And this too was no slight miracle,
that they also should be saved on his account.


ae Kai tovrovs, meaning perhaps those who remained at
yra.

* The fast referred to was that which occurred on the great
day of atonement (Lev. xxiii. 27) i. e. on the tenth of the
seventh month (Tisri). This would be about the end of Sep-
tember, after the autumnal equinox, when navigation was
considered dangerous.—G. B.S.


aero On, THE APOSTLES:


5


Pe)


15


‘“* Paul admonished them, and said unto them,
Sirs, I perceive that this voyage will be with
hurt and much damage, not only of the lading
and ship, but also of our lives. Nevertheless
the centurion believed the master and the
owner of the ship, more than those things
which were spoken by Paul. And _ because
the haven was not commodious to winter in,
the more part advised to depart thence also,
if by any means they might attain to Phenice,
and there to winter; which is an haven of
Crete, and lieth toward the southwest and
northwest. And when the south wind blew
softly, supposing that they had obtained their
purpose, loosing thence, they sailed close to
Crete. But not long after there arose against
ita tempestuous wind, called Euroclydon.t
And when the ship was caught, and could not
bear up into the wind, we let her drive”’
(Rs, Vis. were, driven.”)). (v. ro-15,):. deal
therefore advised them to remain, and he
foretells what would come of it: but they,
being in a hurry, and being prevented by the
place, wished to winter at Phenice. Mark
then the providential ordering of the events:
first indeed, ‘‘ when the south wind blew
softly, supposing they had obtained their pur-
pose,” they loosed the vessel, and came
forth; then when the wind bore down upon
them, they gave way to it driving them, and
were with difficulty saved. “And running
under a certain island which is called Clauda,
we had much work to come by the boat:
which when they had taken up, they used
helps, undergirding the ship; and, fearing
lest they should fall into the quicksands, ¢
strake sail,§ and so were driven. And we
being exceedingly tossed with a tempest, the
next day they lightened the ship; and the
third day we cast out with our own hands the
tackling of the ship. And when neither sun
nor stars in many days appeared, and no
small tempest Jay on us, all hope that we


+ Preponderant authority favors the reading evpaxvAwv from
evpos, the S. E. wind and the Latin Aguz/o,a N. wind (so &, B*
A.Vulgate Erasmus Mill, Bengel, Olshausen, Hackett, Tischen-
dorf, Lachmann, Tregelles, Westcott and Hort, R.V.) If evpo-
kAvéwy is read, it is disputed whether the first part of the word
is e¥pos (Alford, Gloag. Howson,) or evpvs, broad. Meyer de-
fends the latter reading, on the ground that the phrase 0 xaAov-
wevos requires that the word évp. denote a zame and not merely
the direction of the wind and that it is easier to suppose that
this reading should be modified into the former than the re-
verse. Alford supposes that evpaxvAwy was the name of the
wind, which the Greek sailors did not understand and pro-
nounced evpoxAvéwy. Meyer's argument is inadequate, and the

robabilities favor the reading evpaxAvéwy with the meaning,
N. E. wind, a signification, moreover, which answers all the
conditions of the narrative. (See Bib. Dict. sué voce.)\—G.B.S.

+ Rather, ‘‘on the Syrtis” (eis thy Supt.) There were
two shoals on the coast of Africa, called by this name, the
Syrtis Major and the Syrtis Minor. The former to the S. W.
of Crete is the one here referred to.—G. B. S.

§ R. V. ‘they lowered the gear’’ (axevos). The word
+xevos—utensil, implement—is in itself indefinite and must be
understood from the context. It has here been taken to mean
‘“\nchor;’’ ‘mast’? (Olshausen) ; “‘sail’’? (Meyer, Lechler,
Hackett, A. V.); ‘‘gear,”’ meaning the ropes and topsails in
order to set the ship in a direction off shore.—G. B. S.


316 THE WORKS OF


oT. CHRYSOS2oOnE |Homity LIII.


should be saved was then taken away. But
after long abstinence Paul stood forth in the
midst of them, and said, Sirs, ye should have
hearkened unto me, and not have loosed from
Crete, and to have gained this harm and
loss.” (v. 16-21.) Then after so great a
storm he does not speak as insultingly over
them, but as wishing that at any rate he
might be believed for ‘the future. Wherefore
also he alleges what had taken place for a
testimony of the truth of what was about to
be said by him. “And now I exhort you to
be of good cheer : for there shall be no loss
or any man’s life among you, but of the ship.
For there stood by me this night the angel of
God, whose I am, and whom 7 serve, saying,
Fear not, Paul; thou must be brought before
Cesar: and, lo God hath given thee all them
that sail with thee. Wherefore, sirs, be of
good cheer, for I believe God, that it shall
be even as it was told me. Howbeit we
must be cast upon a certain island.” (v. 22-
26.) And he foretells two things; both that
they must be cast upon an island, and that
though the ship would be lost, those who were
in it should be saved—which thing he spoke
not of conjecture, but of prophecy—and that
he “must be brought before Cesar.” But
this that he says, ‘God hath given thee all,”
is not spoken boastfully, but in the wish to
win those who were sailing in the ship: for
(he spoke thus), not that they might feel
themselves bound to him, but that they might
believe what he was saying. “God hath
given thee; ” as much (as to say), They are
worthy indeed of death, since they would not
listen to thee: however, this is done out of
favor to thee. “But when the fourteenth
night was come, as we were driven up and
down in Adria, about midnight the shipmen
deemed that they drew near to some country ;
and sounded, and found it twenty fathoms ;
and when they had gone a little further, they
sounded again, and found it fifteen fathoms.
Then fearing lest they should have fallen
upon rocks, they cast four anchors out of the
stern, and wished for the day. And asthe ship-
men were about to flee out of the ship, when
they had let down the boat into the sea, under | 7
color as though they would have cast anchors
out of the foreship, Paul said to the centurion
and to the soldiers, Except these abide in the
ship, ye cannot be saved. Then the soldiers
cut off the ropes of the boat, and let her fall
off.” (v. 27-32.) The sailors however, were
about to escape, having no faith in what was
said: but the centurion does believe Paul.
For he says, If these flee, “ye cannot be
saved:” so saying, not on this account, but
that he might restrain them, and the proph-cy


might not fall to the ground. See how as in
a church they are instructed by the calmness
of Paul’s behavior, how he saved them out of
the very midst of the dangers. And it is of
providential ordering that Paul is disbelieved,
that after proof of the facts, he might be be-
lieved : which accordingly was the case.
And he exhorts them again to take some
meat, and they do as he bids them, and he
takes some first, to persuade them not by
word, but also by act, that the storm did them
no harm, but rather was a benefit to their
souls. “And while the day was coming on,
Paul besought them all to take meat, saying,
This day is the fourteenth day that ye have
tarried and continued fasting having taken
nothing.” (v. 33.) (6) And how, say you,
did they go without food, having taken’ noth-
ing? how did they bear it ?
sessed them, and did not let them fall intoa
desire of food, being, as they were, at the
point of extreme jeopardy; (7) but they had
no care for food. ‘Wherefore I pray you
to take some meat: for this is for - your
health: for there shall not an hair fall from
the head of any of you. And when he had
thus spoken, he took bread, and gave thanks
to God in presence of them all: and when
he had broken’ it, he began to eat.
were they all of good cheer, and they also
took some meat,” (v. 34-36) seeing that
there was no question about their lives being
saved. (d@) “And we were in all in the ship
two hundred threescore and sixteen souls.
And when they had eaten enough, they light-
ened the ship, and cast out the wheat into the
sea. And when it was day, they knew not
the land : but they discovered a certain creek
with a shore, into the which they were
minded, if it were possible, to thrust in the
ship. And when they had taken up the
anchors, they committed themselves unto the
sea, and loosed the rudder bands, and hoisted
up the mainsail to the wind, and made toward


1 The confusion here has arisen from the scribe’s taking the
four last portions a, c, e, g, i. €. 4, 5, 6, 7, and inserting be-
tween them the first three 4, J, @d, but in the order 4, a, 7, i. e.
I, 3, 2: so that the confused order becomes PI Go Feiss (3). 6, (2),

The texts also needed to be redistributed. Of our Mss. A,
G omit all the latter part d, e, 4, g- so that B and Cat. are the
authorities here followed for the “Old text. (of N. we have no
collation).—In (/), for are ov mept Tay Wuxev avTaY GvTOS TOD
Adyou which we have referred to, ‘‘ Then were they of good
cheer,” viz. because they believed Paul’ s assurance that their
lives were safe. mod. text substitutes ** (they had no care for
food, ) are Ov TEpt TOY TUXOYTWY GVTOS TOU kuvdvvov.”’ In (d), “ xat-
elxov,” TOUS olakas TH TVEOVoH Sovtes, the meaning seems to be,
they bore right down (upon the shore), letting the rudder- han-
dles go, so that the wind was right astern: méAAakis yap ovx
oT» movova.y, for oftentimes they steer not so, but more or
less transverse to the line of the wind. Karédepov TO OKEVOS, T.
€. Ta igtia : what this can mean, we do not understand: but
above in v. 17, old text has xaAdoavtes 70 oxevos for xaA. Ta
iozta : hence we read here katepepovTo | (xaAagavtes, OF some
such word) 70 oxevos, T. €. Ta t.—For eyKOTTOMEVNS THS pULNS
we read with the Catena eyx. 7S mpvuvys. Mod. text substi-
tutes éyxomtovtes (Sav. Tos) TOU mVEVBAaTOS THY pumyY.


Their fear pos- °


Then


Homity LIII.]


Pa nvAecsS OF THE “ABOSTLES,


317


shore.” (v. 37-41.) “They made towards
shore,” having given the rudder-handles to the
wind: for oftentimes they do it not in this
way. ‘They were borne along, having loosed
the rigging, i. e. the sails. ‘‘ And falling into
a place where two seas met, they ran the ship
aground; and the forepart stuck fast, and
remained unmovable, but the hinder part
was broken with the violence of the waves; ”
for when there is a strong wind, this is the
consequence, the stern bearing the brunt (of
the storm). (@) ‘And the soldiers’ counsel
was to kill the prisoners, lest any of them
should swim. out, ‘and escape.” (Vv. 42.)


Again the devil tries to hinder the prophecy,
and they had a mind to kill some, but the cen-
turion suffered them not, that he might save
Paul, so much was the centurion attached to
him. ‘But the centurion, willing to save
Paul, kept them from their purpose; and
commanded that they which could swim
should cast themselves first into the sea, and
get to land: and the rest, some on boards,
and some on broken pieces of the ship. And
so it came to pass, that they escaped all safe
to land.” (v.43, 44.) “And when they were
escaped, then they knew that the island was
Salle Melita; «.(ehsuxxyiil.t.),27 Do -you
mark what good came of the storm? Why
then it was no mark of their being forsaken,
that the storm came upon them. (c) Now
this that happened was in consequence of the
season of the year; but the wonder is greater,
that at such a season they were saved from
the midst of the dangers, both he, and for his
sake the rest, (¢) and this too in the Hadri-
atic. There were two hundred and seventy-
six souls in all: no small matter this also, if
indeed they believed. The voyage was at an
unseasonable time. (g) It is natural to sup-
pose they would ask the reason why they were
sailing, and would learn all. Nor was it for
nothing that the voyage was so protracted ; it
afforded Paul an opportunity for teaching.


(Recapitulation.) And Paul says, “I per-
ceive that (this voyage will be) with hurt and
loss.” (v. 10.) And observe how unassuming
the expression is. That he may not seem to
prophesy, but to speak as of conjecture, “I
perceive,” says he. For they would not have
received it, had he said this at the outset.
In fact he does prophesy on this former occa-
sion, as he does afterward, and says (there),
“The God whom I serve,” leading them on.
Then how comes it that it was not “ with
loss” (of any) “of their lives?” It would
have been so, but that God brought them safe
through it. For as far as.depended on the |
nature of the thing, they had perished, but


God prevented it. Then, to show that it was
not from conjecture that he so spake, the
master of the ship said the contrary (v. 11),
and he a man of experience in the matter : so
far was it from being the case that Paul’s
advice was given from conjecture. More-
over, the place suggested this same (which
the master said), “being not commodious ;”
and it was evident that from conjecture “ the
more part advised” (v. 12) as they did,
rather than Paul. Then, severe the storm
(that ensued), deep the darkness: and that
they may not forget, the vessel also goes to
pieces, and the corn is flung out and ail be-
side, that they may not have it in their power
after this to be shameless. For this is why
the vessel goes to pieces, and! their souls are
tightly braced. Moreover, both the storm
and the darkness contributed not a little to
his obtaining the hearing he did. Accord-
ingly observe how the centurion does as he
bids him, insomuch that he even let the boat
go, and destroyed it. And if the sailors did
not as yet comply with his bidding, yet after-
wards they do so: for in fact this is a reck-
less sort of people. (v. 13-20.) “Sirs, ye
should have hearkened to me,” etc. (v. 21.)
One is not likely to have a good reception,
when he chides in the midst of calamity;
but * when he tells them what more there is
(to come) of the calamity, and then predicts
the good, then he is acceptable. Therefore
he attacks them then first, when “all hope
that they should be saved was taken away:”
that none may say, Nothing has come of it.
And their fear also bears witness. More-
over, the place is a trying one, for it was in
the Adriatic, and then their long abstinence.
They. were’ in’ the: midst of death. It )was
now the fourteenth day that they were going
without food, having taken nothing. ‘ Where-
fore,” said he, “I pray you to take some
meat: for this is for your health” (v. 34),
that ye should eat, lest ye perish of hunger.
Observe, his giving thanks after all that had
happened strengthened them. For this
showed an assured mind that they would be
saved. (4) “Then were they all of good
cheer, and they also took some meat.” (v. 36.)
And not only so, but henceforth they so cast
all their care upon Paul, that they even cast


1 Kat emodiyyovrac avtav ai Wuyat. Hom. in Matt. p. 60,
A. émad. is applied to the action of salt in stopping corrup-
tion; and ib. 167 B. Christians are the salt of the earth, wa
émiadliyywuev Tous Stappéovras. Here in a somewhat similar
sense, ‘‘the vessel goes to pieces and their (dissolute) souls
(which were in danger of going to pieces) are powerfully con-
stricted, held in a close strain, braced to the uttermost.”
Mod. text omits this, and for tva py AaOwvrar—avacoxurvteiv, sub-
stitutes, ‘‘ That they may not perish, the corn is thrown out
and all the rest.’’—Below, add’ étav Kat ta rAciova A€yn THs
auudopas : mod. text absurdly substitutes mwaparpéyn: we
insert after this the clause rore ta ypnora mpoAeyer which our
Mss. have below after xai 0 GoB80s paprupet.


318


out the corn (v. 37), being so many. (a)
Two hundred and seventy-six souls (v. 38):
whence had they victuals?* (c) See how
they do their part as men, and how Paul does
not forbid them. “And when it was day,”
etc., “they loosed the rudder-bands.” (v. 39,
40.) And the vessel goes to pieces in the
daytime, that they may not be clean dis-
solved with the terror: that you may see the
prophecy brought out as fact. ‘‘And the
soldiers’ counsel,” etc. (v. 42.) Do you
mark that in this respect also they were given
to Paul? since for his sake the centurion suf-
fered them not to be slain. So confessedly
wicked do those men seem to me to have
been : insomuch that they would have chosen
even to slay them: but some swam on shore,
others were borne on boards, and they all
were thus saved, and the prophecy received
accomplishment ; (a prophecy,) although not
solemn from length of time, since he did not
deliver it a number of years before, but keep-
ing close to the nature of the things them-
selves: (still a prophecy it was,) for all was
beyond the reach of hope. And (so) it was
through themselves being saved that they
learnt who Paul was. But some one may say:
why did he not save the ship? That they
might perceive how great a danger they had
escaped : and that the whole matter depended,
not on the help of man, but on God’s hand
saving them independently of a ship. So
that righteous men, though they may be ina
tempest, Or on the sea, or in the deep, suffer
nothing dreadful, but even save others to-
gether with themselves. If (here was) a ship
in danger and _ suffering wreck, and prisoners
were saved for Paul’s sake, consider what a
thing it is to have a holy man in a house: for
many are the tempests which assail us also,
tempests far more grievous than these (nat-
ural ones), but He can also give” us to be
delivered, if only we obey holy men as those
(in the ship) did, if we do what they enjoin.
For they are not simply saved, but themselves
also contributed to other men’s believing
(xiorw eiofveyxav). Though the holy man be in
bonds, he does greater works than those who
are free. And look how this was the case
here. The free centurion stood in need of
his bound prisoner: the skilful pilot was in
want of him who was no _ pilot—nay rather, of
him who was the true pilot. For he steered
as pilot not a vessel of this (earthly) kind,
but the Church of the whole world, having


1 76Oev Ta oiTypecia ecxyov; i.e. what were they to subsist
upon, having thrown out the rest of the corn? But they
trusted Paul’s assurance for all.

2 yapioagGar i. e. to the holy man, to be saved for his sake,
in like manner as *‘ He gave (kexaptorac) to Paul them that
sailed with him,”’ v. 24.


THE. WORKS OF STi(CHEYsSOaT0


[HomiLy LIII.


learnt of Him Who is Lord also of the sea;
(steered it,) not by the art of man, but by the
wisdom of the Spirit. In this vessel are
many shipwrecks, many waves, spirits of
wickedness, “from within are fightings, from
without are fears” (2 Cor. vii. 5): so that
he was the true pilot. Look at our whole
life: it is just such (as was this voyage).
For at one time we meet with kindliness, at
another with a tempest; sometimes from our
own want of counsel, sometimes from our
idleness, we fall into numberless evils ; from
our not hearkening to Paul, when we are
eager to go somewhither, where he bids us
not. For Paul is sailing even now with us,
only not bound as he was then: he admon-
ishes us even now, and says to those who are
(sailing) on this sea, “take heed unto your-
selves: for after my departing grievous
wolves shall enter in among you” (Acts xx.
29): and again, “In the last times perilous
times shall come: and men shall be lovers of
their own selves, lovers of money, boasters.’’:
(2 Tim. iii. 2.) This is more grievous than
all storms. Let us therefore abide where he
bids us—in faith, in the safe haven: let us
hearken unto him rather than to the pilot that
is within us, that is, our own reason. Let us
not straightway do just what this may sug-
gest; not what the owner of the ship: no,
but what Paul suggests: he has_ passed
through many such tempests. Let us not
learn (to our cost) by experience, but before
the experience let us “avoid both harm and
loss.” Hear what he says: “They that will
be rich fall into temptation.” (1 Tim. vi. g.)
Let us therefore obey him; else, see what
they suffered, because they did not take his
counsel. And again he tells in another place
what causes shipwrecks: ‘‘ Who,” he says,
““have made shipwreck concerning the faith.
But do thou continue in the things which thou
hast learned and wast assured of.” (x Tim. i.
19.) Let us obey Paul: though we be in the
midst of a tempest, we shall surely be freed
from the dangers: though we remain without
food fourteen days, though hope of safety
may have left us, though we be in darkness
and mist, by doing his bidding, we shall be
freed from the dangers. Let us think that
the whole world is a ship, and in this the evil-
doers and those who have numberless vices,
some rulers, others guards, others just men,
as Paul was, others prisoners, those bound by
their sins: if then we do as Paul bids us, we
perish not in our bonds, but are released from
them: God will give us also to him. Or
think you not that sins and passions are
grievous bonds? for it is not the hands only
that are bound, but the whole man. For tell


Homi_y LIV.]


Maer OF THE-APORPELES:


319


me, when any one possessed of much money
uses it not, nor spends it, but keeps it close,
is he not bound more grievously than any
prisoner by his miserliness, a bond that can-
not be broken? What again, when a man
gives himself up to (the belief in) Fate, is not
he too bound with other fetters ? What, when
he gives himself up to observations (of
times)? What, when to omens? are not
these more grievous than all bonds? What
again, when he gives himself up to an unrea-
sonable lust and to love? Who shall break
in pieces these bonds for you? There is
need of God’s help that they may be loosed.
But when there are both bonds and tempest,
think how great is the amount of dangers.
For which of them is not enough to destroy?
The hunger, the tempest, the wickedness of
those on board, the unfitness of the season ?
But against all these, Paul’s glory stood its
ground. So is it now: let us keep the saints
near us, and there will be no tempest: or
rather, though there be a tempest, there will
be great calm and tranquillity, and freedom
from dangers: since that widow had the saint
for her friend, and the death of her child was
loosed, and she received back her son alive
again. (1 Kings xvii. 17.) Where the feet
of saints step, there will be nothing painful ;
and if such should happen, it is for proving
us and for the greater glory of God. Accus-
tom the floor of thy house to be trodden by
such feet, and an evil spirit will not tread
there. For as where a sweet odor is, there a
bad odor will not find place: so where the
holy unguent is, there the evil spirit is choked,
and it gladdens those who are near it, it
delights, it refreshes the soul. Where thorns


are, there are wild beasts: where hospitality
is, there are no thorns: for almsgiving having
entered in, more keenly than any sickle it
destroys the thorns, more violently than any
fire. Be not thou afraid: (the wicked one)
fears the tracks of saints, as foxes do lions.
For “the righteous,” it says, “is as bold asa
lion.” (Prov. xxviii. 1.) Let us bring these
lions into our house, and all the wild beasts
are put to flight, the lions not needing to roar,
but simply to utter their voice. For not so
much does the roaring of a lion put the wild
beasts to flight, as the prayer of a righteous
man puts to flight evil spirits: let him but
speak, they cower. And where are such men
now to be found, you will say? Everywhere,
if we believe, if we seek, if we take pains.


Where hast thou sought, tell me? When
didst thou take this work in hand? When
didst thou make this thy business? But if


thou seekest not, marvel not that thou dost
not find. For “he that seeketh findeth ”
(Matt. vii. 7), mot he that seeketh not. Lis-
ten to those who live in deserts: away with
thy gold and silver: (such holy men) are to
be found in every part of the world. Though
thou receive not such an one in thy house,
yet go thou to him, live with the man, be at
his dwelling-place, that thou mayest be able
to obtain and enjoy his blessing. Fora great
thing it is to receive a blessing from the
saints : which let us be careful to obtain, that
being helped by their prayers we may enjoy
mercy from God, through the grace and lov-
ing-kindness of His only-begotten Son, with
Whom to the Father and the Holy Ghost
together be glory, might, honor, now and
ever, world without end. Amen.


EOI, LLY.


ACTS


“ And the barbarous peopie showed us no little kind-
ness : for they kindled a fire, and received us every
one, because of the present rain, and because of
the cold. And when Paul had gathered a bundle
of sticks, and laid them on the fire, there came a
viper out of the heat, and fastened on his hand.”


“‘ SHOWED,” he says, “no little kindness to
us—barbarians ” (as they were *)—‘ having
kindled a fire: else it were of no use that


* The Maltese, though undoubtedly civilized, were BapBapor
in the Greek and Roman sense of speaking an unintelligible
language (cf. 1 Cor. xiv. 11). The word might be appropri-
ately rendered ‘‘foreigners.’’ The Maltese were of Phcenician
descent and spoke a mixed dialect.—G. B. S.


SONS). Be


their lives be saved, if the wintry weather
must destroy them. Then Paul having taken
brushwood, laid it on the fire. See how active
he is; observe how we nowhere find him do-
ing miracles for the sake of doing them, but
only upon emergency. Both during the storm
when there was a cause he prophesied, not for
the sake of prophesying, and here again in
the first instance he lays on brushwood :—
nothing for vain display, but (with a simple
view) to their being preserved, and enjoying
some warmth. Then a viper “fastened on
his hand. And when the barbarians saw the


320


THE WORKS OFPNST.) CHiasOs D@xr


|Homity LIV.


venomous beast hang on his hand, they said
among themselves, No doubt this man is a
murderer, whom, though he hath escaped the
sea, yet vengeance suffereth not to live.” (v.
4.) Well also was this permitted, that they
should both see the thing and utter the
thought, in order that, when the result en-
sued, there might be no disbelieving the mir-
acle. Observe their good feeling (towards
the distressed), in saying this (not aloud, but)
among themselves—observe (also) the natural
judgment clearly expressed even among bar-
barians, and how they do not condemn with-
out assigning a reason. And _ these also
behold, that they may wonder the more.
“* And he shook off the beast into the fire, and
felt no harm. Howbeit they looked when he
should have swollen, or fallen down dead sud-
denly: but after they had looked a great
while, and saw no harm come to him, they
changed their minds, and said that he was a
god.” (v.5,6.) They expected him, it says, to
fall down dead: and again, having seen that
nothing of the kind happened to him, they
said, He is a god. Again (viz. as in ch. xiv.
11), another excess on the part of these men.
“In the same quarters were possessions of
the chief man of the island, whose name was
Publius; who received us, and lodged us
three days courteously. And it came to pass,
that the father of Publius lay sick of a fever
and of a bloody flux: to whom Paul entered
in, and prayed, and laid his hands on him, and
healed him.” (v. 7,8.) Behold again another
hospitable man, Publius, who was both rich
and of great possessions: he had_ seen
nothing, but purely out of compassion for
their misfortune, he received them, and took
care of them. So that he was worthy to re-
ceive kindness: wherefore Paul as a requital
for his receiving them, “healed him. So
when this was done, others also, which had
diseases in the island, came, and were healed :
who also honored us with many honors; and
when we departed, they laded us with such
things as were necessary ” (v. 9, 10), both us
and the rest. See how when they were quit
of the storm, they did not become! more neg-
ligent, but what a liberal entertainment was
given to them for Paul’s sake: and three
months were they there, all of them provided
with sustenance. See how all this is done for
the sake of Paul, to the end that the prisoners
should believe, and the soldiers, and the cen-
turion. For if they were very stone, yet from


1 auedcotépous yevouevous, i. e. the impression left on their
minds by the storm was not suffered to wear out, when the
danger was over. What happened on shore, Paul’s miracles,
the kindness and honors shown them by the barbarians for
Paul’s sake, all helped to keep them from relapsing into indif-
ference.


the counsel they heard him giving, and from
the prediction they had heard him making,
and from the miracles they knew him to have
wrought, and from the sustenance they by his
means enjoyed, they must have got a very
high notion of him. See, when the judgment
is right, and not preoccupied by some passion,
how immediately it gets right judgings, and
gives sound verdicts. “And after three
months we departed in a ship of Alexandria,
which had wintered in the isle, whose sign
was Castor and Pollux.* And landing at
Syracuse, we tarried there three days, And
from thence we fetched a compass, and came
to Rhegium: and after one day the south
wind blew, and we came the next day to
Puteoli: where we found brethren, and were
desired to tarry with them seven days: and
so we went toward Rome. And from thence,
when the brethren heard of us, they came to
meet us as far as Appii forum, and the Three
Taverns : whom when Paul saw, he thanked
God, and took courage.” (v. 11-15.) Already
the preaching has reached to Sicily: see how
it has run through (even to those lands): at
Puteoli also they found some: others also
came to meet them. Such was the eagerness
of the brethren, it nothing disconcerted them,
that Paul was in bonds. But observe also
how Paul himself also was affected after the
manner of men. : For it says, “he took cour-
age, when he saw the brethren.” Although
he had worked so many miracles, nevertheless
even from sight he received an accession (of
confidence). from this we learn, that he was
both comforted after the manner of men, and
the contrary. ‘And when we came to Rome,
Paul was suffered to dwell by himself with a
soldier that kept him.” (v. 16.) Leave was
given him to dwell by himself. No slight proof
this also of his being held in much admiration :
it is clear they did not number him among the
rest. “And it came to pass, that after three
days he called together them that were the
chief of the Jews.” Afterthree days/he called
the chief of the Jews, that their ears might not
be preoccupied. And what had he in common
with them? for they would not (else) have
been like to accuse him. Nevertheless, it was
not for this that he cared; it was for the
teaching that he was concerned, and that what
he had to say might not offend them.


(Recapitulation.) “ And the barbarians,” etc.
(v. 2.) The Jews then, beholding all the
many miracles they did, persecuted and _har-


* Or with the sign of the Dioscuri. The reference is to the
ships zzs7gme, an image or picture of the divinities Castor and
Pollux on the prow of the ship. In the current mythology
they were the sons of Jupiter and Leda, and were regarded as
the tutelary divinities of sailors.—G. B. S.


Homity LIV.|


ioe Sete OF THE APOSTEES. 321


assed (Paul); but the barbarians, who had
seen none, merely on the ground of his mis-
fortune, were kind to him.—‘‘ No doubt,” say
they, “this man is a murderer.” (v.4). They
do not simply pronounce their judgment, but
say, ‘‘ No doubt,” (i. e.) as any one may see,
“and vengeance,” say they, “suffereth him
not to live.” Why then, they held also the
doctrine of a Providence, and these barbarians
were far more philosophic than the _ philoso-
phers, who allow not the benefit of a Provi-
dence to extend to things “ below the moon:”’
whereas (these barbarians) suppose God to be
present everywhere, and that although a
(guilty) man may escape many (a danger), he
will not escape in the end. And they do not
assail him forthwith, but for a time respect
him on account of his misfortune: nor do they
openly proclaim their surmise, but speak it
“among themselves: a murderer;” for the
bonds led them to suspect this. ‘They
showed no small kindness,” and yet (some of
them) were prisoners. Let those be ashamed
that say, Do not do good to those in prison: let
these barbarians shame us; for they knew not
who these men were, but simply because they
were in misfortune (they were kind): thus
much they perceived, that they were human
beings, and therefore they considered them
to have a claim upon their humanity. “ And
for a great while,” it says, “they expected
that he would die.” (v. 6.) But when he
shook his hand, and flung off the beast, then
they saw and were astonished. And the mir-
acle did not take place suddenly, but the men
went by the length of time, “after they had
looked a great while,” so plainly was there no
deceit, no haste here (cuvaprayj). “* Publius,” it
says, “lodged them courteously” (v. 7): two
hundred and seventy-six persons. Consider
how great the gain of his hospitality: not as
of necessity, not as unwilling, but as reckon-
ing it a gain he lodged them for three days:
thereafter having met with his requital, he
naturally honored Paul much more, when the
others also received healing. ‘Who also,”
it says, “honored us with many honors”
(v. 10): not that he received wages, God for-
bid; but as it is written, “The workman is
worthy of his meat. And when we departed,
they laded us with such things as were neces-
sary.” (Matt. x. 10.)
thus received them, they also received the
word of the preaching: for it is not to be
supposed, that during an entire three months
they would have had all this kindness shown
them,’ had these persons not believed strongly,


1 ov yap av ev ToLuHVw ToTO’TW SiedexIncav wy Ghodpa av’Twr
This is evidently


muatevoavTwy. (Mod. text *torauvta deA€x Oy.)
The context requires (as we have given in the trans-


corrupt.


21


It is plain that having |


and herein exhibited the fruits (of their con-
version): so that from this we may see a
strong proof of the great number there was of
those that believed. Even this was enough to
establish (Paul’s) credit with those (his fellow-
voyagers). Observe how in all this voyage
they nowhere touched at a city, but (were
cast) on an island, and passed the entire
winter (there, or) sailing—those being herein
under training for faith, his fellow-voyagers, I
mean. (a) “And after three months we de-
parted in a ship of Alexandria, which had
wintered in the isle, whose sign was Castor
and Pollux.” (v. 11.) Probably this was
painted on it: so addicted were they to their
idols. (d@) ‘‘And when the south wind blew,
we came the next day to Puteoli: where we
found brethren, and were desired to tarry
with them seven days: and so we went toward
Rome.” (v. 13, 14.) (&) Observe them tarry-
ing a while, and again hasting onwards. (e)
“ And from thence, when the brethren heard
of us, they came to meet us as far as Appii
forum, and the Three Taverns” (v. 15): not
fearing the danger. (¢) Paul therefore was
now so much respected, that he was even per-
mitted to be by himself: for if even before
this they used him kindly, much more would
they now. (g) “He was suffered,” it says,
“to dwell by himself, with a soldier that kept
him.” (v. 16.) That it might not be possible
for any plot to be laid against him there
either—for there could be no raising of sedt
tion now. So that in fact they were not keep-
ing Paul in custody, but guarding him, so that
nothing unpleasant should happen: for it was
not possible now, in so great a city, and with
the Emperor there, and with Paul’s appeal,
for anything to be done contrary to order.
So surely is it the case, that always through
the things which seem to be against us, all
things turn out for us. “ With the soldier”
for he was Paul’s guard. ‘And having called
together the chief of the Jews” (v. 17), he
discourses to them, who both depart gainsaying,
and are taunted by him, yet they dare not say
anything : for it was not permitted them to
deal with his matter at their own will. For
this is a marvellous thing, that not by the
things which seem to be for our security, but
by their very opposites, all comes to be for us.
And that you may learn this—Pharaoh com-
manded the infants to be cast into the river.


lation). ‘‘ would not have been so hospitably and liberally en-
tertained, such a number as there were of them, two hundred
and seventy-six souls and this for a period of three months :”’
but in dceAex9. perhaps SemAéyxOnoav is latent: “they would
not have been so honored etc., but rather would have been
convicted,’’ etc.—In what follows, the parts had fallen out of
their places thus 4 ots dae Sie hee Mod. text in ¢, ore
hoBnbevtes Tov xivduvoy é&HAPov, connecting this with the first
clause of 4 Kal TaUTa ixava exeivous TLOT Seebal:


THE. WORKS: OF


328


ST CHRYSOS TG


[Homity L.V.


(Exod. 1. 22.) Unless the infants had been
cast forth, Moses would not have been saved,
he would not have been brought up in the
palace. When he was safe, he was not in
honor; when he was exposed, then he was in
honor. But God did this, to show His riches
of resource and contrivance. ‘The Jew threat-
ened him, saying, ‘‘ Wouldest thou kill me?”
(ib. 11. i. 14) and this too was of profit to him.
It was of God’s providence, in order that he
should see that vision in the desert, in order
that the proper time should be completed,
that he should learn philosophy in the desert,
and there live in security. And in all the
plottings of the Jews against him the same
thing happens: then he becomes more illus-
trious. As also in the case of Aaron; they
rose up against him, and thereby made him
more illustrious (Num. xvi. xvii.): that so his
ordination should be unquestionable, that he
might be held in admiration for the future also
from the plates of brass (trav retadwv tov yaAxod).
Of course you know the history: wherefore I
pass over the narration. And if ye will, let
us go over the same examples from the begin-
ning. Cain slew his brother, but in this he
rather benefited him: for hear what Scripture
says, ‘“ The voice of thy brother’s blood crieth
unto Me” (Gen. iv. ro): and again in an-
other place, “ To the blood that speaketh better
things than that of Abel.” (Heb. xii. 24.) He
freed him from the uncertainty of the future,
he increased his reward: we have all learnt
hereby what love God had for him. For what
was he injured? Not a whit, in that he
received his end sooner. For say, what do
they gain, who die more slowly? Nothing:
for the having good days does not depend on
the living many years or few years, but in the
using life properly. The Three Children
were thrown into the furnace, and through
this they became more illustrious: Daniel was
cast into the pit, and thence was he made
more renowned. (Dan. iii. and vi.) You see
that trials in every case bring forth great good
even in this life, much more in the life to
come: but as to malice, the case is the same,
as if a man having a reed should set himself
to fight with the fire: it seems indeed to beat
the fire, but it makes it brighter, and only
consumes itself, For the malice of the
wicked becomes food and an occasion of splen-
dor to virtue: for by God’s turning the un-
righteousness to good account, our character


shines forth all the more. Again, when the
devil works anything of this kind, he makes
those more illustrious that endure. How


then, you will say, was this not the case with
Adam, but, on the contrary, he became more
disgraced? Nay, in this case of all others
God turned (the malice of) that (wicked one)


-Yes, but hear the cause:


to good account: but if (Adam) was the worse
for it, it was he that injured himself: for it is
the wrongs that are done to us by others that
become the means of great good to us, not so
the wrongs which are done by ourselves. As
indeed, because the fact is that when hurt by
others, we grieve, but not so when hurt by
ourselves, therefore it is that God shows, that
he who suffers unjustly at the hands of an-
other, gets renown, but he who injures him-
self, receives hurt: that so we may bear the
former courageously, but not the latter. And
besides, the whole thing there was Adam’s
own doing. Wherefore didst thou the
woman’s bidding? (Gen. iil. 6.) Wherefore
when she counselled thee contrary (to God),
didst thou not repel her? Thou wast assur-
edly thyself the cause. Else, if the devil was
the cause, at this rate all that are tempted
ought to perish: but if all do not perish, the
cause (of our destruction) rests with our-
selves.’ “But,” you will say, ‘all that are
tempted ought (at that rate) to succeed.”
No: for the cause is in ourselves. “At that
rate it ought to follow that (some) perish with-
out the devil’s having anything to do with it.”
Yes: and in fact many do perish without the
devil’s being concerned in it: for surely the
devil does not bring about all (our evil do--
ings); no, much comes also from our own
sluggishness by itself alone: and if he too is
anywhere concerned as a cause, it is from our
offering the occasion. For say, why did the
devil prevail i in Judas’ case? When “Satan
entered into him ” (John xiii. 27), you will say.
it was because “he
was a thief, and bare what was put in the
bag.” (ib. xii. 6.) It was he that himself
gave the devil a wide room for entering into
him: so that it is not the devil who puts into
us the beginning, it is we that receive and
invite him. “ But,” you will say, “if there
were no devil, the evils. would not have be-
come great.” ‘True, but then our punishment
would “admit of no plea for mitigation: but as
it is, beloved, our punishment is more mild,
whereas if we had wrought the evils of our-
selves, the chastisements would be intoler-
able. For say, if Adam, without any counsel,


1 The dialogue seems to proceed thus. ‘If the devil was
the cause of Adam’s fall, at this rate it ought to follow that all
whom the devil tempts should perish (dec kata tovTo mavtas
TOUS TELpaconevous amoAAvaOat): If this be not the case, as cer-
tainly it is not, then, the cause (of our perishing) is with our-
selves (et d¢ BH amdAAvyrat, Tap nas y attia).”’ Then : "AAN’
edet, hyo, TavTas TOUS TELpACOWLEvOUs KaTopOovv: ov’ Tap nas yap
y attia: ede, odynoi, Kai xwpis Tov dcaBoAov amoAdvobar, ** But,’
say you, ‘‘ (at this rate) all that are tempted ought to succeed
(against the Tempter, to come off victorious from the en-


counter).’’ No: for the cause (of our being tempted) is with
ourselves. “ Then people cught to perish | even without the
devil: i.e. ‘It should follow that those who perish, perish


independently of the tempter.’ Yes: in fact many do,” etc.
In the printed text add’ éei—-KaTopbooy, A METRE OE dnédrvabat
are put interrogatively, and in place of the ov map eas yap U7)
aitia of the Mss. (w hich we point Ov. wap nuas y. 7. a.) it has ,


€l Tap 7. 7. a.


Homity LIV.|


Lia ops CEs iS yO) pas i oi i


ALPS TES, 23


3


had committed the sin he did, who would
have snatched him out of the dangers? ‘“ But
he would not have sinned,” you will say?
What right hast thou to say this? For he
who had so little solidity, that was so inert
and so ready for folly as to receive such
advice as this, much more would he without
any counsel have become this (that he did
become). What devil incited the brethren of
Joseph to envy? If then we be watchful,
brethren, the devil becomes to us the cause
even of renown. Thus, what was Job the
worse for his falling into such helplessness of
disiress 5. Speak not of this instance,” you
will say: “(Job was not the worse, ) but ‘the
weak person is the worse.” Yes, and the
weak person is the worse, even if there be no
devil. ‘But in a greater degree,” you will
say, ‘when there is the devil’s power working
along with him.” ‘True, but he is the less
punished, when he has sinned through the
devil’s working with him; for the punish-
ments are not the same for all sins. Let us
not deceive ourselves: the devil is not the
cause of our taking harm, if we be watchful :!
rather what he does, is to awake us out of our
sleep; what he does, is to keep us on the
alert. Let us for a while examine these
things: suppose there were no wild beasts,
no irregular states of the atmosphere; no
sicknesses, no pains, no sorrows, nor anything
else of the kind: what would not man have
become? A hog rather than a man, revelling
in gluttony and drunkenness, and troubled by
none of those things. But as it is, cares and
anxieties are an exercise ‘and discipline of
philosophy, a method for the best of training.
For say, let a man be brought up in a palace,
having no pain, nor care, nor anxiety, and
having neither cause for anger nor failure,
but whatever he sets his mind upon, that let
him do, in that let him succeed, and have all
men obeying him: (see whether) such a man
would not become more irrational than any
wild beast. But as it is, our reverses and our
afflictions are as it were a whetstone to
sharpen us. For this reason the poor are for
the most part wiser than the rich, as being
driven about and tost by many waves. Thus
a body also, being idle and without motion, is
sickly and unsightly : but that which is exer-
cised, and suffers labor and _ hardships, is
more comely and healthy :
find to hold also in the case of the soul.


1 Hom. xxiii. in Gen. § 6, p. 215, A. ‘*‘ 1] exhort you never to
lay the blame upon Satan, but upon your own remissness. I
say not this to exculpate him, for he ‘ goeth about,’ etc. 1 Pet.
v. 8, but to put ourselves in more security, that we may not
exculpate ourselves when we so easily go over to the evil one,
that we may not speak those heartless, senseless words, *W hy
has God left the evil one so much freedom to seduce men.’


and this we should |


These words betoken the greatest ingratitude. Consider this ;
God has left him that freedom, to this verv end, that by fear |
of the enemy he may keep us ever watchful and sober.”’


Iron also, lying unused, is spoilt, but if
worked it shines brightly; and in like manner
a soul which is kept in motion. Now these
reverses are precisely what keeps the soul in
motion. Arts again perish, when the soul is
not active: but it is active when it has not
everything plain before it: it is made active
by adverse things. If there were no adverse
things, there would be nothing to stir it: thus,
if everything existed ready-made in beautiful
sort, art would not have found wherein to ex-
ercise itself. So, if all things were level to
our understanding, the soul would not find
wherein to exert itself: if it had to be carried
about everywhere, it would be an unsightly
object. See you not, that we exhort nurses
not to make a practice of carrying children
always, that they may not bring them into a
habit (of wanting to be carried) and so make
them helpless? This is why those children
which are brought up under the eyes of their
parents are weak, in consequence of the in-
dulgence, which by sparing them too much
injures their health. It is a good thing, even
pain in moderation; a good thing, care; a
good thing, want ; for? they make us strong:
good also are their opposites: but each of
these when in excess destroys us; and the
one relaxes, but the other (by overmuch
tension) breaks us. Seest thou’ not, that
Christ also thus trains His own disciples ?
If they needed these things, much more do
we. But if we need them, let us not grieve,
but even rejoice in our afflictions. For these
are remedies, answering to our wounds, some
of them bitter, others mild; but either of
them by itself would be useless. Let us
therefore return thanks to God for all these
things: for He does not suffer them to happen
at random, but for the benefit of our souls.
Therefore, showing forth our gratitude, let us
return Him thanks, let us glorify Him, let us
bear up courageously, considering that it is
but for a time, and stretching forward our
minds to the things future, that we may both
lightly bear the things present, and be counted
worthy to attain unto the good things to come,
through the grace and mercy of His only be-
gotten Son, with Whom to the Father and the
Holy Ghost together be glory, might, honor,
now and ever, world without end. Amen.


2 The printed text, toxvpods yap nuas moi Kada Kal Ta
eats Ben., fortes enim nosreddunt gue bona et contraria
sunt. But cada nai 7a évavtia clearly answers to KaAodv Kai
AumH TUmMETpOS, KaAdY Kat HpovTis, Kaddv cai évdeca. Only it may
be doubted whether ta évav7ia is to be taken here as above,

““Good also are adverse things, or, “their opposites,”’ i. e.
‘* freedom from sorrow. and care, and want, if in moderation.”
But the context speaks for the latter: viz. ‘(In moderation),
for each of them (both these things and of their opposites) be-
ing out of measure destroys : and as the one leaves no solidity
or Stability (xat 70 wév Xavvot, i. €. immoderate joy, ease, com-
fort), so the other by excessive tension breaks.’*—So below by
ravta we understand “‘these things and their opposites,”
which are described as ra wév mexpa, ta S€ nuepa (mod. text


n5é€a)


>


3 THE WORKS, OF


ST. CHRYSOSTGRE |Homity LV.


Pee MTT Y, soa


ACTS XXVIII. 17-20.


“ And it came to pass, that after three days Paul called ;


the chief of the Jews together: and when they
were come together, he said unto them, Men and
brethren, thought I have committed nothing against
the people, or customs of our fathers, yet was I de-
livered prisoner from Jerusalem into the hands of
the Romans. Who, when they had examined me,
would have let me go, because there was no cause
of death in me. But whenthe Jews spake against
it, I was constrained to appeal unto Cesar; not
that I had aught to accuse my nation of. For this
cause therefore have I called for you, to see you,
and to speak with you: because that forthe hope
of Israel I am bound with this chain.”


He wished to exculpate both himself and
others ; himself, that they might not accuse
him, and by so doing hurt themselves; and
those (others), that it might not seem that the
whole thing was of their doing. For it was
likely that a report was prevalent, that he had
been delivered up by the Jews; and this was
enough to alarm them. He therefore ad-
dresses himself to this, and defends himself
as to his own conduct.* “How then is it
reasonable,” it might be said, “that they
should deliver thee up without a cause?”
The Roman governors, he says, bear me wit-
ness, who wished to let me go. ‘“ How was it
then that they did not let (thee) go?”
‘‘When the Jews spake against it,” he says.
Observe how he extenuates (in speaking of)
their charges against him.’ Since if he had
wished to aggravate matters, he might have
used them so as to bear harder upon them.


* Paul’s prompt summoning of the unbelieving Jews was
due as Chrys. reminds us, to his desire to conciliate them and
thus to prevent the rise of new obstacles to the progress of the
gospel. The apostle might naturally suppose that the Jews of
Jerusalem, who were bent upon destroying him, had lodged
information against him with their brethren at Rome and that
his appearance as a prisoner might still further excite their
prejudice and opposition. This view of Paul’s action removes
the objection that he could not have given attention to the
Jews before making the acquaintance of the Christian church
(Zeller). He had, however, made their acquaintance ; the
brethren had gone out to meet him on his approach to the city
and he had probably spent the most of the three days referred
toin theircompany. Zeller has objected still more zealously
to Paul’s statement.
ple or the customs of the fathers.”’
is, that he had never sought the destruction or subversion of


the Jewish law and customs, but had ever labored in the line of |


the Messianic fulfilment of them.
tagonism to the law was directed against justification by the
Law.’

1 viz. by saying only avtiAeyovtwy tov “Iovd., whereas they
had shown the utmost malignity against him, accusing him of
crimes which they could not prove, and “saying that he was
not fit to live: ’’ but he is so forbearing, that though he might
have turned all this against them, he sinks the mention of it,
etc.


‘*T have done nothing against this peo- |
Paul’s meaning, however, |


Meyer fitly says: ‘‘ His an- |


Wherefore, he says, “I was constrained to
appeal unto Cesar:” so that his whole speech
is of a forgiving nature. What then? didst
thou this, that thou mightest accuse them?
No, he says: “‘ Not that I had aught to accuse
my nation of:”’ but that I might escape the
danger. For it is for your sakes “that I am
bound with this chain.” So far am I, he says,
from any hostile feeling towards you. Then
they also were so subdued by his speech, that
they too apologized for those of their own
nation: “‘ And they said unto him, We neither
received letters out of Judea concerning thee,
neither any of the brethren that came showed
or spake any harm of thee.” (v. 21.) Neither
through letters, nor through men, have they
made known any harm of thee. Nevertheless,
we wish to hear from thyself: “‘ But we desire
to hear of thee what thou thinkest” (v. 22): -
and then forestalled him by showing their own
sentiments. ‘‘ For as concerning this sect, it
is known to us, that everywhere it is spoken
against. And when they had appointed hima
day, there came many to him into his lodging ;
to whom he expounded and testified the king-
dom of God, persuading them concerning
Jesus, both out of the Law of Moses and out
of the Prophets, from morning till evening.
And some believed the things which were
spoken, and some believed not.” (v. 23, 24.)
They said not, we speak against it, but “it is
spoken against.” Then he did not immedi-
|ately answer, but gave them a day, and they
came to him, and he discoursed, it says, ‘‘ both
out of the Law of Moses, and out of the
Prophets. And some believed, and some be-
believed not. And when they agreed not
among themselves, they departed, after that
Paul had spoken one word, Well spake the
Holy Ghost by Esaias the prophet unto our
|fathers, saying, Go unto this people, and say,
Hearing ye shall hear, and shall not under-
stand; and seeing ye shall see, and not per-
/ceive: for the heart of this people is waxed
and their ears are dull of hearing,
and their eyes have they closed; lest they
should see with their eyes, and hear with their
‘ears, and understand with their heart, and
should be converted, and I should heal them.”
(v. 25-27.) But when they departed, as they


>
<


| gross,


2


Homity LV.] ire, Ae ts OF


THE JAPOSTLES. 325


were opposed to each other, then he reproaches
them, not because he wished to reproach
those (that believed not), but to confirm these
(that believed). ‘Well said Esaias,” says he
to them. So that to the Gentiles it is given to
know this mystery. No wonder then, if they
did gainsay: this was foretold from the first.
Then again he moves their jealousy (on the
score) of them of the Gentiles. “ Be it known
therefore unto you, that the salvation of God
is sent unto the Gentiles, and that they will hear
it. And when he had said these words, the
Jews departed, and had great reasoning among
themselves. And Paul dwelt two whole years
in his own hired house, and received all that
came in unto him, preaching the kingdom of
God, and teaching those things which concern
the Lord Jesus Christ, with all confidence, no
man forbidding him. Amen.” (v. 28-31.)
It shows the freedom he had now: without
hindrance in Rome, he who had been hin-
dered in Judea; and he remained teaching
there for two years. What of the (years)
after these? *


(Recapitulation.) (d) “Who having ex-
amined me,” says he, “ found nothing in me ”
(v. 18). When those ought to have rescued,
they “delivered (him) into the hands of the
Romans.” And such the superabundance,*
* * because those had not power to condemn,
but delivered him prisoner. ‘ Not as having
aught to accuse my nation of,” (v. 19) am I
come. See what friendliness of expression !
“my nation:” he does not hold them as
aliens. He does not say, I do not accuse,
nut. 1" have’ not (whereof) ‘to *accuse:”
although he had suffered so many evils at
their hands. But nothing of all this does he
say, nor make his speech offensive: neither
does he seem to be sparing them as matter
of favor. For this was the main point, to
show that they delivered him prisoner to the
Romans, * when those ought to have con-


1 Ti 6m ta wera Tavta; For the answer to this question, see
the Recapitulation.—The remainder of the Exposition had
fallen into extreme confusion, in consequence of the original
redactor’s having read the notes in the order 2, 4, 6: 1, 3,5: 7:
and this is followed by another series of trajections. The
restoration of the true order here, and in the numerous cases
of the like kind in the former homilies, was no easy matter;
but being effected, it speaks for itself. Later scribes (of the
old text) have altered a few words here and there: but the
framer of the mod. text has endeavored to make it read
smoothly, in point of grammar, little regarding the sense and
coherence of the whole.

2 Kat tocavty 7 meptovata, i. e. not only the Jews could prove
nothing against him, but the Romans also, to whom they
delivered him, after strict and repeated examinations, found
nothing in him worthy of death. Soex abundanti, enough
and more than enough, was his innocence established. Mod.
text adds tns €AevOepias.

_ 3 Thisclause 70 detEar 67e Pwmators mapedwkav Séoucov is want-
ing in A. C. In the next clause. S€ov éexetvous Katadixacat,
* whereas, had I been guilty, iose, the Jews at Jerusalem, ought
to have condemned me, instead of that, ‘ they delivered me pris-
oner to the Romans,’ and the consequence was, that ‘I was
compelled to appeal unto Cesar.’’’ But this clause being fol-


demned him. (a) ‘“ For this cause,” he says,
“‘T wished to see you” (vy. 20): that it might
not be in any man’s power to accuse me, and
to say what (naturally) might suggest itself
(ra rapioTaueva), that having escaped their
hands I have come for this: not to bring evils
upon others, but myself fleeing from evils.
“TI was compelled to appeal unto Czsar.”
Observe them also speaking more mildly
to him. “We beg,” say they: and wish
to speak in exculpation of those (at Jeru-
salem). (¢) Whereas they ought to accuse
them, they plead for them: by the very fact of
their exonerating them, they do in fact accuse
them.* (4) For this very thing was a proof
that they knew themselves exceedingly in the
wrong. Had they been confident, they would
at any rate have done this, so that he should
not have it in his power to make out his story
in his own way, and besides they shrank from
coming. And by their many times attempting
they showed * * (/) “As for this sect, it is
known to us,” say they, “that it is everywhere
spoken against.” (v. 21, 21.)* True, but (peo-


lowed by e, mod. text connects thus: tovs d€ katadixagat deov
éxetvous, S€ov Katyyopjaat: but whereas ¢hese (the Jews at
Rome) ought to have condemned those (the Jews at Jeru-
salem), ought to have accused them, they rather apologize for
them, etc.

4 S€ov exelvwy KatTynyopjoat: amoAoyourtat Si av KaTyyopovow
avtav. Werestore it thus, amoAoyovvta: Si av amoAoyourTat,
Kkatyyopovey avt@y. And in (4), TovTo mév yap avto for—avTov.
‘This very thing,’’ i. e. their neither sending letters concern-
ing him to Rome, nor coming themselves; “if they had been
confident of their cause (€6appovv), kav TovTo éemoingay, they
would at any rate have sent letters concerning him, if they did
not come themselves. ote pn Suvnbyvac ocuvapmacar pe,
Erasmus, who here makes his version from the old text, zta
ne possent me simul rapere. The mod. text “for if they had
been confident, they would at least have done this and come
together, wate a’Tov ovvapracat, ut ipsum secum attraherent.”
(Ben.) It does not appear what me has to do here, unless the
words, defectively reported, are put in St. Paul’s mouth:
‘‘ if’? he might say, ‘‘they were confident, they would have
done this, so that I should not be able ovvapraca.”’ The
expression ovvapracac (sc. 70 Gntovmevov) is a term of logic,
‘to seize to one’s self as proved some point which is yet in
debate and not granted by the opponent: therefore a fefitZo
princifit. Above, p. 321, we had ovvaprayy in the sense of
‘‘ jumping hastily to a conclusion.” Later authors also use it
in the sense, ‘‘ to suppress.’’ See above, p. 209, note ®. Here,
‘they would at any rate have written letters concerning him
(or, me), that so he (or, I) might not be able to have it all his
(or, my) own way:”’ to beg the point in dispute, and run off
with his own justification.—aAdAws Te Kai €ABeiy wxynoar, * es-
pecially as they shrunk from SooUne Kai TO TOAAaKLS EmLXEL-
pioa édectav, A., emexnpar edecoav.”” ead Kal T@ 1. emcxetpyoat
‘by their repeated attempts (to slay him?)’’ édecav o7e ovK
€@appouv, or oTe éSeccav. Mod. text. ‘But now, not being
confident they shrunk from coming; especially as by their
frequent attempting, they showed that they were not confi--
dent.”

* Needless difficulties have been found inv. 22. It is said
that the Jews speak as if they had heard of the Christian
Church at Rome, which some years before is represented by
Paul’s Epistle to the Romans as large and flourishing (Rom.
i. 8), only from hearsay, and that Luke must have represented
them as so speaking in order to represent Paul as the founder
of the Roman Church. For the reserve of the Jews, however,
plausible and sufficient reasons can be given, if the fact that
they say no more than they do ay aha explanation. To usit
does not seem to require any. he Jews do not state that
they know xofhing concerning the Roman Christians. They
speak of the ‘‘ sect’ in general, but do not say that they know
of it only by hearsay. They simply state one thing which they
know, not Aow they know it, nor hag it is ad/ that they know.
This statement served their purpose to commit themselves in
no way against Paul concerning whom they had received no
official information from Jerusalem (vy. 21) as also the purpose
| to encourage Paul to explain himself and defend his cause
| fully and frankly to them.—G. B. S.


326


THE WORKS OF (Sf, CHEYSOS.l@ar


{Homity LV.


ple) are also everywhere persuaded (as, in fact,
here), ‘‘some were persuaded, and some be-
lieved not. And when they had appointed him
a day,” etc. (v. 23-25.) See again how not by
miracles but by Law and Prophets he puts
them to silence, and how we always find him
doing this. And yet he might also have
wrought signs; but then it would no longer
have been matter of faith. In fact, this
(itself) was a great sign, his discoursing from
the Law and the Prophets. Then that you
may not deem it strange (that they believed
not), he introduces the prophecy which saith,
“Hearing ye shall hear and not understand,”
more now than then: “and ye shall see and
not perceive’ (v. 26) more now than then.
This is not spoken for the former sort, but for
the unbelievers. How then? Was it con-
trary to the prophecy, that those believed ?
(““Go,”) it says, “unto this people” (that is),
to the unbelieving people. He did not say
this to insult them, but to remove the offence.
“Be it known then,” he says, “unto you, that
unto the Gentiles is sent the salvation of
God. They,” says he, “will hear it too.” (v.
28.) Then why dost thou discourse to us?
Didst thou not know this? Yes, but that ye
might be persuaded, and that I might excul-
pate myself, and give none a handle (against
me). (¢) The unbelieving were they that
withdrew. But see how they do not now form
plots against him. For in Judea they had a
sort of tyranny. Then wherefore did the
Providence of God order that he should go
thither, and yet the Lord had said, ‘‘ Get thee
out quickly from Jerusalem?” (ch. xxii. 18.)
That both their wickedness might be shown,
and Christ’s prophecy made good, that they
would not endure to hear him: and so that all
might learn that he was ready to suffer all
things, and that the event might be for the
consolation of those in Judea: for there also
(the brethren) were suffering many grievous
evils. But if while preaching the Jewish doc-
trines, he suffered thus, had he preached the
doctrines of the glory of Christ, how would
they have endured him? While “purifying
himself” (ch. xxi. 26) he was intolerable, and
how should he have been tolerable while
preaching? What lay ye to his charge?
What have ye heard? He spoke nothing of
the kind. He was simply seen, and he ex-
asperated all against him. Well might he
then be set apart for the Gentiles: well might
he be sent afar off: there also destined to dis-
course to the Gentiles. First he calls the


1 i, e. “You say, He is accused of preaching everywhere
against the Law—but of what do ye accuse him? what have
you heard him say ?
They did but see him in the Temple. xxi. 27, and straightway
stirred up all the people against him.”


Not a word of the kind did he speak. |


Jews, then having shown them the facts he
comes to the Gentiles. (ch. xxiv. 18.) ‘ Well
spake the Holy Ghost,” etc. But this saying,
“The Spirit said,” is nothing wonderful: for
an angel also is said to say what the Lord
saith : but? He (the Spirit) not so. When one
is speaking of the things said by the angel, one
does not say, Well said the angel, but, Well
said the Lord. ‘“ Well said the Spirit:” as
much as to say, It is not me that ye dis-
believe. But God foreknew this from the
first. ‘‘ He discoursed,” it says, ‘‘ with bold-
ness, unhindered ” (v. 31): for it is possible to
speak with boldness, yet hindered. His bold-
ness nothing checked: but in fact he also
spoke unhindered. (c) “ Discoursed,?”’ it says,
“the things concerning the kingdom of God :”
mark, nothing of the things of sense, nothing
of the things present. (/) But of his affairs
after the two years, what say we? (4) (The
writer) leaves the hearer athirst for more: the
heathen authors do the same (in their writ-
ings), for to know everything makes the
reader dull and jaded. Or else he does this,
(e) not having it in his power to exhibit it
from his own personal knowledge. (@) Mark
the order of God’s Providence,’ “I have been
much hindered from coming unto you...
having a great desire these many years to-


9


2 GAN’ éxecvos ovKeTe, A., execvwv. Cat., execvo. Mod. text
adr’ évTavOa pév ovtws, cet 5€ ovKeTr. "AAAws b€ wai—. He
makes this an argument against those who affirmed the Holy
Ghost to be a created Angel. There are many places where
an Angel speaks in the name of the Lord, and what the Angel
says, is the Lord’s saying. But in speaking of such a com-
munication, one would not say, Well spake the Angel, but,
Well spake the Lord. So here, if the Spirit were but an
Angel, St. Paul would not have said, **‘ Well spake the Holy
Spirit: he would have said, Well spake the Lord. Hence the
clause add’ éxetvos or exetvo (Sc. TO Iv.) ovxeTe means, “* But not
so the Spirit,’’ i.e. What has been said of the case of an
Angel speaking in the name of the Lord, does not apply here:
the Holy Spirit speaks in His own name. The sense is
obscured by the insertion of the clause xadas eize, ¢., 70 Lv.
To” A. (which we omit) before aAX’ éxetvos ovKeTL,

3 Here follows another series of trajections: the parts, as it
seems, having been transcribed from the notes in this order,
5) 3, 11 6) 4, 22°75 (91.0) 20. Mode text-amserts here; eee
Paul,” it says, ““dwelt two whole years in his own hired
house.”’ So without superfluity was he, rather so did ke imi-
tate his Master in all things, since he had even his dwelling
furnished him, not from the labors of others, but from his own
working: for the words, ‘‘in his own hired house,” signify
this. But that the Lord also did not possess a house, hear
Him saying to the man who had not rightly said, *‘I will fol-
low Thee whithersoever Thou goest: The foxes’ said He
‘have holes, and the birds of the air have nests: but the Son
of Man hath not where to lay His head.’’ Thus did He from
His own self teach that we should possess nothing, nor be
exceedingly attached to things of this life. ‘And he re-
ceived,’' it says, ‘tall that came in unto him, preaching the
kingdom of God.’’ See him speaking nothing of the things of
sense; nothing concerning the present things, but all concern-
ing the kingdom of God.’’ And below after 4, in place of c—g,
the same has: ‘‘ But he does this, and tells not what things
came afterwards, deeming it would be superfluous for those
who would take in hand the things he had written, and who
would learn from these how to add on to the narration: for
what the things were which went before, such doubtless he
found these which came after. Hear too what he says, writ-
ing after these things (?) to the Romans, ‘‘ Whensoever I take
my journey into Spain, I will come to you.”

4 The report is very defective, but the meaning in general
is this: See how his desire of coming to Rome is accomplished,
but not in the way which he proposed. Hence in (%) we do
not hesitate to supply the negative which is omitted in the
Mss. and the printed text. “Opas mas OY ravta mpoewpa.


Homity LV.]


come unto you.” (Rom. xv. 22,23.) (d@) But
he fed them with hopes. (g) I am in haste
to go to Spain, and “I hope,” says he, “ to
see you in my journey, and to be brought
thitherward on my journey by you, if first I be
filled with your company in some measure.”
(ib. 24.) (z) Of this he says, I will come and
rest together with you “in the fulness of the
blessing of the Gospel” (ib. 29): and again
“Tam going to Jerusalem to minister to the
saints” (ib. 25): this is the same that he has
said here, ‘‘ To do alms to my nation I came.”
(Acts xxiv. 17.) (4) Do you mark how he did
not foresee everything—that sacred and divine
head, the man higher than the heavens, that
had a soul able to grasp all at once, the holder
of the first place—Paul? The man whose
very name, to them that know him, suffices
for rousing of the soul, for vigilance, for shak-
ing off all sleep! Rome received him bound,
coming up from the sea, saved from a ship-
wreck—and was saved from the shipwreck of
error. Like an emperor that has fought a
naval battle and overcome, he entered into
that most imperial city. (4) He was nearer
now to his crown. Rome received him bound,
and saw him crowned and proclaimed con-


THe ACis OF THE APOSTLES.


queror. There he had said, I will rest
together with you: but this was the beginning
of a course once more, and he added trophies
to trophies, a man not to be overcome.
Corinth kept him two years, and Asia three,
and this city two for this time; a second time
he again entered it, when also he was consum-
mated, Thus he escaped then, and having
filled the whole world, he so brought his life to
a close. Why didst thou wish to learn what
happened after these two years? ‘Those too
are such as these: bonds, tortures, fightings,
imprisonments, lyings in wait, false accusa-
tions, deaths, day by day. Thou hast seen
but a small part of it? How much soever
thou hast seen, such is he for all the rest. As
in the case of the sky, if thou see one part of
it, go where thou wilt thou shalt see it such as
this: as it is with the sun, though thou see its
rays but in part, thou mayest conjecture the
rest: sois it with Paul. His Acts thou hast
seen in part; such are they all throughout,
teeming with dangers. He was a heaven hav-
ing in it the Sun of Righteousness, not such
a sun (as we see): so that that man was better
than the very heaven. Think you that this is
a small thing—when you say “ The Apos-
tle,” immediately every one thinks of him (as),
when you say “The Baptist,” immediately |
they think of John? To what shall one com-
pare his words? To the sea, or even to the
ocean? . But nothing is equal to them. More
copious than this (sea) are (his) streams ; |


purer and deeper ; so that one would not err
in calling Paul’s heart both a sea and a
heaven, the one for purity, the other for
depth. He is a sea, having for its voyagers
not those who sail from city to city, but those
from earth to heaven: if any man sail in this
sea, he will have a prosperous voyage. On
this sea, not winds, but instead of winds the
Holy and Divine Spirit wafts the souls which
sail thereon: no waves are here, no rock, no
monsters: all is calm. It is a sea which is
more calm and secure than a haven, having no
bitter brine, but a pure fountain both sweeter
than * *, and brighter and more transparent
than the sun: a sea it is, not having precious
stones, nor purple dye as ours, but treasures
far better than those. He who wishes to de-
scend into this sea, needs not divers, needs
not oil, but much loving-kindness (o:2av6pwziac) :
he will find in it all the good things that
are in the kingdom of Heaven. He will
even be able to become a king, and to
take the whole world into his possession,
and to be in the greatest honor; he who
sails on this sea will never undergo ship-
wreck, but will know all things well. But as
those who are inexpert in this (our visible
sea) are suffocated (in attempting to dive
therein), so is it in that other sea : which is just
the case with the heretics, when they attempt
things above their strength. It behooves
therefore to know the depth, or else not to
venture. If we are to sail on this sea, let us
come well-girded. “I could not,” he says,
“speak unto you as unto spiritual, but as unto
Carnal.” .(z° Cor. iii...) Let) mo,one wees
without endurance sail on this sea. Let us
provide for ourselves ships, that is, zeal,
earnestness, prayers, that we may pass over
the sea in quiet. For indeed this is the living
water. Like as if one should get a mouth of
fire, such a mouth does that man get who
knows Paul well: like as if one should have a
sharp sword, so again does such an one be-
come invincible. And for the understanding
of Paul’s words there is needed also a pure
life. For therefore also he said: “ Ye are be-
come such as have need of milk, seeing ye are
dull of hearing.” (Heb.v.11, 12.) Forthere
is, there is an infirmity of hearing. For as a
stomach which is infirm could not take in
wholesome food (which it finds) hard of di-
gestion, so a soul which is become tumid and
heated, unstrung and relaxed, could not re-
ceive the word of the Spirit. Hear the dis-
ciples saying, “ This is a hard saying : who
can hear it” (John vi. 60)? But if the soul
be strong and healthy, all is most easy, all is


‘light : it becomes more lofty and buoyant: it


is more able to soar and lift itself on high.


328 THE WORKS -OF TST CHWS 05 Teor {Homity LV.


Knowing then these things, let us bring our|wherein are no waves, and attain unto the
soul into a healthy state: let us emulate Paul, | good things promised to them that love Him,
and imitate that noble, that adamantine soul :| through the grace and mercy of our Lord Jesus
that, advancing in the steps of his life, we may| Christ, with Whom to the Father and Holy
be enabled to sail through the sea of this|Ghost together be glory, might, honor, now
present life, and to come unto the haven!and ever, world without end. Amen.


THE HOMILIES OF ST. JOHN CHRYSOSTOM,


ON THE


EPISTLE OF ST. PAUL THE APOSTLE


ReOovicAn NCS:


TRANSLATED BY


RS Neoe le os) MOR RS 2) MwA,


OF EXETER COLLEGE, OXFORD, AND


REV; W. EH. SIMGCOX,
FELLOW OF QUEEN’S COLLEGE, OXFORD,
REVISED, WITH NOTES, BY


GEORGE By. STEVENS, Px.D. D.D.,


PROFESSOR IN YALE UNIVERSITY.


PREFACE TO HOMILIES ON ROMANS.


St. CHRysostom’s Commentary on the Epistle to the Romans is one of the closest and most argumenta-
tive of those he has left us. The style of the Epistle itself called for this, being such as almost constantly to
remind an attentive reader of the necessity of forming some notion of the views and feelings of the persons to
whom it was originally addressed. To this point St. Chrysostom has paid much attention, and has conse-
quently obtained’a far clearer view of the doctrinal bearing of the Epistle than most other commentators. His
early rhetorical education would probably have given him even too strong a bias toward that kind of exposi-
tion, but for his subsequent course of severe discipline and ascetic devotion. As it is, the rhetorical element in
his commentary is of very great value. His ready apprehension of the effect intended to be produced by the
style and wording of a sentence, is often the means of clearing up what might otherwise seem obscure or even
inconsistent. An example of this occurs in the beginning of the seventh chapter, which he expounds in the
12th Homily. The illustration of our release from the Law of Moses by partaking in the Death of Christ, by
the dissolution of marriage at death, is so stated in the Epistle as to contain an apparent inconsistency, as
though the death of the Law, and the death of the person, were confounded. And the various readings only
shift the difficulty, without removing it. This, however, he has very ably shown to be, in fact, an argument
a fortior?. Other cases will strike other persons as they happen to have found difficulty in the Text.

A far higher qualification for interpreting St. Paul, in whom, as much as in any of the sacred writers, the
Man appears as well as the guiding Spirit, was that peculiar affection with which he regarded him, and which
he expresses particularly in the beginning of the Introduction, and at the close of the last Homily. The effect
of this is perhaps best traced in the commentary on Rom. ix. 3, Hom. xvi.

The elaborate composition of these Homilies, and the close attention which it must have required, has
been thought an indication that they must have been delivered before the Author was engaged in the cares of
the Bishopric of Constantinople. But Tillemont has detected even surer indications, which place the point
clearly beyond all question. In his exhortation to Charity, Hom. viii. he speaks of himself and his
hearers as under one Bishop. It has been objected that he speaks of himself as Pastor, in Hom. xxix.
but he does the same in other Homilies, certainly delivered by him when he was only a preacher at
Antioch, and the terms are less definite than in the other case, v. ad: P. Ant. Hom. xx. on the Statues.
Besides, he seems to address persons who have ready access to the place in which St. Paul taught and was
bound, which cannot be shown to tally with Constantinople, but evidently agrees with Antioch. The binding
of St. Paul there mentioned is not, however, on record, and it is just possible he may mean in that expression
to refer to another place.

Some account of the life of the Author has been given in the Preface to the Homilies on the First Epistle
to the Corinthians, already translated.1 It may be worth while, however, to notice particularly, in connection
with this work, the manner in which St. Chrysostom was quoted in the Pelagian controversy, as some of the
passages are taken from it.

St. Augustin, adv. Julianum, |. 1, c. vi. discusses a passage in a Homily to the newly baptized, which was
alleged against the doctrine of Original Sin. He had spoken of infants as not having sins, meaning of course
actual sins, as the plural number implies. The words were, however, easily turned in translation so as to bear
another sense. St. Augustin quotes on the other side his Letter to Olympias, that “Adam by his sin con-
demned the whole race of men.” And Hom. ix. in Gen. c. 1. v. 28, where he speaks of the loss of command
over the creation, as a penalty of the Fall. And finally, a passage from the Homily before quoted (as


1 [ For this a more complete sketch of the Life and Work of St. Chrysostom has been given by the Editor in the Prolego-
mena to the first volume. ]
Aas


PREFACE TO: HOMILVIES ON ROMA:


332


ad Neophytos), in which he speaks of our Lord finding us “ bound by a hereditary debt; ” and one in Hom. x.
of this Commentary, viz. that on Rom. v. 14. These are sufficient to make it clear, that St. Chrysostom did
not hold any Pelagian doctrine on this point.

With respect to Free-will, he has one or two passages, as in Hom. on the words of St. Paul, 2 Cor. iv. 13.
Ben, t. iii. p. 264. “ That first believing, and obeying when called, is of our good will; but when the founda-
tion of faith is laid, we need the assistance of the Spirit.” And on St. John i. 38. Ben. 8. p. 107, p. 154, O. T.
“that God does not precede our wills with His gifts ; but when we have begun, when we have sent our will before,
then He gives us abundant opportunities of salvation.” However, in Hom. lviii. in Gen. he says, “though he
received help from above, yet he first did his own part. So let us persuade ourselves, that though we strive
ever so much, we can do no good thing at all, except we are aided by help from above. For as we can never
do anything aright without that help, so unless we contribute our own share, we shall not be able to obtain help
fromabove.’’ This illustrates his meaning about doing our own part frst, and shows that he does not mean
to exclude Divine aid in the very beginning of good actions, only not saferseding the motion of our will. The
word gifts is also to be observed. He probably did not think of its being applicable to the first motions of
prevenient grace, intending himself the Evangelical gifts. This view of his meaning seems to solve the difficul-
ties of his expressions, so far as is necessary in a writer more rhetorical than logical. Some passages in this
Commentary bear on the point, as on Rom. il. 16, and viii. 26.

In a Letter to Olympias, shortly before his death, he laments the errors of a “ Monk Pelagius,” and it is
supposed that he means the well-known heretic.

The present Translation is from the text of Savile, except where otherwise noted. For the first sixteen
Homilies, several Mss. have been collated in Paris, with a view to an Edition of the original, the rest of the
collation is not yet come to hand. Four contain nearly the whole of the Commentary, and three more several
parts of it: two of these were partially used by the Benedictine Editors, and supply some valuable readings in
the latter Homilies. There is also one Ms. in the Bodleian Library, which has many mistakes, but agrees in
general with the best readings in those which have been collated. It contains nearly the whole text as far as
Hom. xxx. and has been entirely collated after Hom. xvi. and for a great part of the earlier Homilies.

The Editors are indebted for the Translation, and much of the matter contained in the Notes, to the Rev-
erend J. B. Morris, M. A., of Exeter College, as well as for the Index.

C. MARRIOTT.


The Benedictine text having been revised by Mr. Field with singular acumen by aid of collations of all
European Mss. of any account, it was not thought right to republish this important volume without revising
the translation by that text. This was kindly undertaken by the Rev. W. H. Simcox, late Fellow of Queen’s
College, and has been executed with the care and exactness to be expected from that accomplished scholar. In
other respects, he has with a remarkable modesty left the previous translation untouched.

1876 BBS bush.


CUNTEN TS 00 THE TOMILIES,


ARGUMENT : : : C ; : - : : - : : : : : ;

HomiLy I.—Rom. i. 7, 2. Paul, a servant of Jesus Christ, called to be an Apostle, separated unto the
Gospel of God which He promised afore by His prophets in the Holy Scriptures. - - : ;

HomiLy II.—Rom. i. 8. First, I thank my God through Jesus Christ for you all, that your faith is pro-
claimed throughout the whole world

Homity III.—Rom. i. 18. For the wrath of God is revealed from heaven against all ungodliness and
unrighteousness of men, who hold down the truth in unrighteousness

Homity IV.—Rom. i. 26, 27. For this cause God gave them up unto vile passions: for their
women changed the natural use into that which is against nature: and likewise also the men, leav-
ing the natural use of the woman, burned in their lust one toward another .

Homity V.—Rom. i. 28. And even as they refused to have God in their knowledge, God gave them up
unto a reprobate mind, to do those things which are not fitting : ; : - :

Hominy VI.—Rom. ii. 17, 18. But if thou bearest the name of a Jew, and restest upon the law, and
gloriest in God, and knowest his will, and approvest the things that are excellent, being instructed
out of thelaw - : : c

Homity VII.—Rom. iii. 9-18. What then? are we in worse case than they? No, in no wise: for we
before laid to the charge both of Jews and Greeks, that they are all under sin. As it is written, There
is none righteous, no, not one: there is none that understandeth, there is none that seeketh after
God. They have all turned aside, they are together become unprofitable; there is none that doeth
good, no, not so much as one. Their throat is an open sepulchre; with their tongues have they used
deceit ; the poison of asps is under their lips; whose mouth is full of cursing and bitterness; their feet
are swift toshed blood; destruction and misery are in their ways: and the way of peace have they not
known: there is no fear of God before their eyes

Homity VIII.—Rom. iv. 1, 2. What shall we then say that Abraham, our forefather according to the
flesh, hath found? For if Abraham was justified by works, he hath whereof to glory; but not toward
God

Homity IX.—Rom. iv. 23. Now it was not written for his sake alone that it was reckoned unto him; but
for our sake also, unto whom it shall be reckoned, who believe on him that raised Jesus our Lord
from the dead

Homity X.—Rom. v. 12. Therefore as through one man sin entered into the world, and death through
sin, and so death passed unto all men, for that all sinned .

HomILY XI.—Rom. vi. 5. For if we have become united with him by the likeness of his death, we shall
be also by the likeness of his resurrection

HomiLty XII.—Rom. vi. 19. I speak after the manner of men because of the infirmity of your flesh: for
as ye presented your members as servants to uncleanness and to iniquity unto iniquity; even so now
present your members as servants to righteousness unto sanctification

HomMILy XIII.—Rom. vii. 14. For we know that the law is spiritual: but I am carnal, sold under


sin ‘ ; : y ;


PAGE


“358


334 CONTENTS ‘OF THE HOMIES


PAGE
HomMILy XIV.—Rom. viii. 12, 13. So then, brethren, we are debtors, not to the flesh, to live after the
flesh. For if ye live after the flesh, ye must we but if by the spirit ye mortify the deeds of


the body, ye shall live ; ; é ; ; ; : : : : : - : « 439
Homity XV.—Rom. viii. 28. And we know that to them that love God, all things work together for

gool . : : j : . : 5 . : : - ; : . : : : : - 452
HomiLty XVI.—Rom. ix. 1. I say the truth in Christ, I lie not, my conscience bearing witness with me

in the Holy Ghost . s : ; 5 : : : > : c ; : : ‘ é - 459


~». Homity XVII.—Rom. x. 1. Brethren, my heart’s desire and my supplication to God is for them, that they


may besaved . 5 : : . : : 5 : - : - : : 3 - 471
Homity XVIII.—Rom. x. 14,15. How then shall nies call on him in whom they have not believed ?

and how shall they believe in him whom they have not heard? and how shall ae hear without

a preacher? And how shall they preach, except they be sent . : : ; . 478


» Homity XIX.—Rom. xi. 7. What then? That which Israel seeketh for that he obtained not: but the


election obtained it, and the rest were hardened : : : : A 3 : : : : . 486
HomILy XX.—Rom. xii. 1. I beseech you, therefore, brethren, by the mercies of God, to present

your bodies a living sacrifice, holy, acceptable to God, which is your reasonable service ; : . 496
HomiLty XXI.—Rom. xii. 4, 5. For even as we have many members in one body, and all the members

have not the same office; so we, who are many, are one body in Christ, and severally members one


of another . 6 : : : ‘ 5 : ; - : - : : : - : : - OL
HomILty XXII.—Rom. xii. 14. Bless them which persecute you; bless and curse not : : : - 506
Homity XXIII.—Rom. xiii. 1. Let every soul be in subjection to the higher powers . : 5 : > Btn


Homity XXIV.—Rom. xiii. 11. And this knowing the season, that now it is high time for you to
awake out of sleep. ; : 3 b 5 - : : 6 : : ; : : : 5 Gat


Homity XXV.—Rom. xiv. 1, 2, But him that is weak in faith receive ye, yet not to doubtful disputa-
tions. One man hath faith to eat all things; but he that is weak, eateth herbs. : : 52r


HomiLty XXVI.—KRom. xiv. 14. I know, and am persuaded in the Lord Jesus, that ee is un-
clean of itself: save that to him who accounteth anything to be unclean, to him it is unclean - - 529


HomiLy XXVII.—Rom. xvi. 25-27. Now to him that is able to stablish you according to my gos-

pel, and the preaching of Jesus Christ, according to the revelation of the mystery, which hath been

kept in silence through times eternal, but now is manifested, and by the scriptures of the prophets,

according to the commandment of the eternal God, is made known unto all the nations unto obedience

of faith: to the only wise God, through Jesus Christ, to whom be the glory forever, Amen. . - 534
HomiLty XXVIII.—Rom. xv. 8. For I say that Christ hath been made a minister of the circumcision for

the truth of God, that he might confirm the promises given unto the fathers . : : : : - 538
Homity XXIX.—Rom. xv. 14. And I myself also am persuaded of you, my brethren, that ye yourselves

are full of goodness, filled with all knowledge, able also to admonish one another 2 : s - 542
HomILty XXX.—Rom. xv. 25-27. But now I say, I go unto Jerusalem ministering unto the saints. For

it hath been the good pleasure of Macedonia and Achaia to make a certain contribution for the poor

among the saints that are at Jerusalem. Yea, it hath been their good pleasure, and their debtors they


are : : ; : F : : : ; ; : 5 ; : F : ; : M547
Homity XXXI.—Rom. xvi. 5. Salute Epenetus, my beloved, who is the first-fruits of Asia unto
Christ . 2 ; : : é ; : c 5 : : ; : ‘ 3 : : - cling}


HomiLty XXXII.—Rom. xvi. 17, 18. NowI beseech you, brethren, mark them which are causing the
divisions and occasions of stumbling contrary to the doctrine which ye learned, and turn away from
them. For they that are such serve not our Lord Christ, but their own belly; and by their smooth
and fair speech, they beguile the hearts of the innocent . 5 : ; : ; 5 : : - 559


7


HOMILIES


OF


El doch, CERRY SOS) OMe,


ARCHBISHOP OF CONSTANTINOPLE,


ON THE


EPISELe OF St. PAUL THE APOSLLE


TO THE


ROMANS.


DHE, ARGUMENT


As I keep hearing the Epistles of the blessed
Paul read, and that twice every week, and
often three or four times, whenever we are
celebrating the memorials of the holy martyrs,
gladly do I enjoy the spiritual trumpet, and
get roused and warmed with desire at recog-
nizing the voice so dear to me, and seem to
fancy him all but present to my sight, and
behold him conversing with me. But I grieve
and am pained, that all people do not know
this man, as much as they ought to know him;
but some are so far ignorant of him, as not
even to know for certainty the number of his
Epistles. And this comes not of incapacity,
but of their not having the wish to be continu-
ally conversing with this blessed man. For it
is not through any natural readiness and
sharpness of wit that even I am acquainted
with as much as I do know, if I do know any-
thing, but owing to a continual cleaving to
the man, and an earnest affection towards
him. For, what belongs to men beloved, they
who love them know above all others; because
they are interested in them. And this also
this blessed Apostle shows in what he said to
the Philippians ; “ Even as it is meet for me
to think this of you all, because I have you in
my heart, both in my bonds, and in the de-
fence and confirmation of the Gospel.” (Phil.
i.7.) And so ye also, if ye be willing to apply
to the reading of him with a ready mind, will


! Field counts this as the first Homily: but it seemed need-
less to disturb the usual numeration.


need no other aid. For the word of Christ is
true which saith, “ Seek, and ye shall find;
knock, and it shall be opened unto you.”
(Matt. vii. 7.) But since the greater part of
those who here gather themselves to us, have
taken upon themselves the bringing up of
children, and the care of a wife, and the charge
of a family, and for this cause cannot afford to
give themselves wholly to this labor, be ye at
all events aroused to receive those things
which have been brought together by others,
and bestow as much attention upon the hear-
ing of what is said as ye give to the gathering
together of goods. For although it is un-
seemly to demand only so much of you, yet
still one must be content if ye give as much,
For from this it is that our countless evils
have arisen—from ignorance of the Scriptures ;
from this it is that the plague of heresies has
broken out; from this that there are negligent
lives; from this labors without advantage.
For as men deprived of this daylight would
not walk aright, so they that look not to the
gleaming of the Holy Scriptures must needs be
frequently and constantly sinning, in that they
are walking in the worst darkness. And that
this fall not out, let us hold our eyes open to
the bright shining of the Apostle’s words ; for
this man’s tongue shone forth above the sun,
and he abounded more than all the rest in the
word of doctrine; for since he labored more
abundantly than they, he also drew upon him-
self a large measure of the Spirit’s grace.


335


336


THE WORKS OF Sf. CHRY¥sOst Ome


[THE ARGUMENT.


(1 Cor. xv. 10.) And this I constantly affirm,
not only from his Epistles, but also from the
Acts, For if there were anywhere a season
for oratory, to him men everywhere gave
place. Wherefore also he was thought by
the unbelievers to be Mercurius, because
he took the lead in speech. (Acts xiv. 12.)
And as we are going to enter fully into
this Epistle, it is necessary to give the date
also at which it was written. For it is not,
as most think, before all the others, but before
all that were written from Rome, yet subse-
quent to the rest, though not to all of them.
For both those to the Corinthians were sent
before this: and this is plain from what he
wrote at the end of this, saying as follows:
“But now I go unto Jerusalem to minister
unto the saints: for it hath pleased them of
Macedonia and Achaia to make a certain con-
tribution for the poor saints which are at Jer-
usalem.” (Rom. xv. 25, 26.) For in writing
to the Corinthians he says: “If it be meet
that I go also, they shall go with me” (1 Cor.
Xvi. 4); meaning this about those who were
to carry the money from thence. Whence it
is plain, that when he wrote to the Corinthians,
the matter of this journey of his was in
doubt, but when to the Romans, it stood now
a decided thing. And this being allowed, the
other point is plain, that this Epistle was after
those. But that to the Thessalonians also
seems to me to be before the Epistle to
the Corinthians: for having written to them
before,. and having moved the question of
alms to them, when he said, ‘“ But as touching
brotherly love, ye need not that I write unto
you: for ye yourselves are taught of God to
love one another. And indeed ye do it
toward all the brethren” (1 Thess. iv. 9, 10):
then he wrote to the Corinthians. And this
very point he makes plain in the words, “ For
I know the forwardness of your mind, for
which I boast of you to them of Macedonia,
that Achaia was ready a year ago, and your zeal
hath provoked very many” (2 Cor. ix. 2):
whence he shows that they were the first he
had spoken to about this. This Epistle
then is later than those, but prior (xpéry) to
those from Rome; for he had not as yet set
foot in the city of the Romans when he wrote
this Epistle, and this he shows by saying,
‘For I long to see you, that I may impart
unto you some spiritual gift.” (Rom. i. 11.)
But it was from Rome he wrote to the Philip-
pians; wherefore he says, “ All the saints
salute you, chiefly they that are of Czesar’s
household ” (Phil. iv. 22): and to the Hebrews
from thence likewise, wherefore also he says,
“all they of Italy salute. them.” (Heb, xiii.
24.) And the Epistle to Timothy he sent also


from Rome, when in prison; which also seems
to me to be the last of.all the Epistles; and
this is plain from the end: “ For I am now
ready to be offered,” he says, “and the time
of my departure is at hand.” (2 Tim. iv. 6.)
But that he ended his life there, is clear, I may
say, to every one. And that to Philemon is
also very late, (for he wrote it in extreme old
age, wherefore also he said, “as Paul the
aged, and now also a prisoner in Christ
Jesus,”) (Philem. 9), yet previous to that to
the Colossians. And this again is plain from
the end. For in writing to the Colossians, he
says, ‘‘All my state shall Tychicus declare
unto you, whom I have sent with Onesimus, a
faithful and beloved brother.” (Col. iv.
For this was that Onesimus in whose behalf he
composed the Epistle to Philemon. And
that this was no other of the same name with
him, is plain from the mention of Archippus.
For itis he whom he had taken as worker
together with himself in the Epistle to Phile-
mon, when he besought him for Onesimus,
whom when writing to the Colossians he
stirreth up, saying, ‘Say to Archippus, Take
heed to the ministry which thou hast received,
that thou fulfil it.” (Col. iv..17.) And that
to the Galatians seems to me to be before
that to the Romans.* But if they have a
different order in the Bibles, that is nothing
wonderful, since the twelve Prophets, though
not exceeding one another in order of time,
but standing at great intervals from one
another, are in the arrangement of the Bible
placed in succession. Thus Haggai and
Zachariah and the Messenger’ prophesied
after Ezekiel and Daniel, and long after
Jonah and Zephaniah and all the rest. Yet
they are nevertheless joined with all those
from whom they stand so far off in time.

But let no one consider this an undertaking
beside the purpose, nor a search of this kind a
piece of superfluous curiosity ; for the date of
the Epistles contributes no little to what we are
looking after.f For when I see him writing to


1 ‘Or ‘ Angel,’ i.e. Malachi; who was so called from the
expression Mal. i. 1 (LXX. 61a xetpos ayyeAov avtovd. cf. E. V.
in margin ‘by the hand of Malachi’), cf. 2 Esdr. 1. 40.”’

* It is remarkable that the conclusions of Chrys. should
harmonize so well with the results of modern scholarship in
regard to the order of the Pauline epistles. Except in assign-
ing the Epistle to the Hebrews to Paul and in apparently
interposing a considerable period between Philemon and
Colossians, his statements may be taken as giving the best
conclusions of criticism.—G. B. S.

+ Our author rightly attaches much importance to the time
and occasion of writing as bearing upon the meaning of the
epistles. The earliest epistles—those to the Thessalonians—
relate to Paul’s missionary labors and are but a continuation
of the apostle’s preaching. They might almost be called
samples of his sermons. The group which falls next in order
(Gal., 1 and 2 Cor., and Rom.) comprehends the great doctrinal
discussions of the problems of law and grace, and reflects the
conflict of the Apostle to the Gentiles with the Judaizing
tendency in all its phases. This group is most important for
the study of the Pauline theology. The third group—the
epistles of the (first) imprisonment—Col., Philem., Eph. and
Phil.—besides containing a wonderful fulness and richness


THE ARGUMENT.]


the Romans and to the Colossians about the
same subjects, and yet not in a like way
about the same subjects; but to the former
with much condescension, as when he says,
“Him that is weak in the faith receive ye,
but not to doubtful disputations; for one
believeth that he may eat all things, another,
who is weak, eateth herbs” (Rom. xiv. 1, 2):
but to the Colossians he does not write in
this way, though about the same things, but
with greater boldness of speech: ‘* Wherefore
if ye be dead with Christ,” he says, “ why, as
though living in the world, are ye subject to
ordinances (touch not, taste not, handle not),
which all are to perish with the using, not in
any honor to the satisfying of the flesh”
(Col. ii. 20-23);—I find no other reason for
this difference than the time of the transaction.
For at the first it was needful to be conde-
scending, but afterwards it became no more
so. And in many other places one may find
him doing this. Thus both the physician and
the teacher are used to do. For neither does
the physician treat alike his patients in the first
stage of their disorder, and when they have
come to the point of having health thence-
forth, nor the teacher those children who are
beginning to learn and those who want more
advanced subjects of instruction. Now to the
rest he was moved to write by some particular
cause and subject, and this he shows, as
when he says to the Corinthians, “ Touching
those things whereof ye wrote unto me”
(1 Cor. vii. 1): and to the Galatians too from
the very commencement of the whole Epistle
writes so as to indicate the same thing; but to
these for what purpose and wherefore does he
write? For one finds him bearing testimony
to them that they are “ full of goodness, being
filled with all knowledge, and able also to
admonish others.” (Rom. xv. 14.) Why
then does he write to them? ‘‘ Because of
-the grace of God,” he says, ‘which is given
unto me, that I should be the minister of
Jesus Christ” (ib. 15, 16): wherefore also he
says in the beginning: “I am a debtor; as
much as in me is, I am ready to preach the
Gospel to you that are at Rome also;” for
what is said—as that they are ‘“ able to exhort
others also” (Rom. i. 14, 15),—and the like,
rather belongs to encomium and encourage-
ment: and the correction afforded by means


of Christian thought, exhibits to us the rise and spread of
Gnostic heresies,—the introduction of heathen philosophical
ideas which were destined to exert a mighty influence upon
the theology, religion and life of the church for centuries.
The last group—the Pastoral epistles—has a peculiar private
and personal character from being addressed to individuals.
They have a special value, for all who hold their genuineness,
from oe the latest Christian counsels of ‘* Paul the aged.”’


to
ly


ie tha CLE TO ‘RHE ROMANS:


537


of a letter, was needful even for these; for
since he had not yet been present, he bringeth
the men to good order in two ways, both by
the profitableness of his letter and by the
expectation of his presence. For such was
that holy soul, it comprised the whole world
and carried about all men in itself thinking
the nearest relationship to be that in God,
And he loved them so, as if he had begotten
them all, or rather showed (so 4 Mss.) a
greater instinctive affection than any father
(so Field: all Mss. give “a father’s toward
all”); for such is the grace of the Spirit, it
exceedeth the pangs of the flesh, and displays
a more ardent longing than theirs. And this
one may see specially in the soul of Paul, who
having as it were become winged through love,
went continually round to all, abiding no-
where nor standing still. For since he had
heard Christ saying, ‘‘ Peter, lovest thou Me?
feed My sheep” (John xxi. 15); and setting
forth this as the greatest test of love, he
displayed it in a very high degree. Let us too
then, in imitation of him, each one bring into
order, if not the world, or not entire cities and
nations, yet at all events his own house, his
wife, his children, his friends, his neighbors.
And let no one say to me, “I am unskilled
and unlearned: ” nothing were less instructed
than Peter, nothing more rude than Paul, and
this himself confessed, and was not ashamed
to say, “though I be rude in speech, yet not
in knowledge.” (2 Cor. xi.6.) Yet neverthe-
less this rude one, and that unlearned man,*
overcame countless philosophers, stopped the
mouths of countless orators, and did all by
their own ready mind and the grace of God.
What excuse then shall we have, if we are not
equal to twenty names, and are not even of
service to them that live with us? Thisis but
a pretence and an excuse—for it is not want


* The “ learning’ of the Apostle Paul has been greatly
exaggerated on both sides. It has been customary to over-
estimate it. He has been described as learned in Greek liter-
ature. The quotation ofa few words from Aratus (Acts xvii. 28)
and the use of two (probably) proverbial sayings which have
been traced to Menander and Epimenides (1 Cor. xv. 33; Titus
i. 12) furnish too slender support for this opinion. (vid. Meyer
zu locis). It is said that Paul had abundant 7 a to
become acquainted with the Greek literature in Tarsus. But
he left Tarsus at an early age and all the prejudices of his
family would disincline fan to the study of Heathen litera-
ture. His connection with Gamaliel and the style of his
epistles alike show that his education was predominantly
Jewish and Rabbinic. He was learned after the manner of
the strictest Pharisees and from his residence in Tarsus and
extended travel had acquired a good writing and speak-
ing knowledge of the Greek language. Chrys. is uni-
formly inclined, however, to depreciate the culture of
Paul. This springs from a desire to emphasize the greatness
of his influence and power as compared with his attainments.
The apostle’s confession that he is an idwrns tw-Adyw (2 Cor.
xi. 6), means only that he was unskilled in eloquence
and is to be taken as his own modest estimate of himself in
that particular. Moreover it is immediately qualified by ada’
ov TH yvwoee Which is entirely inconsistent with the idea that
he was rude or illiterate in general, or that he considered
himself to be so.—G. B. S.


THE WORKS OF Si. ;CoRYSOSlORr
|


of learning or of instruction which hindereth ; that are akin to us, and hereafter may partake
our teaching, but drowsiness and sleep. (Acts|of countless blessings through the grace and
i. 15; li. 41.) Let us then having shaken off|love of our Lord Jesus Christ towards man,
this sleep with all diligence cleave to our own| through Whom, and with Whom, be glory to
members, that we may even here enjoy much/the Father, with the Holy Ghost, now, and
calm, by ordering in the fear of God ee ere a and to all ages. Amen.


[HomIty I.


338


BLO) ML Noe:


RO) Mirae leurs


“Paul, a servant of Jesus Christ, called to be an
Apostle, separated unto the Gospel of God,
(which He promised afore by His prophets in the
Holy Scriptures. )”


Moses having written five books, has no-
where put his own name to them, neither
have they who after him put together the his-
tory of events after him, no nor yet has Mat-
thew, nor John, nor Mark, nor Luke; but the
blessed Paul everywhere in his Epistles sets !
his own name. Now why was this? Because
they were writing to people, who were present,
and it had been superfluous to show them-
selves when they were present. But this man
sent his writings from afar and in the form of
a letter, for which cause also the addition of
the name was necessary. But if in the Epistle
to the Hebrews he does not do the same, this
too is after his own wise judgment.* For
since they felt prejudiced against him, lest on
hearing the name at the outstart, they should
stop up all admission to his discourse, he
subtly won their attention by concealing the
name. But if some Prophets and Solomon
have put their names, this I leave as a subject
for you to look further into hereafter, why
some of them wished to put it so, and some
not. For you are not to learn everything
from me, but to take pains yourselves also
and enquire further, lest ye become more dull-
witted.

“ Paul, a servant of Jesus Christ.” Why
did God change his name, and call him Paul,
who was Saul? It was, that he might not
even in this respect come short of the Apos-
tles, but that that preéminence which the
chief of the Disciples had, he might also ac-
quire (Mark iii. 16); and have whereon to
ground a closer union with them. And he


1 In every one of his Epistles prefixes (Savile).

* This expression is significant as showing the confidence
of Chrys. in the Pauline authorship of the Epistle to the
Hebrews. It need hardly be said that the reason for the
omission of the Apostle’s name is purely fanciful and that
ae non-Pauline character of the Epistle is almost demonstra-

le.—G. B. S.


calls himself, the servant of Christ, yet not
merely this;* for there be many sorts of ser-
vitude. One owing to the Creation, accord-
ing to which it says, “ for all are Thy servants”
(Ps. cxix. 91); and according to which it says,
‘* Nebuchadnezzar, My servant ” (Jer. xxv. 9),
for the work is the servant of Him which
made it. Another kind is that from the faith,
of which it saith, ‘‘ But God be thanked that
ye were the servants of sin, but ye have
obeyed froma pure heart that form of doc-
trine which was delivered unto you: being
then made free from sin, ye became the ser-
vants of righteousness.” (Rom. vi. 17, 18.) -
Another is that from civil subjection (zof:reiac),
after which it saith, “‘ Moses my servant is
dead ” (Jos. i. 2) ; and indeed all the Jews were
servants, but Moses in a special way as shin-
ing most brightly in the community. Since
then, in all the forms of the marvellous
servitude, Paul was a servant, this he puts in
the room of the greatest title of dignity, say-
ing, “a servant of Jesus Christ.” And the
Names appertaining to the dispensation * he
sets forth, going on upwards from the lowest.
For with the Name Jesus, did the Angel come
from Heaven when He was conceived of the
Virgin, and Christ He is called from being
anointed, which also itself belonged to the
flesh. And with what oil, it may be asked,
was He anointed? It was not with oil that
He was anointed, but with the Spirit. And
Scripture has instances of calling such
‘“‘Christs’: inasmuch as the Spirit is the chief
point in the unction, and that for which the
oil is used. And where does it call those
“Christs” who are not anointed with oil?
“Touch not,” it says, “ Mine anointed, and do
My prophets no harm” (Ps. cv. 15), but at
that time the institution of anointing with oil
did not yet even exist.


“Called an Apostle.” He styles himself


2 Or, “not in one way only.”’ : ;
3 oixovouias, viz. the concealment of His glory in the Incar-
nation.


Homi.y I.|


iit wo ee; POU LH Ey ROMANS.


+


339


“called” in all his Epistles, so showing his
own candor (eiyveuocivyv), and that it was not
of his own seeking that he found, but that
when called he came near and obeyed. And
‘the faithful, he styles, “‘ called to be saints,” *
but while they had been called so far as to be
believers, he had besides a different thing
committed to his hands, namely, the Apostle-
ship, a thing full of countless blessings, and at
once greater than and comprehensive of, all
the gifts.

And what more need one say of it, than
that whatsoever Christ was doing when pres-
ent, this he committed to their hands when
He departed. Which also Paul cries aloud,
speaking thereof and magnifying the dignity
of the Apostles’ office; “‘ We are ambassadors
for Christ, as though God did beseech by us;

1. e. in Christ’s “stead, ““ Separated to the
Gospel of God.” (2 Cor. v. 20.) For as ina
house, each one is set apart for divers works ;
thus also in the Church, there be divers distri-
butions of ministrations. And herein he
seems to me to hint, that he was not ap-
pointed by lot only, but that of old and from
the first he was ordained to this office; which
also Jeremy saith, that God spake concerning
himself, ‘“‘ Before thou camest forth out of the
womb, I sanctified thee, I ordained thee a
prophet unto the nations.” (Jer.i. 5.) Forin
that he was writing to a vainglorious city, and
one every way puffed up, he therefore uses
every mode of showing that his election was
of God. For he Himself called him, and
Himself separated him. And he does this,
that he may make the Epistle deserve credit,
and meet an easy reception. “To the Gos-
pel of God.” Not Matthew then alone is an
Evangelist, nor Mark, as neither was this man
alone an Apostle, but they also; even if he
be said préeminently to be this, and they that.
And he calleth it the Gospel, not for those
good things only which have been brought to
pass, but also for those which are to come.
And how comes he to say, that the Gospel
“of God” is preached by himself? for he
says, “ separated to the Gospel of God ’’—for
the Father was manifest, even before the Gos-
pels. Yet even if He were manifest, it was
to the Jews only, and not even to all of these
as were fitting. For neither did they know
Him to be a Father, and many things did
they conceive unworthily of Him. Where-


* It is noticeable that in the New Testament the apostles
call the body of believers ‘‘saints,’’ but never apply this term
to themselves orto one another. In later times the body of
believers returned the compliment and fixed the term as a
title upon the Apostles, New Testament writers, Church
Fathers, and a large number of Christians_more or less dis-
tinguished for learning or piety. Most Christians find the


title more Boe eats to the two first classes than to the two |


last.—G.


fore also Christ saith, ‘The true worship-
pers” shall come, and that ‘the Father seek-
eth such to worship Him.” (John iv. 23.)
But it was afterwards that He Himself with
the Son was unveiled to the whole world,
which Christ also spake of beforehand, and
said, ‘that they might know Thee the only
true God, and Jesus Christ Whom Thou has
sent.” (John xvii. 3.) But he calls it the
“Gospel ” of God, to cheer the hearer at the
outstart. For he came not with tidings to
make the countenance sad, as did _ the
prophets with their accusations, and charges,
and reproofs, but with glad tidings, even
the ‘*Gospel of God;” countless treasures
of abiding and unchangeable blessings.

Ver; “Which He promised afore by
His Prophets in the Holy Scriptures,”

For the Lord, saith he, “shall give the
word to them that proclaim glad tidings with
great power” (Ps. Ixviii. 12, Sept.); and
again, “‘ How beautiful are the feet of them
that preach the Gospel of peace.” (Is. lii. 7 ;
Rom. x. 15.) See here both the name of the
Gospel expressly and the temper of it, laid
down in the Old Testament. For, we do not
proclaim it by words only, he means, but also
by acts done; since neither was it human, but
both divine and unspeakable, and transcend-
ing all nature. Now since they have laid
against it the charge of novelty also, He
shows it to be older than the Greeks, and
described aforetime in the Prophets. And
if He gave it not from the beginning because
of those that were unwilling to receive it, still,
they that were willing did hear it. “ Your
father Abraham,” He says, “rejoiced to see
My day, and he saw it, and was glad.’ (John
Vill. 56.) How then comes He to say,
Many prophets desired to see the things
which ye see, and have not seen them?”
(Matt. xiii. 17.) He means not so, as ye see
and hear, the Flesh itself, and the very mira-
cles before your eyes. But let me beg you to
look and see what a very long time ago these
things were foretold. For when God is about
to do openly some great things, He announces
them of along time before, to practise men’s
hearing for the reception of them when they
come.

“In. the Holy Scriptures.” Because the
Prophets not only spake, but also writ what
they spake; nor did they write only, but also
shadowed them forth by actions, as Abraham
when he led up Isaac, and Moses when he
lifted up the Serpent, and when he spread out
his hands’ against Amalek, and when he
offered the Paschal Lamb.


2.


1 Which the Fathers teach to be a a type of aoe upon the
Cross. Seeon ZJert. A fol. c. 30, p. Oxf.


340 TEE WORKS.@m


Ver. 3. “Concerning His Son which was
made of the seed of David, according to the
flesh.”

What dost, thou, O Paul, that after lifting
up our souls so, and elevating them, and
causing great and unutterable things to pass
in show before them, and speaking of the
Gospel, and that too the Gospel of God, and
bringing in the chorus of the Prophets, and
showing the whole of them heralding forth
many years before those things which were
to come: why dost thou again bring us down
to David? Art thou conversing, oh tell me,
of some man, and giving him Jesse’s son for
a father? And wherein are these things
worthy of what thou hast just spoken of?
Yea, they are fully worthy. For our dis-
course is not, saith he, of any bare man.
Such was my reason for adding, ‘according
to the flesh;” as hinting that there is also a
Generation of the Same after the Spirit.
And why did he begin from that and not from
this the higher? It is because that was what
Matthew, and Luke, and Mark, began from.
For he who would lead men by the hand to
Heaven, must needs lead them upwards from
below. So too was the actuai dispensation
ordered. First, that is, they saw Him a man
upon earth, and then they understood Him to
be God. In the same direction then, as He
Himself had framed His teaching, did His
disciple also shape out the way which leadeth
thither. Therefore the generation according
to the flesh is in his language placed first in
order, not because it was first, but because he
was for leading the hearer from this up to that.

Ver. 4.“ And declared to be the Sonof
God with power, according to the Spirit of
Holiness, by the resurrection from the dead,
even Jesus Christ.”

What is said has been made obscure by the
close-folding of the words, and so it is neces-
sary to divide it. What then is it, which he
says? We preach, says he, Him Who was
made of David. But this is plain. Whence
then is it plain, that this incarnate ‘‘ Person ”
was also the Son of God? First, it is so from
the prophets; wherefore he says, ‘ Which
He had promised afore by the Prophets in
the” Holy Seriptures.? "(vr a2))7 ame enthis
way of demonstration is no weak one. And
next also from the very way of His Gen-
eration: which also he sets forth by saying,
“of the seed of David according to the
flesh) torrie: ‘btoke* the! tale oramatune:
Thirdly, from the miracles which He did,
yielding a demonstration of much power, for
‘in power’? means this. Fourthly, from the
Spirit which He gave to them that believe
upon Him, and through which He made


ST. \CHERYSOSTORE


|Homity I.


them all holy, wherefore he saith, ‘‘ according
to the Spirit of holiness.”’ For it was of God
only to grant such gifts. Fifthly, from the
Resurrection; for He first and He alone
raised Himself: and this Himself too said to
be above all a miracle sufficient to stop the
mouths even of them that behaved shame-
lessly. For, “Destroys this) Hemple;’ vie
says, “and in three days I will raise it up”
(John xix.) ; and, ‘“ When ye have lifted’ Me
“up from the earth, then shall ye know that
I am He” (ib. viii. 28); and again, This
“generation seeketh after a sign; and there
shall no sign be given unto it, but the sign of
Jonas.” (Matt. xii. 39.) What then is the
being “ declared?” being shown, being man-
ifested, being judged, being confessed, by the
feeling and suffrage of all; by Prophets, by
the marvellous Birth after the Flesh, by the
power which was in the miracles, by the
Spirit, through which He gave sanctification,
by the Resurrecticn, whereby He put an end
to the tyranny of death.

Ver.5. ‘“‘ By Whom we have received grace
and Apostleship for obedience to the faith.”

See the candor of the servant. He wishes
nothing to be his own, but all his Master’s.
And indeed it was the Spirit that gave this.
Wherefore He saith, ‘‘ I have many things to ~
say unto you, but ye cannot bear them now.
Howbeit when He, the Spirit of Truth, is
come, He will guide you into all truth”? (John
xvi. 12): and again, “Separate Me Paul and
Barnabas.” (Acts xiii. 2.) And in the Epis-
tle to the Corinthians, he says, that “to one
is given by the Spirit the word of wisdom, to
another the word of knowledge’’ (1 Cor. xii.
8, 11); and that It divideth all as It willeth.
And in addressing the Milesians, he says,
“Over which the Holy Ghost hath made you
shepherds and overseers.” (Acts xx. 28.)
You see, he calls the things of the Spirit, the
Son’s, and the things of the Son, the Spirit’s.
“Grace and Apostleship;” that is, it is not we
that have achieved for ourselves, that we
should become Apostles. For it was not by
having toiled much and labored that we had
this dignity allotted to us, but we received
grace, and the successful result is a part of
the heavenly gift. “ For obedience to the
faith.” So it was not the Apostles that
achieved it, but grace that paved the way
before them. For it was their part to go
about and preach, but to persuade was of
God, Who wrought in them. As also Luke
saith, that ‘‘He opened their heart” (Acts
Xvi. 14); and again, To whom it was given to
hear the word of God.! “To obedience ;” he


1 Supposed to be a vague recollection of St. Luke viii. 10, or
of Acts xix. ro.


:
:
:
;


Homity I.]


hie EPISTLE TO UTHEROMANS.


341


says not, to questioning and parade (karacxevyy)
of argument but “to obedience.” For we
were not sent, he means, to argue, but to give
those things which we had trusted to our
hands. For when the Master declareth
aught, they that hear should not be nice and
curious handlers of what is told them, but
receivers only; for this is why the Apostles
were sent, to speak what they had heard, not
to add aught from their own stock, and that
we for our part should believe—that we
should believe what ?—“ concerning His
Name.” Not that we should be curious
about the essence, but that we should believe
on the Name; for this it was which also
wrought the miracles. For it says, “in the
Name of Jesus Christ rise up and walk.”
(Acts iii. 6.) And this too requireth faith,
neither can one grasp aught of these things
by reasoning (Aoytou@ Kataaafeiv). “ Among
all nations, among whom are ye also the
called of Jesus Christ.” What? did Paul
preach then to all the nations? Now that he
ran through the whole space from Jerusalem
to Illyricum, and from thence again went
forth to the very ends of the earth, is plain
from what he writes to the Romans; but even
if he did not come to all, vet still what he
says is not false, for he speaks not of himself
alone, but of the twelve Apostles, and all who
declared the word after them. And in
another sense, one should not see any fault
to find with the phrase, if about himself, when
one considers his ready mind, and how that
after death he ceaseth not to preach in all
parts of the world. And consider how he
extols the gift, and shows that it is great and
much more lofty than the former, since the
old things were with one nation, but this gift
drew sea and land to itself. And attend to
this too, how free the mind of Paul is from all
flattery; for when conversing with the
Romans, who were seated as it were upon a
sort of summit of the whole world, he
attaches no more to them than to the other
nations, nor does he on the score of their
being then in power and ruling, say, that they
have in spiritual things also any advantage.
But as (he means) we preach to all the
nations, so do we to you, numbering them
with Scythians and Thracians: for if he did
not wish to show this, it were superfluous to
say “ Among whom are ye also.” * And this


he does to take down their high spirit (kevav


* The expression has also another important bearing upon
a question much debated by modern scholars, viz.: was the
Roman Church predominantly Jewish or Gentile? The
Pauline usage is strongly in favor of understanding by the
words Taé 4vn Gentiles as opposed to Jews. If this is correct
the expression together with ev ois egte would seem decisive
as showing the predominantly Gentile character of the Roman
Christian community.—G. B. S.


to remind them of the benefit.


7d ghonua) and to prostrate the swelling vanity
of their minds, and to teach them to honor
others alike to themselves: and so he pro-
ceeds to speak upon this very point.

Ver. 6. ‘“ Among whom are ye also the
called of Jesus Christ.”

That is, along with whom ye also are: and
he does not say, that he called the others
with you, but you with the others. For if in
Christ Jesus there is neither bond nor free,
much less is there king and private man.
For even ye were called and did not come
over of yourselves.

Ver. 7. “To all that be in Rome, beloved
of God, called to be saints: grace to you and
peace from God our Father, and the Lord
Jesus Christ.”

See how continually he puts the word
“ called,” saying, “called to be an Apostle ;
among whom ye also are called; to all that
be in Rome, called:” and this he does not
out of superfluity of words, but out of a wish
For since
among them which believed, it was likely that
there would be some of the consuls (izdruv;


Ben. consulares) and rulers as_ well
as poor and common men, casting aside


the inequality of ranks, he writes to them
all under one appellation. But if in things
which are more needful and which are
spiritual, all things are set forth as common
both to slaves and to free, for instance, the
love from God, the calling, the Gospel, the
adoption, the grace, the peace, the sanctifica-
tion, all things else, how could it be other
than the uttermost folly, whom God _ had
joined together, and made to be of equal
honor in the greater things, those to divide
on account of things on earth? on this
ground, I presume, from the very outstart,
this blessed Apostle, after casting out this
mischievous disease, conducts them to the
mother of blessings, humble-mindedness.
This made servants better, since they learnt
that they should take no harm from their ser-
vitude, while they had the true freedom ; this
would incline masters to be gentle, as being
instructed that they have no advantage in
being free, unless the goods of faith have the
first place given them. And that you may
learn that he was not doing this to work con-
fusion, by dashing all things, but still knew
the best distinction, he wrote not simply to
all that were in Rome, but with a definition
added, “ beloved of God.” For this is the
best discrimination, and shows whence the
sanctification was. Whence then was the
sanctification ? from Love. For after saying,
“ beloved,” then he proceeds, “called to be
saints,’ showing that it is from this that the


342


THE’ WORKS’ OF “ST. “CHR¥SOSU082


|Homiry 1.


fount of all blessings is. But saints he calls
all the faithful. ‘Grace unto you and
peace.”

Oh address, that bringeth countless bless-
ings tous! This also Christ bade the Apos-
tles to use as their first word when entering
into houses. (Luke x. 5.) Wherefore it is
from this that Paul also in all places takes
his beginning, from grace and peace; for it
was no small war which Christ put an end
to, but indeed one varying and of every kind
and of a long season (o:kidov kai xavtodariv); and
this not from our labors, but through His
grace. Since then love presented us with
grace, and grace with peace, having set them
down in the due order of an address, he
prays over them that they may abide perpet-
ual and unmoved, so that no other war may
again be blown into flame, and beseeches
Him that gave, to keep these things firmly
settled, saying as follows, “Grace be unto
you and peace from God our Father, and the
Lord Jesus Christ.” See in this passage, the
“from” is common to the Son and the Father,
and this is equivalent to “of whom.” ! For
he did not say, Grace be unto you and peace
from God the Father, “ through” our Lord
Jesus Christ; but, “from God the Father, and
the Lord Jesus. Christ.” Strange! how
mighty is the love of God! we which were
enemies and disgraced, have all at once
become saints and sons. For when he calls
Him Father, he shows them to be sons; and
when he says sons, he has unveiled the whole
treasure of blessings.

Let us then keep showing a conversation


worthy of the gift, and hold on in peace and |
For other dignities are but for a|


holiness.
time, and are brought to an end along with
this life present, and may be bought with
money (whence one might say they are not
dignities at all but names of dignities only,
having their strength in the investiture of fine
array and the servility of attendants), but this
as having been given of God, the gift of sanc-


1 See St. Basil de Spiritu Sancto, c.2, 4. and 5. St. Chrysos-
tom is arguing against the Arian abuse of 1 Cor. viil. 6, as he
does on the passage itself.


tification and adoption, is not broken through
even by death, but even here maketh men
conspicuous, and also departs with us upon
our journey to the life to come. For he that
holdeth on in the adoption, and keeps an
exact watch upon his holiness, is much
brighter and more happy even than he that is
arrayed with the diadem itself, and has the pur-
ple ; and has the delight of abundant peace in
the present life and is nurtured up with goodly
hopes, and hath no ground for worry and dis-
turbance, but enjoys constant pleasure; for
as for good spirits and joy, it is not greatness
of power, not abundance of wealth, not pomp
of authority, not strength of body, not sumpt-
uousness of the table, not the adorning of
dresses, nor any other of the things in man’s
reach that ordinarily produces them, but
Spiritual success, and a good conscience
alone. And he that hath this cleansed, even
though he be clad in rags and struggling with
famine, is of better spirits than they that live
so softly. So too he that is conscious of
wicked deeds, even though he may gather to
himself all men’s goods, is the most wretched
of allmen. For this cause Paul, living in con-
tinual hunger and nakedness, and_ being
scourged every day was joyful, and went
more softly than they that were then emperors.
But Ahab though a king, and indulging ina
sumptuous luxury, when he had done that one
sin, groaned and was out of spirits, and his
countenance was fallen both before the sin
and after the sin. If then we wish to enjoy
pleasure, above all things else let us shun
wickedness, and follow after virtue; since it
is not in the nature of things for one to have
a share thereof on any other terms, even if we
were mounted upon the king’s throne itself.
Wherefore also Paul saith, ‘ But the fruit of
the Spirit is love, joy, peace.” (Gal. v. 22.)
This fruit then let us keep growing by us,
that we may be in the fruition of joy here,
and may obtain the kingdom to come, by the
grace and love towards man of our Lord
Jesus Christ, through Whom and with Whom,
be glory to the Father, and to the Holy Spirit,
now and always, even unto all ages. Amen.


Lae
ij
‘
h


Homicy II.]


SHE) EPISTLE ‘TO. THE. ROMANS.


343


POM MY. LT.


ROM. I. 8.


“ First, I thank my God through Jesus Christ for you
all, that your faith is spoken of throughout the
whole world.”


An exordium worthy of this blessed spirit,
and able to teach all men to offer unto God
the firstlings of their good deeds and words,


~ and to render thanks not only for their own,


but also for others’ well-doings: which also
maketh the soul pure from envy and grudg-
ing, and draweth God in a greater measure
towards the loving spirit of them that so ren-
der thanks. Wherefore also elsewhere he
says, “ Blessed be God and the Father of our
Lord Jesus Christ, Who hath blessed us with
all spiritual blessing.” (Eph. i. 3.) And
it is fitting that we render thanks not
only when rich, but also when poor, not
when in health only, but also when sick,
not when we thrive only, but also when we have
to bear the reverse. For when our affairs are
borne onward with a fair wind, to be thankful
is not matter of wonder. But when no small
tempests be upon us, and the vessel veers
about and is in jeopardy, then is the great
time for displaying patience and goodness of
heart. For this cause Job also gained a


crown from hence, and the shameless mouth


of the devil did he stop, and show clearly that
not even when he saw good days was
it through his wealth that he was thankful,
but through his much love toward God. And
see too what things he is thankful for: not
for things earthly and perishing, as power
and authority and glory (for these things
are of no account), but for real blessings,
faith and boldness of speech. And with how
much feeling* he gives thanks: for he saith
not “to God,” but “‘to my God,” which also
the Prophets do, so making that which is
common to all their own. And what is there
wonderful in the Prophets doing so? For
God himself plainly does it continually to His
servants, calling Himself the God of Abra-
ham and Isaac and Jacob, as_ peculiarly
theirs. ‘That your faith is spoken
throughout the whole world.” What then,
had the whole world heard of the faith of the
Romans? Yes, the whole, according to him.


1 §:abecews, see Ernest? Lex. Technol. in v.


of |
}and drawing them to themselves.


(Or, since that time, raca éé éxeivov), And it is
not a thing unlikely. For the city was not
one of no note, but as being upon a sort of
eminence it was on every account conspicuous.
But consider, I pray, the power of the preach-
ing, how in a short time by means of publi-
cans and fishermen it took hold upon the
very head of all cities, and Syrians became
the teachers and guides of Romans. He
attests then two excellencies in them, both
that they believed, and that they believed
with boldness, and that so great as that the
fame of them reached into all the world.
“For your faith,” he says “is spoken of
throughout the whole world. Your faith,”
not your verbal disputations, nor your ques-
tionings, nor your syllogisms. And yet there
were there many hindrances to the teaching.
For having recently acquired the empire of
the world they were elated, and lived in
riches and luxury, and fishermen brought the
preaching there, and they Jews and of the
Jews, a nation hated and had in abomination
among all men; and they were bidden to
worShip the Crucified, Who was brought up
in Judea. And with the doctrine the
teachers proclaimed also an austere life to


men who were practised in softness, and
were agitated about things present. And
they that proclaimed it were poor and
common men, of no family, and born of


men of no family. But none of these things
hindered the course of the word. So great
was the power of the Crucified as to carry
the word round everywhere. “For it is
spoken of,” he says, “in all the world.” He
says not, it is manifested, but, is spoken of,
as if all men had them in their mouths. And
indeed when he bears witness of this in the
Thessalonians, he adds another thing also.
For after saying, “from you sounded out the
word of God,” he adds, “so that we need not
to speak anything.’’ (1 Thess. i. 8,) For the
disciples had come into the place of teachers,
by their boldness of speech instructing all,
For the
preaching came not anywhere to a_ stand,
but went over the whole world more rapidly
than fire. But here there is only thus much
—‘it is spoken of.” He well says that ‘it


344 THE WORKS OF


|Homity II.


ST.«CHRYSOSTOM.


is spoken of,” showing that there was no need
to add aught to what was said, or to take
away. Fora messenger’s business is this, to
convey from one to another only what is told
him. For which cause also the priest is
called a “messenger” (Mal. ii. 7), because
he speaks not his own words, but those of
Him that sent him. And yet) )Peter shad
preached there. But he reckons what was
his, to be his own as well. In such degree,
as I said before, was he beyond measure clear
of all grudging!

Ver. 9. “ For God 1s my witness, whom I
serve with my spirit in the Gospel of His
Son.”

Words these of an Apostle’s bowels of affec-
tion, the showing forth this of fatherly con-
cernment !1_ And what is it which he says,
and why does he call God to witness? He
had to declare his feeling toward them.
Since then he had not as yet ever seen them,
he therefore called no man to witness, but
Him Who entereth in the hearts. For since
he was saying, “I love you,” and as a token
thereof alleged his praying continually for
them, and wishing to come to them, and
neither was this self-evident, he betakes him-
self to the trustworthy testimony. Will
then any one of you be able to boast that
he remembers, when praying at his house
(éxt ri oixiac) the entire body of the Church?
I think not. But Paul drew near to God in
behalf not of one city only, but of the whole
world, and this not once, or twice, or thrice,
but continually. But if the continually Bear-
ing any one about in one’s memory would not
happen without much love; to have any in
one’s prayers, and to have them there continu-
ally, think what great affection and friendship
that implies. But when he says, “ Whom I
serve with my spirit in the Gospel of His Son,”
he shows us at once the grace of God, and
also his own humble-mindedness; the grace
of God because He entrusted to him so great
a matter; but his own humility, because he
imputes it all not to his own zeal, but to the
assistance of the Spirit. But the addition of
“the Gospel,” shows the kind of ministry.
For there are many and diverse modes of
service. And as under kings all are ranged
under one that beareth kingly power, and all
have not to minister (dcaxovowvrat) about the
same thing, but to one belongeth the ministry
of ruling armies and to another that of order-
ing cities and to another again that of keep-
ing treasures in the storehouses, thus also
in spiritual things, one serveth God and
laboreth (Aarpetec xaidovzete.) in believing and


1 Four Mss, écéacxadtas, a father’s mode of Teaching. S.
«ndewovias,


‘ordering his own life well, and another in
undertaking the care of strangers, and
another in taking in hand the patronship of
them that be in need. As even during the
Apostle’s own time, they of Stephen’s com-
pany served God in the guardianship of the
widows, others (a240 2 Mss., all ov) in the
teaching of the word, of whom also Paul was,
serving in the preaching of the Gospel. And
this was the fashion of his service : for it was
to this that he was appointed. On this
account, he not only calls God to witness,
but also says what he was entrusted with, to
show that having so great things put into his
hands, he would not have called Him Who
trusted them to him to witness what was false.
And therewith he wished to make another
point out also, viz. that he could not but
have this love and care for them. For that
they might not say “ who art thou? and, from
whence? that thou sayest that thou art
anxious over a City so great, and most impe-
rial,” he shows that he must needs have this
care,” if at least the sort of service that was
committed to him, was to declare the Gospel :
for he that hath this put into his hands, must
needs have continually upon his mind them
that are to receive the word. And he shows


another thing besides this by saying, “in my .


spirit ; ” that this service is much higher than
either the Gentile or the Jewish. For the
Gentile is both fleshly and in error, and the
Jewish is true indeed, yet even this is fleshly.
But that of the Church is the opposite of the
Gentile, but more lofty than the Jewish by a
great deal. For the mode of our service is
not with sheep and oxen and smoke and fat,
but by a spiritual soul, which Christ also
shows in saying that “God is a Spirit, and
they that worship Him must worship Him in
spirit and in truth.” (John iv. 24.)

“In the Gospel of His Son.” Having
said above that it was the Father’s Gospel,
here he says it is the Son’s. So indifferent is
it to say the Father’sor the Son’s! For he
had learnt from that blessed voice that the
things of the Father are the Son’s, and the
things of the Son are the Father’s, For “all
Mine are Thine, and Thine are Mine.’
(John xvii. 10.)

“That without ceasing I make mention of
you always in my prayers.” This is the part
of genuine love, and he seems indeed to be
saying some one thing, yet states four things
even here. Both that he remembers, and
that he does so continually, and that it is in
his prayers, and that it is to ask great things.
for them.


2 One Ms. adds, if Christ hath given him this care, and


nmap il


Homity II.]


ie) VE PISkLe,; TO -THE*ROMANS:


345


Ver. 10, 11. “ Making request, if by any
means now at length I might have a prosper-
ous journey by the will of God to come unto


You see him painfully desiring to see them,
and yet not enduring to see them contrary to
what seemed good unto God, but having his
longing mingled with the fear of God. For
he loved them, and was eager to come to
them. Yet he did not, because he loved
them, desire to see them, contrary to what
seemed good unto God. This is true love,
not as we love who err on both sides from
the laws of love: for either we love no one,
or if we ever do love, we love contrary to
what seemeth good unto God, acting in both
against the Divine law. And if these things
be grievous (¢opr«a) when spoken of, they are
more grievous when done. And how do we
love contrary to what seems good to God?
(you will say.) When we neglect Christ pin-
ing with hunger, and provide our children
and friends and relations above their needs.
Or rather what need to carry the subject
further. For if any one will examine his own
conscience, he will find that this takes place
in many things. But such was not that
blessed person, but he knew both how to love
and to love as he ought (3 Mss. omit “as he
ought’), and as was fitting, and though exceed-
ing all men in loving, he transgressed not the
measures of love. See then two things thrive
extremely in him, fear of God, and also long-
ing towards the Romans. For to be praying
continually, and not to desist when he
obtained not, shows exceeding love. But
while loving, thus to continue yielding to the
will of God, shows intense~ reverence. In
another place, however, having “thrice be-
sought the Lord ” (2 Cor. xii. 8), he not only
did not receive, but on the contrary, when he
did not receive, he was very thankful for not
having been heard. So, in all things did he
look to God. But here he received, though
not when he asked, but after delay, and
neither hereat was he discontented. And
these things I mention that we may not repine
at not being heard, or at being heard slowly.
For we are not better than Paul, who con-
fesses his thankfulness for both, and with
good ground. For when he had once given
himself up to the all-governing Hand, and
put himself with as much subjection under it,
as clay under the potter, he followed where-
soever God led. Having then said that he
desired to see them, he mentioned also the
cause of his desire; and what is it?

Ver. 11. “That I may impart unto you
some spiritual gift, to the end ye may be es-
tablished.”


For it was not merely as many now go
travelling in a needless and profitless way
that he also went, but for necessary and very
urgent ends. And he does not tell them his
meaning openly, but by way of hints, for he
does not say that I may teach you, that I may
instruct you, that I may fill up that which is
wanting ; but, “‘ that I may impart ;” showing,
that it is not his own things which he is giv-
ing them, but that he was imparting to them
what he had received. .,And here again he
is unassuming, in saying ‘‘some,” he means,
a small one, and suited to my powers. And
what may this small one be which thou art
now going to impart? This it is, he says, ‘ to
the end that ye may be established.” This
then also cometh of grace, namely, the being
unwavering and standing fast. But when you
hear of grace, think not that the reward of
resolve on our part is thereby cast aside; for
he speaks of grace, not to disparage the
labor of resolve on our part, but to undermine
(iroteuvduevoc, aS piercing a thing inflated) the
haughtiness of an insolent spirit (azovoiac).
Do not thou then, because that Paul hath
called this a gift of grace, grow supine. For
he knows how, in his great candor, to call
even well doings, graces; because even in
these we need much influence from above.
But in saying, “to the end that ye may be
established,” he covertly shows that they
needed much correction: for what he would
say is this: Of a “long time I have both
desired ” and prayed to see you, for no other
reason than that I may “stablish, strengthen,
fix” you thoroughly in the word of God, so
that ye be not continually wavering. But he
does not express himself so (for he would
have shocked them), but in another way he
hints to them the same thing, though in a
subdued tone. For when he says, “to the
end that ye may be established,” he makes
this plain. Then since this also was very
irksome, see how he softens it by the sequel.
For that they may not say, are we wavering,
and carried about? and need we speech of
yours in order to stand fast? he anticipates
and does away any gainsaying of the kind,
by saying as follows.

Ver. 12. ‘“‘Thatis, that I may be comforted
together with you by the mutual faith both of
you and me.”

As if he said, Do not suspect that I spoke
to accuse you. It was not with this feeling
that I said what I did. But what may it be
that I wished to say? Ye are undergoing


many tribulations, being drenched on
every side (by those who persecute you
TEPLAVTAODUEVOL. 3 Mss. xapevox/obuevor, har-
| .

|assed). I desired then to see you, that


346


THE WORKS OF Siy (CHa s0s tere


[Homity IL


IT might comfort you, or rather, not that I
might comfort you only, but that I might
myself receive comfort. See the wisdom of
the teacher. He said, to the end that “ye
may be strengthened ; he knew that what he
had said would be heavy and irksome to the
disciples. He says, “‘to the end that ye may
be comforted.” But this again is heavy, not
indeed to such a degree as the former, still it
is heavy. He then pares down what is galling
in this also, smoothing his speech on every
side, and rendering it easy of acceptance.
For he does not say barely, “to be com-
forted,” but, “‘to be comforted together with
you;” nor was he content with this but he
puts in a further lenitive, when he says, “ by
the mutual faith both of you and me.” * Oh
how great was his humble-mindedness! He
showed himself also to be in need of them,
and not them only of him. And he puts the
disciples in the position of teachers, not let-
ting any superiority remain upon his own
side, but pointing out their full equality. For
the gain is mutual, he means, and I need the
comfort from you, and you that from me.
And how comes this to pass? “Through the
mutual faith both of you and me.” For as in
the case of fire, if any one gather together
many lights, it is a bright flame that he
kindles, thus also does it naturally happen
with the faithful. For when we be by our-
selves, torn away from others, we are some-
how in worse spirits. But when we see one
another, and are entwined?! with the members
of our own selves, great is the comfort we
receive. You must not look to the present
time, during which, by God’s grace, both in
city and in the desert itself, there be many
hosts of believers, and all impiety hath been
driven out ; but consider, in that time, how
great a good it was both for disciples to see
their master, and for brethren who had come
from another city to be seen of brethren. But
that I may make what I am saying plainer,
let me bring the matter toan example. For if
it should even happen and come to pass (may
it never do so!) that we had been carried
away to the land of the Persians or Scythians
or other barbarians, and had been scattered
(7 Mss. “ torn asunder”) by twos and threes in
their cities, and were then suddenly to see any
one of those here coming to us, reflect what a


* Verse 12 is best understood as a quasi-correction, or modi-
fication of v. 11, to show that he does not mean that his coming
to them would be a blessing to them alone, but also to him-
self; thus: I mean to say that I want to visit you not only
that | may impart {wetad@, v. 11) something unto you, but
that I may be encouraged in you (or among you) through the
action and reaction of our common (év aAAnAots) faith. Thus
rovto 6€ éotiv is taken not as simply explanatory, but as mildly
adversative.—G. B.S.

1 tepitAak@pev seems here to have a double sense from the
context.


harvest of comfort we should reap of it! See
ye not those too who are in the prisons, if
they see any of their acquaintance, how they
revive, and are quite fluttering with the pleas-
ure? But if I compare those days with
captivity and imprisonment, count it no won-
der. For these suffered far harder things
than those, scattered as they were, and driven
about, and dwelling in the midst of famine
and of wars, and tremblingly expecting daily
death, and suspecting friends and kindred
and relatives, and dwelling in the world as in
a strange land, aye, and in far harder plight
than they who live in another’s country.
This is why he says, “to the end that ye may
be established and comforted with us by our
mutual faith.” And this he says, not as
though himself needed any assistance from
them (far from it; for how should the pillar
of the Church, who was stronger than
iron and the rock, the spiritual adamant, who
was equal to the charge of countless cities),
but that he should not make his language
impetuous and his reproof vehement, he says,
that he himself also needs their consolation.
But if any one here should say, that the com-
fort was his gladness at the increase of their
faith, and that Paul needed this, he would
not be mistaking his meaning in this way |
either. If then thou desire, one might say,
and pray, and wilt gain comfort and give
comfort by it, what is there to hinder thy
coming? By way of dissipating this suspi-
cion then, he proceeds.

Ver. 13. “Now I would. not have you
ignorant, brethren, that oftentimes I desired
to come unto you (but was let hitherto).”

Here is a compliance great as that of
slaves, and a plain exhibition of his excellent
temper (ciyrenooivyc)! For, that he was let,
he says, but why, he does not go on to say.
For he does not pry into the command of
his Master, but only obeys. And yet one
might expect a person to start questions, as
to why God hindered a city so conspicuous and
great, and towards which the whole world was
looking, from enjoying such a teacher, and
that for so long a time. For he that had
overcome the governing city, could easily go
on to the subjects of it. But he that let alone
the more royal one, and lay in wait about the
dependents, had the main point left neglected.
But none of these things does he busy himself
with, but yields to the incomprehensibleness
of Providence, thereby both showing the right
tone of his soul, and instructing us all never
to call God to account for what happens, even
though what is done seem to trouble the
minds of many. For the Master’s part it is
alone to enjoin, the servants’ to obey. And


Homizy II.|


THE BPISTLE TO) THE “ROMANS:


347


this is why he says, that he was let, but not
for what cause; for he means, even I do not
know; ask not then of me the counsel or
mind of God. For neither “shall the thing
formed say to him that formed it, Why hast
thou made me thus?” For why, tell me, do
you even seek to learn it? do you not know
that all things are under His care, that He is
wise, that He doeth nothing at a mere hazard,
that He loveth thee more than they who begat
thee, and goes exceeding far beyond a father’s
yearnings of affection to thee, and a mother’s
anxiousness. Seek then no more, and go not
a step further; for this is sufficient consola-
tion for thee: since even then it was well
ordered for the Romans. And if thou know-
est not the manner, take it not to heart: for
this is a main feature of faith, even when in
ignorance fo the manner of the dispensation,
to receive what is told us of His Providence.

Paul then having succeeded in what he was
earnest about (and what was this? to show
that it was not as slighting them that he did
not come to them, but because, though
greatly desiring it, he was hindered), and hav-
ing divested himself of the accusation of re-
missness, and having persuaded them that he
was not less desirous to see them than them-
selves, further shows his love to them by
other things. For even when I was hindered,
he means, I did not stand aloof from the
attempt, but I kept attempting always yet was
always hindered, yet never did I stand aloof,
thus, without falling out with the will of God,
still keeping my love. For by his purposing
it to himself and not standing aloof from it,
he showed his affection; but through his be-
ing hindered and yet not struggling against
it, all his love to God. “That I might have
some fruit among you also.” Yet he had told
them the cause of his longing before, and
shown that it was becoming him; but still
here also, he states it, clearing away all their
suspicion. For since the city was conspicu-
ous, and in the whole extent of sea and land
had no equal to many even the mere desire of
becoming acquainted with it became a reason
(xpédacve) for a journey to it; that they might
not think anything of the sort about Paul, or
suspect that, merely with a view to glory in
claiming them to himself he desired to be
present there, he repeatedly lays down the|
ground of his desire, and before he says, it
was that “I may impart to you some spiritual
gift,” that I desired to see you; but here
more clearly, ‘‘that I might have some fruit |
among you also even as among other Gen-|
tiles.’ The rulers he puts with the subjects, |
and after the countless triumphs and victories |
and the glory of the consuls, he puts them |


with the barbarians, and with good reason
too. For where the nobility of faith is,
there is none barbarian, none Grecian, none
stranger, none citizen, but all mount up to
one height of dignity. And see him here
also unassuming, for he does not say, that I
may teach and instruct, but what? “that I
might have some fruit.” And not fruit,
simply, but “some fruit.” Again, depreciat-
ing his own share therein just as he had said
above, “that I may impart some gift.” And
then to repress them too, as I said also be-
fore, he says, “even as among other Gen-
tiles.” * For, I do not, because you are rich,
and have the advantage of others, show less
concern about the others. For it is not the
rich that we are seeking, but the faithful.
Where now are the wise of the Greeks, they
that wear long beards and that are clad in
open dress,’ and puff forth great words (ra
ueyada ovoovrec)? All Greece and all barbarian
lands has the tentmaker converted. But
Plato, who is so cried up and carried about*
among them, coming a third time to Sicily
with the bombast of those words of his, with
his brilliant reputation (izeAzewc), did not
even get the better of a single king, but came
off so wretchedly, as even to have lost
his liberty. But this tentmaker ran over
not Sicily alone or Italy, but the whole
world; and while preaching too he desisted
not from his art, but even then sewed skins,
and superintended the workshop. And even
this did not give offence to those who were
born of consuls, and with very good rea-
son, for it is not their trades and occupa-
tions, but falsehood and forged doctrines,
which usually render teachers easy subjects
of contempt. And for this reason, even
Athenians still laugh at the former. But this
man even barbarians attend to, and even
foolish and ignorant men. For his preaching
is set forth to all alike, it knows no distinc-
tion of rank, no preéminence of nation, no
other thing of the sort; for faith alone does


* Verse 13 adds a new reason for his wish to visit Rome—
iva twa kaprov ox@. It seems to me that more is here
meant than the establishing and encouragement of Vv. 11, 12;


that the Apostle is not here merely repeating the idea of


Te petad@ xapiowa (Meyer, Alford), but is thinking of the
conversion of those outside of the Roman Christian commu-
nity. This is confirmed by the generalization of v. 14: “And


to Greeks and Barbarians, I am debtor.” It was not merely
ajoy that he might experience, but a conquest which he
might win for Christ. His purpose to go to Rome is
grounded upon his fixed purpose to carry the gospel to all
Gentile nations without distinction of race or culture (so
Godet, Hofmann). Chrysostom’s exposition proceeds upon the
supposition of the simple identity of these statements.—G.
Bros

1 éfwuidas,a short tunic leaving the arms and shoulders
bare, which had withit a kind of mantle. It was used by
slaves, and adopted perhaps by these philosophers as a badge
of austerity. See Alian. Var. Hist. 1.1x. c. 34. Ed. Varior.
note of Perizonius.

2 Field reads adouevos cai repidepouevos, Vulg. ayouevos which
may mean “ alleged.”’


348


THE WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


‘t require, and not reasonings. Wherefore it
‘s most worthy of admiration, not only be-
rause it is profitable and saving, but that it is
readily admissible and easy (Sav. “ lova-
ble),” and comprehensible to all: which is a
main object in the Providence of God, who
setteth forth His blessings to all in common.

For what He did in respect of the sun and
the moon and the earth and the sea and
other things, not giving the rich and the wise
a greater share of the benefits of these, and a
less to the poor, but setting forth the enjoy-
ment of them to all alike, this also did He
with regard to the preaching, and even in a
much greater degree, by how much this is
more indispensable than they. Wherefore
Paul repeatedly says, “ among all the Gen-
tiles,” to show that he in no respect favors
them, but is fulfilling his Master’s command,
and sending them away to thanksgiving to
the God of all, he says ;

Ver. 14. ‘I am a debtor to the Greeks and
to the Barbarians, both to the wise and to the
unwise.”

Which also he said when writing to the
Corinthians. And he says it, to ascribe the
whole to God. (1 Cor. ix. 16.)

Wers: 90,725 Much 2s) in mews, sam
ready to preach the Gospel to you that are at
Rome also.”

Oh, noble soul! having taken on hima task
laden of so great dangers, a voyage across
the sea, temptations, plottings, risings—for it
was likely, that one who was going to address
so great a city which was under the tyrannic
sway of impiety, should undergo temptations
thick as snowflakes; and it was in this way
that he lost his life in this city, being cut off
by the tyrant of it—yet still expecting to
undergo so great troubles, for none of these
did he become less energetic, but was in
haste and was in travail and was ready-
minded. Wherefore he says, ‘So, as much
as in me is, I am ready to preach the Gospel
to you that are at Rome also.”

Ver. 16. ‘For I am not ashamed of the
Gospel.”

“What sayest thou, O, Paul? When it
were fitting to say, that I boast, and am
proud, and luxuriate in it; thou sayest not
this, but what is less than this, that thou art
“not ashamed,” which is not what we usually
say of things very glorious. What then is
this which he says, and why does he thus
speak ? while yet he exults over it more than
over heaven. At least, in writing to the
Galatians, he said, “God forbid that I should
glory, save in the Cross of our Lord Jesus
Christ.” (Gal. vi. 14.) How then comes he
here to say, not that I even glory, but that “I


[Homity Il. @


am not ashamed?” The Romans were most
anxiously eager about the things of the world,
owing to their riches, their empire, their vic-
tories; and their kings they reckoned to be
equal to the gods, and so they even called
them. And for this cause too, they wor-
shipped them with temples and with altars
and with sacrifices. Since then they were
thus puffed up, but Paul was going to preach
Jesus, who was thought to be the carpenter’s
son, who was brought up in Judea, and that
in the house of a mean woman, who had no
body guards, who was not encircled in wealth,
but even died as a culprit with robbers, and
endured many other inglorious things; and it
was likely that they were concealing them-
selves as not as yet knowing any of the un-
speakable and great things: for this reason
he says, “I am not ashamed,” having still to
teach them not to be ashamed. For he knew
that if they succeeded in this, they would
speedily go on and come to glorying also:
and do you then, if you hear any one saying,
Dost thou worship the Crucified? be not
ashamed, and do not look down, but luxuriate
in it, be bright-faced at it, and with the eyes
of a free man, and with uplifted look, take up
your confession; and if he say again, Dost
thou worship the Crucified? say in reply to
him, Yes! and not the adulterer, not the
insulter of his father, not the murderer of his
children (for such be all the gods they have’),
but Him who by the Cross stopped the
mouths of devils, and did away with their
countless juggleries. For the Cross is for
our sakes, being the work of unspeakable
Love towards man, the sign of His great con-
cern for us. And in addition to what has
been said, since they were puffed up with
great pomposity of speech and with their
cloak of external wisdom, I, he means to say,
bidding an entire farewell to these reasonings,
come to preach the Cross, and am _ not
ashamed because of it: “for it is the power
of God to salvation.” For since there is a
power of God to chastisement also (for when
He chastised the Egyptians, He said, “ This is
My great power,””) (Joel ii. 25) and a power
to destruction, (for, “fear Him,” He says,
“that is able to destroy both body and soul
in hell’), (Matt. x. 28) for this cause die
says, it is not these that I come to bring, the
powers of chastisement and punishment, but
those of salvation. What then? Did not
the Gospel tell of these things also, namely,
the account of hell, and that of the outer


1 And this the wiser heathen urge, as Plato, Rep. xi. and
Euthyph. and Aristoph. Nub.

2 Joel ii. 25. S. Ephrem considers that passage to allude to
the plagues of Egypt ; and so others.


Homity II.]


THe Pipl LE TO -THE* ROMANS.


349


darkness, and of the venomous worm?
yet we know of these from no other source
than the Gospel. In what sense then does he
say, “the power of God unto salvation?”
Attend only to what follows. ‘‘To every one
that believeth; to the Jew first, and also to
the Greek.”’

For it is not to all absolutely, but to them
that receive it. For though thou be a Gre-
cian (i.e. Heathen), and even one that has
run into every kind of vice, though a Scythian,
though a barbarian, though a very brute, and
full of all irrationality, and burdened with the
weights of endless sins, no sooner hast thou
received the word concerning the Cross, and
been baptized, than thou hast blotted out all
these; and why says he here, “to the Jew
first, and also to the Greek?” What mean-
eth this difference? and yet he has often said,
“ Neither circumcision is anything, nor uncir-
cumcision ” (1 Cor. vii. 19. see Gal. v. 6 and

vi. 15); how then doth he here agen rdindta
setting the Jew before the Greek? Now w hy
is this ? seeing that by being first he does not
therefore receive any more ‘of. the grace (for
the same gift is bestowed both on this person
and that,) but the “first” is an honor in
order of time only. For he has no such ad-
vantage as that of receiving greater righteous-
ness, ‘but is only honored in respect of his
receive if first. ‘Since’ in’ the’ case of
those that are enlightened (you that are
initiated know what is meant,) all run? to
the baptism, yet not all at the same hour, but
one first and another second. Yet the first
doth not receive more than the second, nor he
than the person after him, but all enjoy the
same gifts. The “first” then here is an
honor in word, not a superiority in grace.
Then after saying, “unto salvation,” he en-
hances the gift further, by showing that it
stayeth not at the present point, but proceed-
eth farther.* For this is what he sets forth,
when he says,

Ver. 17. “ For therein is the righteousness
of God revealed.”

But he who hath become just shall live, not
for the present life only, but for that which is
to come. And he hints not only this, but
also another thing along with this, namely,
the brightness and gloriousness of such a life.


1 See the Ceremonies of Baptism, St. Cyril Lect. xx. (ii. on
BRS .) c. 4. Hesays they ‘‘ were led to tie holy pool.’ p. 264.


* Verse 16 might almost be considered as a summary of the


apostle’s doctrine. It could be expressed thus: subject:
The gospel, what is it? God’s power. For what? Salva-
tion. For whom? Every one that believeth. On what


historic conditions? To the Jew first and also to the Greek.
Ilparov is best taken, not as, simply chronological (Chrys.
Godet, Hodge), but as denoting a providential, economic
precedence (Meyer, De Wette, Tholuck, Philippi, Alford).—G.


And_|


For since it is possible to be saved, yet not
without shame (as many are saved of those,
who by the royal humanity are released from
punishment), that no one may suspect this
upon hearing of safety, he adds also righteous-
ness; and righteousness, not thine own, but
that of God; hinting also the abundance of it
and the facility. f For you do not achieve it
by toilings and labors, but you receive it by a
gift from above, contributing one thing only
from your own store, “believing.” Then
since his statement did not seem credible, if
the adulterer and effeminate person, and rob-
ber of graves, and magician, is not only to be
suddenly freed from punishment but to be-
come just, and just too with the highest right-
eousness ; he confirms his assertion from the
Old Testament. And first with a short sen-
tence, he lays open a vast sea of histories to
one who has a capacity for seeing them. For
after having said, “from faith to faith,” he
sends the hearer back to the dispensations of
God, which took place thus in the Old Testa-
ment, which, when writing to the Hebrews,
he explains with his usual great wisdom, show-
ing that both the just and the sinners were
justified in that way even then, wherefore also
he made mention both of the harlot and of
Abraham. But then here, after having just
hinted at it (for he was running on to another
and a pressing subject), he again confirms
what he had said from the Prophets, bringing
in Habakkuk before them, crying, and saying,
that it is not in the nature of things for him
who is to live, to live otherwise save by faith ;
for“ a just,” he says, “shall live by faith ”

(Hab. ii. 4), speaking about the life to come.
For since what God giveth transcends reason-
ing entirely, it is but reason that we need
faith. But the man that thinks meanly of it,
and is contemptuous and vainglorious, will
not effect anything at all. Let heretics
hearken to the voice of the Spirit, for such is
the nature of reasonings. ‘They are like some
labyrinth or puzzles ‘which have no end to
them anywhere, and do not let the reason
stand upon the rock, and have their very ori-
gin in vanity. For being ashamed to allow of
faith, and to seem ignorant of heavenly things,
they involve themselves in the dust-cloud of


+ Aicatoovvy Qeov (17) means a righteousness which is from
God (gex. orig.) and of which God’s character is the norm.
The Sixacos fais in an ethical relation which, on its divine
side, is designated as dcx. Beov. God is the author of this right
condition, but man is placed in it on condition and in con-
sequence of faith. The dtx. is é€x mio7ews as its conditioning
cause and its aims at faith and terminates in faith—eis miotw.
How closely and vitally are faith and righteousness connected !
And yet they are to be distinguished. Faith is a subjective
exercise ; righteousness isa status. The former is that which
man does: the latter is the relation and condition in which
God places the believer. They represent respectively the
human and the divine sides of salv ation and are so vitally
related that Paul can say: Aoyigerae 7 miatis eis Sixacocuvny
(Rom. iv. 5 sq).—G. B. S.


ps2


countless reasonings. ‘Then oh miserable and
painful man, fit object for endless tears,
should any one ask thee, how the heaven was
made, and how the earth,—and why do I say
the heaven and the earth? how thou wert thy-
self born,’ how nourished, and how thou grew-
est, art thou then not ashamed of thine igno-
rance? But if anything be said about the
Only-begotten, dost thou thrust thyself through
shame into a pit of destruction, thinking that
it is unworthy of thee not to know every-
thing? And yet disputatiousness is an unwor-
thy thing, and so is ill-timed curiosity. And
why do I speak of doctrines? for even from
the corruption in our present life we have es-
caped by no other means than through the
faith. Thus shone also all those aforetime,
thus Abraham, thus Isaac, thus Jacob, thus
too the harlot was saved, the one in the Old
Testament, and likewise the one in the New.
For, “by faith,” he says, “the harlot Rahab
perished not with them that believed not
when she had received the spies.” (Heb. xi.
31.) For if she had said to herself, “ and
how can they that are captives and exiles, and
refugees, and live the life of vagabond tribes,
get the better of us who have a city, and
walls, and towers?” she would have de-
stroyed both herself and them. Which also
the forefathers of those who were then saved
did suffer. For when, upon the sight of men
great and tall, they questioned the manner of
victory, they perished, without battle or array,
all of them. Seest thou what a pit is that of
unbelief! what a wall that of faith! For the
one carried down endless thousands, the other
not only saved a harlot, but made her the
patroness of so numerous a people !

Now since we know of these and more than
these, never let us call God to account for
what is done, but whatsoever He may lay on}


THE WORKS OF SI. (CHE 0-tar


[Homity JGOE


us, that let us take up with, and let us not run
into niceties and curious questions, though to
human reasoning the thing commanded ap-
pears even amiss. For what, let me ask,
looks more amiss than for a father to slay
with his own hands his only and legitimate
son? (Gen. xxil. 3.) But still when the right-
eous man was bid do it, he raised no nice
scruples about it, but owing to the dignity of
the bidder, he merely accepted the injunction.
And another too that was bidden of God to
strike a prophet, when he raised nice scruples
about the seeming unreasonableness of the
injunction, and did not simply obey, he was
punished to the extreme. (1 Kings xx. 35, 36.)
But he that struck, gained a good report.
And Saul too, when he saved men contrary to
the decree of God, fell from the kingdom, and
was irretrievably punished. And one might
find other instances beside these: by all
which we learn, never to require a reason for
God’s injunctions,” but to yield and obey only.
But if it be dangerous to raise nice scruples
about aught that He may enjoin, and extreme
punishment is appointed for those who are
curious questioners, what possible excuse
shall they have who curiously question things
far more secret and awful than these, as for
instance, how He begat the Son, and in what
fashion, and what His Essence is? Now as
we know this, let us with all kindliness receive
the mother of all blessings, faith ; that sailing
as it were in a still harbor, we may at once
keep our doctrines orthodox, and by steering
our life safely in a straight course, may attain
those eternal blessings by the grace and love
toward man of our Lord Jesus Christ, through
Whom and with Whom be glory unto the Fa-
ther, with the Holy Ghost, for ever and ever.
Amen.


EER OUVEDE Ye


ROM.


“For the wrath of God is revealed from Heaven
against all ungodliness and unrighteousness of
men, who hold down the truth in unrighteousness.”


OpsERVE the discretion of Paul, how after
encouraging by the gentler things, he turns
his discourse to the more fearful. For after
saying that the Gospel is the cause of salva-


1 See Eccles. xi. 5. and Homer, Odys. 1. 216, also Menander |


as quoted by Eustathius on that passage.
2/2 Mss. ** to call God to account for His injunctions.”


Tens:

tion and of life, that it is the power of God,
that it gendereth salvation and righteousness,
he mentions what might well make them fear
that were heedless of it. For since in general
most men are not drawn so much by the
promise of what is good as by the fear of
what is painful, he draws them on both sides.


For this cause too did God not only promise


a kingdom, but also threaten hell. And the
Prophets spake thus with the Jews, ever inter-


Homity III.]


SHE Bristle, TO; THE ROMANS.


350


mingling the evil with the good. For this
cause too Paul thus varies his discourse, yet
not any how, but he sets first the good things,
and after the evil, to show that the former
came of the guiding purpose of God, but the
latter of the wickedness of the backsliding.
And in this way the prophet puts the good
first, saying, “If ye be willing and will obey
me, ye shall eat the good of the land: but if
ye be not willing and will not obey me, the
sword shall devour you.” (ls. i. 19, 20.) So
here too does Paul conduct his discourse.
But observe him; Christ, he means, came to
bring forgiveness, righteousness, life, yet not
in any way, but by the Cross, which is great-
est too and wonderful, that He not only gave
such things, but that He also suffered such
things. If then ye insolently scorn the gifts,
then will the penalties await you. And see
how he raises his language, “ For the wrath of
God,” he says, “is revealed from heaven.”
Whence does this appear? If it be a believer
who says this, we will tell him of the declara-
tions of Christ, but if the unbeliever and the
Grecian, him Paul silences, by what he says
presently of the judgment of God, bringing
an uncontrovertible demonstration from the
things which were done by them. And this
too is by far the most striking point in him,
how he exhibits those who speak against the
truth, as themselves bearing witness by the
things which they do daily, and say, to the
doctrines of the truth. But of this in the
sequel: but for the present, let us keep to
what is set before us. ‘For the wrath of
God is revealed from heaven.” And indeed
even here this often takes place in famines
and pestilences and wars: for each individ-
ually and all in common are punished. What
will be the new thing then? That the chas-
tisement will be greater, and common to all,
and not by the same rules. For now what
takes place is for correction; but then for
vengeance.* And this also St. Paul showed,
when he said, “ We are chastened now, that
we should not be condemned with the world.”
(1 Cor. xi. 32.) And now indeed to many
such things usually seem to come not of the
wrath from above, but of the malice of man.
But then the punishment from God shall be
manifest, when the Judge, sitting upon the


* The author does not make it plain in what he understands
the revelation of God’s wrath here spoken of to consist. He
mentions famines and pestilences as things in which it “ often
takes place.” Paul evidently means that God’s wrath is
manifest in the judicial hardening of the people for their sins
(vid. vv. 21, 28). Their shameful deeds and lives are the pen-
alty of their sin. ‘God punishes their sin by sin’’ (Weiss),
that is, He made them reap the bitter fruit in sinful lives of
their sinful choices and acts. The view of Ritschl that opyn
@eov is here eschatological in meaning seems very inade-
ee gurported (vid. Godet on Romans—Am. ed. p. 102).


fearful tribunal, shall command some to be
dragged to the furnaces, and some to the
outer darkness,! and some to other inexorable
and intolerable punishments. And why is it
that he does not speak as plainly as this, the
Son of God is coming with ten thousand
angels, and will call each man to account, but
says, that ‘‘the wrath of God is revealed?”
His hearers were as yet novices, and there-
fore he draws them first by things quite
allowed by them. And besides what is here
mentioned, he also seems to me to be aiming
against the Greeks. And this is why he
makes his beginning from this, but afterwards
he introduces the subject of Christ’s judg-
ment.

* Against all ungodliness and unrighteous-
ness of men who hold the truth in unrighteous-
ness.” Here he showeth that the ways of
ungodliness are many, and that of truth, one.
For error is a thing various and multiform and
compound, but the truth is one. And after
speaking of doctrines he speaks of life, men-
tioning the unrighteousness of men. For
there be various kinds of unrighteousness also.
One is in money affairs, as when any one
deals unrighteously by his neighbor in these ;
and another in regard to women, when a man
leaves his own wife, and breaks in upon the
marriage of another. For St. Paul calls this
also defrauding, saying thus, “That no man
go beyond or defraud his brother in the
matter.” (1 Thess. iv. 6.) Others again
injure not the wife or property, but the reputa-
tion of their neighbor, and this too is unright-
eousness. For “a good name is better than
great riches.’ (Prov. xxii. 1.) But some say
that this also is said of Paul about doctrines.
Still there is nothing to prevent its having
been said of both. But what it is “to hold
the truth in unrighteousness,” learn from the
sequel.

Ver. 19. “ Because that which may be known
of God is manifest in them, for God hath
showed it unto them.”

But this glory they invested stocks and
stones with. As then he which is entrusted
with the goods of the king, and is ordered to
spend them upon the king’s glory, if he waste
these upon robbers, and_harlots, and witches,
and make these splendid out of the king’s
stores, he is punished as having done the


1 St. Basil speaks similarly of various punishments, Kegule.
Br. Tr. int. 267, ed. Ben. text ii. p. 507. heophylact on Matt.
viii. 12, seems to allude to this passage. Both say that *‘ outer
darkness” implies an “inner,’’ but seemingly in opposite
senses, Theoph. taking éow to be towards Heaven. Origen on
Matt. xxii. 13 makes ita temporary punishment. St. Chrys. on
Matt. xxii.z3. St. Aug. on Ps. vi. 6. St. Jerome on Matt. viii. 12,
take it otherwise. See also St. Bas. on Ps. 33 (4), 11, text i. 151
e. See Maldonatus on Matt. viii. 12, and St. Chrys. on Rom,
xvi. 16, 72/ra on the difference of punishments.


352 THE “WORKS OF


kingdom the greatest wrong. Thus they also
who after having received the knowledge of
God and of His glory, invested idols there-
with, “held the truth in unrighteousness,” and,
at least as far as was in their power, dealt
unrighteously by the knowledge, by not using
it upon fitting objects. Now, has what was
said become clear to you, or must one make
it still clearer? Perhaps it were needful to
say somewhat more. What then is it which
is here said? The knowledge of Himself God
placed in men from the beginning. But this
knowledge they invested stocks and stones
with, and so dealt unrighteously to the truth,
as far at least as they might. For it abideth
unchanged, having its own glory immutable.
“And whence is it plain that He placed in
them this knowledge, O Paul?” ‘“ Because,”
saith he, ‘that which may be known of Him
is manifest in them.” This, however, is an
assertion, not a proof. But do thou make it
good, and show me that the knowledge of God
was plain to them, and that they willingly
turned aside. Whence was it plain then? did
He send them a voice from above? By no
means. But what was able to draw them to
Him more than a voice, that He did, by put-
ting before them the Creation, so that both
wise, and unlearned, and Scythian, and _ bar-
barian, having through sight learned the
beauty of the things which were seen, might
mount up to God.t. Wherefore he says,

Ver. 20. “ For the invisible things of Him
from the Creation of the world are clearly
seen, being understood by the things which
are made.”

Which also the prophet said, “ The heavens
declare the glory of God.” (Ps. xix. 1.) » For
what will the Greeks (i. e. Heathen) say in
that day? That “ we wereignorant of Thee?”
Did ye then not hear the heaven sending forth
a voice by the sight, while the well-ordered
harmony of all things spake out more clearly
than a trumpet? Did ye not see the hours of
night and day abiding unmoved continually,
the goodly order of winter, spring, and the
other seasons remaining both sure and un-
moved, the tractableness (ciyrwuooivyv) of the
sea amid all its turbulence and waves? All
things abiding in order and by their beauty
and their grandeur, preaching aloud of the
Creator? For all these things and more than
these doth Paul sum up in saying, “The in-
visible things of Him from the creation of the
world are clearly seen, being understood by
the things which are made, even His eternal
Power and Godhead; so that they are without
excuse.” And yet it is not for this God hath


1 Pascal. Pen. c. 20, thinks an inward illumination implied
here.


ST. ‘CHRYSOST@sE |Homity IIL


made these things, even if this came of it.
For it was not to bereave them of all excuse,
that He set before them so great a system of
teaching, but that they might come to know
Him. But by not having recognized2 Him
they deprived themselves of every excuse, and
then to show how they are bereaved of excuse,
he says,

Ver. 21. “ Because that, when they knew
God, they glorified Him not as God.”

This is the one greatest charge; and the
second after it is their also worshipping idols,
as Jeremy too in accusing them said, ‘ This
people hath committed two evils: they have
forsaken me the fountain of living water, and
have dug for themselves broken cisterns.”
(Jer. i: 13!) “And ‘then as 2"sipne@r them
having known God, and not used their knowl-
edge upon a fit object, he adduces this very
thing, that they knew gods. Wherefore he
adds, ‘“‘ because that, when they knew God,
they glorified Him not as God.” And he
names the cause through which they fell into
such senselessness. What then is it? They
trusted everything to their reasonings. Still
he does not word it so, but in a much sharper
language, ‘“‘but became vain in their reason-
ings, and their foolish heart was darkened.”
For as in a night without a moon, if any one
attempt to go bya strange road, or to sail
over a strange sea, so far will he be from soon
reaching his destination, that he will speedily
be lost. Thus they, attempting to go the
way leading to Heaven, and having destroyed
the light from their own selves, and, in lieu of
it, trusted themselves to the darkness of their
own reasoning, and seeking in bodies for
Him who is incorporeal, and in shapes for
Him who hath no shape, underwent a most
rueful shipwreck. But beside what has been
said, he names also another cause of their
error, when he says,

Ver. 22. ‘ Professing themselves to be wise,
they became fools.”

For having some great conceit of them-
selves, and not enduring to go the way which
God had commanded them, they were plunged
into the reasonings of senselessness (1 Ms.
diavoiac). And then to show and give in out-
line, what a rueful surge it was, and how des-
titute of excuse, he goes on to say,

Ver. 23. “And changed the glory ot “he
uncorruptible God into an image made like
to corruptible man, and to birds, and four-
footed beasts, and creeping things.”

The first charge is, that they did not find
God; the second was, that it was while they
had great and clear (Sav. marg. “ wise”) means


2 ayvonoavtes 4 Mss. and Sav. marg.; in text ayywmovycartes,
having been obstinate.


Homiy III.]


PEs er lorie TO) Ties ROMANS.


53


to do it; the third, that withal they said they
were wise ; the fourth, that they not only did
not find that Reverend Being, but even low-
ered Him to devils and to stones and stocks.
Now he takes down their haughtiness also in
the Epistle to the Corinthians, but not in the
same way there as here. For there it is from


the Cross he gives them the blow, saying,
“ The foolishness of God is wiser than men.”
(1 Cor. i. 25.) But here, without any compari-
son, he holds their wisdom by itself up to ridi-
cule, showing it to be folly and a mere display
of vain boasting. Then, that you may learn
that when they had the knowledge of God
they gave it up thus treacherously, “ they
changed,” he says. Now he that changeth,
hath something to change. For they wished
to find out more, and not bear with the limits
given them, and so they were banished from
these also. For they were lusters after new
devices, for such is all that is Grecian. And
this is why they stood against one another,
and Aristotle rose up against Plato, and the
Stoics blustered (éopvagavro 6 Mss. “fenced
themselves,” éopaavro: which Field inclines to
prefer) against him, and one has become
hostile to one, another to another. So that
one should not so much marvel at them for
their wisdom, as turn away from them indig-
nant and hate them, because through this
very thing they have become fools. For had
they not trusted what they have to reasonings,
and syllogisms, and sophistries, they would
not have suffered what they did suffer.
Then, to strengthen the accusation against
them, he holds the whole of their idolatry up
to ridicule. For in the first place the chang-
ing even were a very fit subject of scorn.
But to change to such things too, is beyond
all excuse. For what then did they change it,
and what was it which they invested with His
Glory? Some conceptions they ought to
have had about Him, as, for instance, that
He is God, that He is Lord of all, that He
made them, which were not, that He exer-
ciseth a Providence, that He careth for them.
For these things are the “Glory of God.”
To whom then did they ascribe it? Not even
to men, but “to an image made like to cor-
ruptible man.” Neither did they stop here,
but even dropped down to the brutes, or rather
to the images of these. But consider, I pray,
the wisdom of Paul, how he has taken the
two extremes, God the Highest, and creeping
things the lowest: or rather, not the creeping
things, but the images of these ; that he might
clearly show their evident madness. — For
what knowledge they ought to have had con-
cerning Him Who is incomparably more ex-
cellent than all, with that they invested what |


23


was incomparably more worthless than all.
But what has this to do with the philoso-
phers? a man may say. To these belongs
most of all what I have said to do with them.
For they have the Egyptians who were the
inventors of these things to their masters.
And Plato, who is thought more reverend
than the rest of them, glories in these mas-
ters. (Plat. Tim. 21. B. etc.) And his master
is in a stupid awe of these idols, for he it is
that bids them sacrifice the cock to A#scula-
pius! (his last words, Phzedo), where (i. e. in his
temple. So Field from Mss.) are the images
of these beasts, and creeping things. And
one may see Apollo and Bacchus worshipped
along with these creeping things. And some
of the philosophers even lifted up to Heaven
bulls, and scorpions, and dragons, and all
the rest of that vanity. For in all parts did
the devil zealously strive to bring men down
before the images of creeping things, and to
range beneath the most senseless of ail things,
him whom God hath willed to lift up above
the heavens. . And it is not from this only,
but also from other grounds, that you will see
their chief man to come under the remarks
now made. For having, made a collection of
the poets, and having said that we should be-
lieve them upon matters relating to God, as
having accurate knowledge, he has nothing
else to bring forward but the “linked sweet-
ness’ of these absurdities, and then says,
that this utterly ludicrous trifling is to be held
for true. 2%


1 Thus Tert. Ap. 46. Lact. iii. 20. Origen cont. Cels. vi. c.
4, quotes this as showing the Philosophers guilty of St. Paul's
charge, at the same time speaking of Socrates’ previous dis-
course as ** what God had shown them ;"’ the note of Spencer,
Ed. Ben. i. 631, quotes an allegoricai explanation. Theodoret,
Gre. Aff. Cur. Dis. vii. de Sacr. says it was done to disprove the
charge of Atheism.

[Probably Socrates’ real judgment on the popular mythology
was, that it was an imperfect and economical revelation of a
higher truth than it expressed : and its ceremonies the legiti-
mate though conventional expression of true devotion. Thus
‘“‘ the cock to Atsculapius’’ was the sick man’s thank-offering
for recovery from ‘“‘life’s fitful fever.’’]

2 See Plat. Io 533 E. and perhaps Euthyph. 6 A. B: passages
certainly not fairly representative of Plato's deliberate opin-
ions. But Greek Philosophy is here treated as attempting to
rival the Gospel. The Fathers who most value what is true
in it, as Clement of Alexandria and Justin Martyr, speak of it
as from partial Divine Light, and use it against the false; as
Cl. A. Stx. x. recommends the study of it for subordinate
knowledge, and Cohort. ad Gr. quotes Heathens against the
mythology, whose authors he considers led by demonsto de-
ceive men. So too Justin, Ap. i. 46, allows Heathens a partak-
ing of the Adyos, and 20, 55, 58, 62, €tc., refers idol rites to the
demons. St. Augustin de Crz. Der, viii. 10, and elsewhere,
gives a fair estimate of Gentile Philosophy. The Apostolical
Constitutions, r. i. c. 6, forbid studying heathen books. Cote-
lerius in his note quotes on the same side, r. li. c. 61, recog. X.
15, 42. Isid. Sent. iii. 13, etc.,and the blame cast on Origen by
many. On the other side, Tert. de /do/. c. 10, who however
only defends learning in heathen schools, rather than Christians
should conform to heathen customs as teachers. Origen Phil-
ocal.c. 13. Greg. Naz. Or. 20. Hieron. ep. 84. 70 Vall. ad
Magnum Oratorem Greg. Papa. ad 1 Reg. xiii. 19, 20. Theod.


H. E. iv. 26, as checking excess in such studies, Greg. ad De-
siderium, l. ix. Ep. 48. Hier. ddv. Luciferianos, c. 5. Ep. 61,
c. 1. Cassian. Coll. xiv. c. 12, etc.


* The steps of this degeneracy of the Gentile world as
indicated in v. 21-23 may be indicated thus: (1) ceasing to
give glory to God and to recognize his power and divineness.


354 THE WORKS: OF


Ver. 24. “‘ Wherefore also God gave them
up to uncleanness, through the lusts of their
own hearts, to dishonor their own bodies be-
tween themselves.”

Hence he shows, that even of the perver-
sion of the laws it was ungodliness which was
the cause, but He “gave them up,” here is,
Jet them alone.* For as he that hath the
command in an army, if upon the battle lying
heavy upon him he retreat and go away, gives
up his soldiers to the enemies, not by thrust-
ing them himself, but by stripping them of
his own assistance; thus too did God leave
those that were not minded to receive what
cometh from Him, but were the first to bound
off from Him, though Himself having wholly
fulfilled His own part. But consider; He set
before them, for a form of doctrine, the world ;
He gave them reason, and an understanding
capable of perceiving what was needful. None
of these things did the men of that day use
unto salvation, but they perverted to the oppo-
site what they had received. What was to
be done then? to drag them by compulsion
and force? But this were not to make them
virtuous. It remained then, after that, for
Him to leave them alone, and this He did
too, that in this way, if by no other, having
by trial come to know the things they lusted
after, they might flee from what was so shame-
ful (3 Mss. add eixérwe, and with reason). For
if any that was a king’s son, dishonoring his
father, should choose to be with robbers and
murderers, and them that break up tombs,
and prefer their doings to his father’s house ;
the father leaves him, say, so that by actual
trial, he may learn the extravagance of his
own madness. But how comes he to men-
tion no other sin, as murder, for instance, or
covetousness, or other such besides, but only
unchasteness? He seems to me to hint at
his audience at the time, and those who were
to receive the Epistle. ‘‘To uncleanness, to
dishonor their own bodies between them-
selves.”

Note the emphasis here, as it is most severe.


(2) Thanklessness. They lost the sense of their relation to
him as recipients of his bounty. (3) They entered into
vain and foolish speculations—écadAoyiopmot. (4) These ended
only in blindness of mind and heart to the truth which they
once possessed. (5) Mistaking all this folly for wisdom, they
were ripe for complete self-deception. They perverted their
religious feeling by ceasing to make the glorious perfection
of God the object of their worship and by substituting
images of men and animals.—G. B. S.

* The expression: ‘‘God gave them up,’’ etc. is not to
be so softened down into the idea of mere permission.
With this v. (24) begins the description of God’s revelation
of his wrath against them. This is introduced by 60;
because they had pursued the course outlined in the preceding
verses (19-23) God set in operation against them those moral
and providential forces which reduced them to the lowest
depth of misery and shame. Vv. 25-32 show what this exhibi-
tion of his wrath was and what were its consequences. For
historic iilustration of the condition of the Heathen world
ae Bae see Fisher, Beginnings of Christianity, chap. vi.
—G.B.S.


ST. CHRYSOST Gar [Homity III.


For they stood not in need of any others, it
means, to do insolent violence to them, but
the very treatment the enemies would have
shown them, this they did to themselves.
And then, taking up the charge again, he says,

Ver. 25. ‘‘ Who changed the truth of God
into a lie, and worshipped and served the
creature more than the Creator.”

Things which were matter for utter scorn,
he puts down specially, but what seemed of 2
graver cast than the rest, in general terms;
and by all he shows, that serving the creature
is Grecian. And see how strong he makes
his assertion, for he does not say, barely,
“they served the creature,” but “more than
the Creator:” thus everywhere giving fresh
force to the charge, and, by the comparison,
taking from them all ground of mitigation.
“Who is blessed forever. Amen.” But by
this, he means, He was not any whit in-
jured. For Himself abideth “blessed for
ever.” Here he shows, that it was not in self-
defence that He left them alone, inasmuch as
He suffered nothing Himself. For even if.
these treated Him insolently, yet He was not
insolently treated, neither was any scathe
done to the bearings of His glory, but He
abideth continually blessed. For if it often
happen, that man through philosophy would -
not feel the insults men offered him, much
less would God, the imperishable and unalter-
able Nature, the unchangeable and immovy-
able Glory.

For men are in this respect made like unto
God,! when they do not feel what is inflicted
by them who would do them despite, and are
neither insulted of others who insult them, nor
beaten of them when beating them, nor made’
scorn of when they make scorn of them. And
how in the nature of things can this be? it
may be said. It is so, yea most certainly it is
possible, when thou art not vexed at what is
done. And how, it may be said, is it possible
not to be vexed? Nay rather, how is it possi-
ble to be vexed? ‘Tell me now, if your little
child were to insult you, would you then reckon
the insult an insult? What, but would you be
vexed? Surely not. But and if you were to
be vexed, would you not then be ridiculous ?
Thus too let us then get to feel disposed
towards our neighbors, and then we shall have
no sense of displeasure. For they that insult
us are more senseless than children. Neither
let us even seek to be free from insults, but
when we are insulted to bear them. For this
is the only secure honor. But why so? Be-
cause this you are master of, but that, another
person. Do you not see the adamant rever-


1 Greg. Nyss. i. p. 720. é7et amafés To @clov, 0 €v Taber wy
THS Tpos TO Oetov guvadelas amooxorvicerac.


Homiry IV.]


berating the blows it receives? But nature,
you will say, gives it this property. Yet you
too have it in your power to become by free
choice such, as that happens to be by nature.
How? do you not know that the children in
the furnace were not burned? and that Daniel
in the den suffered no harm? This may even
now come to pass. There stand by us too
lions, anger and lust, with fearful teeth tearing
asunder him that falleth among them. (Plato
Rep. viii.) Become then like that (éewov 3
Mss.) Daniel, and let not these affections
fasten their fangs into thy soul. But that,
you will say, was wholly of grace. Yes; be-
cause the acts’ of free-will led the way
thereto. So that if we be willing to train our-
selves to a like character, even now the grace
is athand. And even though the brutes be
an hungered, yet will they not touch thy sides.
For if at the sight of a servant’s body they
were abashed, when they have seen the mem-
bers of Christ, (and this is what we believers
are,) how shall they do else than be still?
Yet if they be not still, it is owing to the fault
of those cast among them. For indeed many
spend largely upon these lions, by keeping
harlots, breaking through marriages, taking
vengeance upon enemies. And so _ before
ever they come to the bottom of the den they
get torn in pieces. (Dan. vi. 24.) But with
Daniel this did not so happen, neither yet
would it with us, if we were so minded, but
even a greater thing would take place than


THEOEPISTLE, TO! ‘THE ROMANS:


be


what then happened. For the lions hurt not


him; and if we be sober-minded, then will
they that hurt us even profit us. Thus then
did Paul grow bright out of those that thwarted
him and plotted against him, thus Job out of
the many scourges, thus Jeremy out of the
miry pit, thus Noah out of the flood, thus
Abel out of the treachery, thus Moses out of
the bloodthirsty Jews, thus, Elisha, thus each
of the worthies of old, not out of relaxedness
and softness, but out of tribulations and trials,
came to be attired with their bright crowns.
Wherefore also Christ, inasmuch as He knew
this to be the groundwork of a good report,
said to His disciples, “In the world ye shall
have tribulation, but be of good cheer, I have
overcome the world.” (John xvi. 33.) What
then, they will say, Have not many been
turned to flight by these terrors? Yes, but
that was not of the nature of temptation, but
of their own remissness. But He that “ with
the temptation maketh also an escape, so that
ye. maybe /able: ‘to, béari it 7. (a) Gore yaa
may He stand by all of us, and reach forth
His hand, that being gloriously proclaimed
victorious we may attain to the everlasting
crowns, through the grace and love towards
man (5 Mss. add the rest and so Field fas-
sim) of our Lord Jesus Christ, through
Whom, and with Whom, to the Father be
glory, with the Holy Ghost, for ever and ever.
Amen.


Pe. LV,


ROMs 1.426; 127.


“ For this cause God gave them up unto vile affections:
for even their women did change the natural use
into that which is against nature: and likewise
also the men, leaving the natural use of the woman,
burned in their lust one towards another.”


Aut. these affections then were vile, but
chiefly the mad lust after males; for the soul
is more the sufferer in sins, and more dishon-
ored, than the body in diseases. But behold
how here too, as in the case of the doctrines,
he deprives them of excuse, by saying of the
women, that “they changed the natural use.”
For no one, he means, can say that it was by
being hindered of legitimate intercourse that
they came to this pass, or that it was from


1 7a THs mp. i. e. his fastings. etc.S. Ephrem notes that it was
not the miracles which were supernatural, but the grace of the
doers thereof, in Nat. Dom. ix. text 2. p. 427. f.


having no means to fulfil their desire that
they were driven into this monstrous insane-
ness. For the changing implies possession.
Which also when discoursing upon the doc-
trines he said, “They changed the truth of
God for a lie.”” And with regard to the men
again, he shows the same thing by saying,
“‘ Leaving the natural use of the woman.” And
in a like way with those, these he also puts
out of all means of defending themselves by
charging them not only that they had the
means of gratification, and left that which
they had, and went after another, but that
having dishonored that which was natural,
they ran after that which was contrary to na-
ture. But that which is contrary to nature
hath in it an irksomeness and displeasingness,
so that they could not fairly allege even


356


THE: WORKS -OF ST) CEr 30> Caine


[Homity IV.


pleasure. For genuine pleasure is that which
is according to nature. But when God hath
left one, then all things are turned upside
down. And thus not only was their doctrine
Satanical, but their life too was diabolical.
Now when he was discoursing of their doc-
trines, he put before them the world and man’s
understanding, telling them that, by the
judgment afforded them by God, they might
through the things which are seen, have been
led as by the hand to the Creator, and then,
by not willing to do so, they remained inex-
cusable. Herein the place of the world he
sets the pleasure according to nature, which
they would have enjoyed with more sense of
security and greater glad-heartedness, and so
have been far removed from shameful deeds.
But they would not; whence they are quite
out of the pale of pardon, and have done an in-
sult tonature itself. And ayet more disgrace-
ful thing than these is it, when even the women
seek after these intercourses, who ought to
have more sense of shame than men. And
here too the judgment of Paul is worthy of
admiration, how having fallen upon two oppo-
site matters he accomplishes them both with
all exactness. For he wished both to speak
chastely and to sting the hearer. Now both
these things were not in his power to do,! but
one hindered the other. For if you speak
chastely you shall not be able to bear hard
upon the hearer. But if you are minded to
touch him to the quick, you are forced to lay
the naked facts before him in plain terms.
But his discreet and holy soul was able to do
both with exactness, and by naming nature
has at once given additional force to his ac-
cusation, and also used this as a sort of veil,
to keep the chasteness of his description.
And next, having reproached the women first,
he goes on to the men also, and says, “‘ And
likewise also the men leaving the natural use
of the woman.” Which is an evident proof of
the last degree of corruptness, when both
sexes are abandoned, and both he that was
ordained to be the instructor of the woman,
and she who was bid to become an helpmate
to the man, work the deeds of enemies
against one another. And reflect too how
significantly he uses his words. For he does
not say that they were enamoured of, and
lusted after one another, but, ‘they burned in
their lust one toward another.” You see that
the whole of desire comes of an exorbitancy
which endureth not to abide within its proper
limits. For everything which transgresseth
the laws by God appointed, lusteth after mon-


13 Mss. tavta d5€ (BovAomévw) auddotepa ovx évov (katopOovr).
(Sav. €vnv) but in these one cannot succeed merely by wishing
it.


strous things and not those which be custom-
ary. For as many oftentimes having left the
desire of food get to feed upon earth and
small? stones, and others being possessed by
excessive thirst often long even for mire, thus
these also ran into this ebullition of lawless
love. But if you say, and whence came this
intensity of lust? It was from the desertion
of God:* and whence is the desertion of
God? from the lawlessness of them that left
Him ; ‘‘men with men working that which is
unseemly.” Do not, he means, because you
have heard that they burned, suppose that the
evil was only in desire. For the greater part
of it came of their luxuriousness, which also
kindled into flame their lust. And this is
why he did not say being swept along or being
overtaken,* an expression he uses elsewhere ;
but what? working. They made a business
of the sin, and not only a business, but even
one zealously followed up. And he called it
not lust, but that which is unseemly, and that
properly. For they both dishonored nature,
and trampled on the laws. And see the great
confusion which fell out on both sides. For
not only was the head turned downwards but
the feet too were upwards, and they became
enemies to themselves and to one another,
bringing in a pernicious kind of strife, and
one even more lawless than any civil war, and
one rife in divisions, and of varied form. For
they divided this into four new, and lawless
kinds. Since (3 Mss. whence) this war was
not twofold or threefold, but even fourfold.
Consider then. It was meet, that the twain
should be one, I mean the woman and the
man. For “the twain,” it says, “shall be
one flesh.” (Gen. ii. 24.) But this the desire
of intercourse effected, and united the sexes
to one another. This desire the devil having
taken away, and having turned the course
thereof into another fashion, he thus sundered
the sexes from one another, and made the one
to become two parts in opposition to the law
of God. For it says, ‘the two shall be one
flesh ;”’ but he divided the one flesh into two:
here then is one war. Again, these same
two parts he provoked to war both against
themselves and against one another. For
even women again abused women, and not
men only. And the men stood against one
another, and against the female sex, as hap-
pens in a battle by night. You see a second


2 uxpas, Mss. the fem. is used of jewels. The Translator
once had some earth which the natives of Mozambique eat in
this way ; it becomes a dram to them, its taste is like magnesia
with iron, which last would give it a stimulant property.
There are some other instances, but cases of madness are per-
haps intended.

3 3 Mss. I should say, . . . . and if you ask whence is the de-
sertion of God, I shall answer you again.

4 Gal. 6, 1. mpoAnOevres, but 5 Mss. mapad.

5 kuptws, perhaps ‘‘as by name.”’


Homity IV.]}


THE


EPISv bE) 2O: THE! ROSLANS:


357


and third war, and a fourth and fifth; there is
also another, for beside what have been men-
tioned they also behaved lawlessly against
nature itself. For when the Devil saw that
this desire it is, principally, which draws the
sexes together, he was bent on cutting through
the tie, so as to destroy the race, not only by
their not copulating lawfully, but also by their
being stirred up to war, and in sedition against
one another.

“ And receiving in themselves that recom-
pense of their error which was meet.” See
how he goes again to the fountain head of the
evil, namely, the impiety that comes of their
doctrines, and this he says is a reward of that
lawlessness. For since in speaking of hell
and punishment, it seemed he would not at
present be credible to the ungodly and delib-
erate choosers of such a life, but even
scorned, he shows that the punishment was in
this pleasure itself. (So Plato Zeer. p. 176,
7.) But if they perceive it not, but are still
pleased, be not amazed. For even they that are
mad, and are afflicted with phrenzy (cf. Soph.
Aj. 265-277) while doing themselves much
injury and making themselves such objects of
compassion, that others weep over them,
themselves smile and revel over what has
happened. Yet we do not only for this not
say that they are quit of punishment, but for
this very reason are under a more grievous
vengeance, in that they are unconscious of the
plight they are in. For it is not the disor-
dered but those who are sound whose votes
one has to gain. Yet of old the matter
seemed even to be a law,! and a certain law-
giver among them bade the domestic slaves
neither to use unguents when dry (i. e. except
in bathing) nor to keep youths, giving the free
this place of honor, or rather of shamefulness.
Yet they, however, did not think the thing
shameful, but as being a grand privilege, anc
one too great for slaves, the Athenian people,
the wisest of people, and Solon who is so
great amongst them, permitted it to the free
alone. And sundry other books of the philos-
ophers may one see full of this disease. But
we do not therefore say that the thing was
made lawful, but that they who received this
law were pitiable, and objects for many tears.
For these are treated in the same way as}
women that play the whore. Or rather their!


1 See Miiller’s Dorzans, |. iv. c. 4, § 6, where it is shown that
this charge is more than exaggerated from confounding earlier |
times with later. Aristotle, Po/. ii. and Plato, Leg. i. 636,
accuse the Lacedzmonians in like manner, but see Xen. de |
Rep. Lac. ii. 13. AZlian.v. H. iii. I. 12, amd other writers |
quoted by Miiller. At Athens opinion was, according to Plato,
rather lax than positively immoral: it may be doubted if |
Solon’s law (Aesch. zz Tym. 19, 25,) WaS meant to bear the |
worst sense, though censured by Plutarch in almost the same |
terms as here. That there was however a fearful prevalence |


of this vice among the heathen cannot be disputed.


plight is more miserable. For in the case of
the one the intercourse, even if lawless, is yet
according to nature: but this is contrary both
to law and nature. For even if there were no
hell, and no punishment had been threatened,
this were worse than any punishment. Yet if
you say “they found pleasure in it,” you tell
me what adds to the vengeance. For sup-
pose I were to see a person running naked,
with his body all besmeared with mire, and
yet not covering himself, but exulting in it, I
should not rejoice with him, but should rather
bewail that he did not even perceive that he
was doing shamefully. But that I may show
the atrocity in a yet clearer light, bear with
me in one more example. Now if any one
condemned a virgin to live in close dens
(Gatouevouévyv), and to have intercourse with un-
reasoning brutes, and then she was pleased
with such intercourse, would she not for this
be especially a worthy object of tears, as
being unable to be freed from this misery
owing to her not even perceiving the misery ?
It is plain surely to every one. But if that
were a grievous thing, neither is this less so
than that. For to be insulted by one’s own
kinsmen is more piteous than to be so by
strangers: these I say (5 Mss. “I consider ”’)
are even worse than murderers: since to die
even is better than to live under such insolency.
For the murderer dissevers the soul from the
body, but this man ruins the soul with the
body. And name what sin you will, none will
you mention equal to this lawlessness. And if
they that suffer such things perceived them,
they would accept ten thousand deaths so
they might not suffer this evil. For there is
not, there surely is not, a more grievous evil
than this insolent dealing. For if when dis-
coursing about fornication Paul said, that
‘Every sin which a man doeth is without the
body, but he that committeth fornication sin-
neth against his own body” (1 Cor. vi. 18);
what shall we say of this madness, which is
so much worse than fornication as cannot
even be expressed? For I should not only
say that thou hast become a woman, but that
thou hast lost thy manhood, and hast neither
changed into that nature nor kept that which
thou haddest, but thou hast been a traitor to
both of them at once, and deserving both of
men and women to be driven out and stoned,
as having wronged either sex. And that thou
mayest learn what the real force of this is, if
any one were to come and assure you that he
would make you a dog instead of being a
flee from him as a


man, would you not
plague? But, lo! thou hast not made thy-
self a dog out of a man, but an animal more


disgraceful than this. For this is useful unto


358


service, but he that hath thus given himself
up is serviceable for nothing. Or again, if
any one threatened to make men travail and
be brought to bed, should we not be filled
with indignation? But lo! now they that
have run into this fury have done more griev-
ously by themselves. For it is not the same
thing to change into the nature of women, as
to continue a man and yet to have become a
woman ; or rather neither this nor that. But
if you would know the enormity of the evil
from other grounds, ask on what account the
lawgivers punish them that make men
eunuchs, and you will see that it is absolutely
for no other reason than because they muti-
late nature. And yet the injustice they do is
nothing to this. For there have been those
that were mutilated and were in many cases
useful after their mutilation. But nothing
can there be more worthless than a man who
has pandered himself. For not the soul only,
byt the body also of one who hath been so
treated, is disgraced, and deserves to be
driven out everywhere, How many hells
shall be enough for such? But if thou scof-
fest at hearing of hell and believest not that
fire, remember Sodom. For we have seen,
surely we have seen, even in this present
life, a semblance of hell. For since many
would utterly disbelieve the things to come


after the resurrection, hearing now of an
unquenchable fire, God brings them to a
right mind by things present. For such


is the burning of Sodom, and that con-
flagration! And they know it well that have
been at the place, and have seen with their
eyes that scourge divinely sent, and the effect
of the lightnings from above. (Jude 7.)
Consider how great is that sin, to have forced
hell to appear even before its time! For
whereas many thought scorn of His words,
by His deeds did God show them the image
thereof in a certain novel way. For that rain
was unwonted, for that the intercourse was
contrary to nature, and it deluged the land,
since lust had done so with their souls.
Wherefore also the rain was the opposite of
the customary rain. Now not only did it fail
to stir up the womb of the earth to the pro-
duction of fruits, but made it even useless for
the reception of seed. For’ such was also the
intercourse of the men, making a body of this
sort more worthless than the very land of
Sodom. And what is there more detestable
than a man who hath pandered himself, or
what more execrable? Oh, what madness!
Oh, what distraction! Whence came this lust
lewdly revelling and making man’s nature all
that enemies could? or even worse than that,
by as much as the soul is better than the! —


THE “WORKS (OF ST. CHEYSOS TG


[Homity IV.


body. Oh, ye that were more senseless than
irrational creatures, and more shameless than
dogs! for in no case does such intercourse
take place with them, but nature acknowl-
edgeth her own limits. But ye have even
made our race dishonored below things irra-
tional, by such indignities inflicted upon and
by each other. Whence then were these evils
born? Of luxury; of not knowing God.
For so soon as any have cast out the fear of
Him, all that is good straightway goes to
ruin.*

Now, that this may not happen, let us keep
clear before our eyes the fear of God. For
nothing, surely nothing, so ruins a man as to
slip from this anchor, as nothing saves so
much as continually looking thereto. For if
by having a man before our eyes we feel more
backward at doing sins, and often even
through feeling abashed at servants of a bet-
ter stamp we keep from doing anything
amiss, consider what safety we shall enjoy by
having God before our eyes! For in no case
will the Devil attack us when so conditioned,
in that he would be laboring without profit.
But should he see us w andering abroad, and
going about without a bridle, by getting a
beginning in ourselves he will be able to drive
us off afterwards any whither. And as it hap-—
pens with thoughtless servants at market, who
leave the needful services which their masters
have entrusted to them, and rivet themselves
at a mere haphazard to those who fall in their
way, and waste out their leisure there; this
also we undergo when we depart from the
commandments of God. For we presently
get standing on, admiring riches, and beauty
of person, and the other things which we have
no business with, just as those servants attend
to the beggars that do jugglers’ feats, and
then, arriving too late, have to be erievously
beaten at home. And many pass the road
set before them through following others,
who are behaving in the same unseemly way.
But let not us so do. For we have been sent
to dispatch many affairs that are urgent.
And if we leave those, and stand gaping at
these useless things, all our time will be
wasted in vain and to no profit, and we shall
suffer the extreme of punishment. For if you


* There is no more forcible exhibition of the meaning of the
apostle in the volume, then that found in this Homily. The
depravity of the heathen world of which Paul has drawn but
an outline picture is here painted in full in dark and awful
colors. The force of dta tovro (26) is rightly brought out as
showing the relation of this depravity to the divine penalty
for unbelief and irreligion. This deplorable moral condition
is the judicial consequence of not following the light which
God had given. It follows from the recoil of the moral law
upon those who violate it. It is an example of the Saviour’s
warning: ‘If the light that i is in thee be darkness, how great
is the darkness ?”’ (Matt. vi. 23). The inevitable result of
continued sin is a constantly increased and inveterate sinful-
ness which, as Chrys. says, is itself a most bitter punishment.

Bioe


Homity V.]


ie: BPIStee TO THEAROMANS.


359


wish yourself to be busy, you have whereat
you ought to wonder, and to gape all your
days, things which are no subject for laughter,
but for wondering and manifold praises. As
he that admires things ridiculous, will himself
often be such, and even worse than he that
occasioneth the laughter. And that you may
not fall into this, spring away from it forth-
with. For why is it, pray, that you stand
gaping and fluttering at sight of riches?
What do you see so wonderful, and able to fix
your eyes upon them? these gold-harnessed
horses, these lackeys, partly savages, and
partly eunuchs, and costly raiment, and the
soul that is getting utterly soft in all this, and
the haughty brow, and the bustlings, and the
noise? And wherein do these things deserve
wonder? what are they better than the beg-
gars that dance and pipe in the market-place ?
For these too being taken with a sore famine
of virtue, dance a dance more ridiculous than
theirs, led and carried round at one time to
costly tables, at another to the lodging of
prostitute women, and at another to a swarm
of flatterers and a host of hangers-on. But if
they do wear gold, this is why they are the


most pitiable, because the things which are
nothing to them, are most the subject of their
eager desire. Do not now, I pray, look at
their raiment, but open their soul, and con-
sider if it is not full of countless wounds, and
clad with rags, and destitute, and defenceless !
What then is the use of this madness of shows ?
for it were much better to be poor and living
in virtue, than to be a king with wickedness ;
since the poor man in himself enjoys all the
delights of the soul, and doth not even per-
ceive his outward poverty for his inward
riches. But the king, luxurious in those
things which do not at all belong to him, is
punished in those things which are his most
real concern, even the soul, the thoughts, and
the conscience, which are to go away with
him to the other world. Since then we know
these things, let us lay aside the gilded rai-
ment, let us take up virtue and the pleasure
which comes thereof. For so, both here and
hereafter, shall we come to enjoy great
delights, through the grace and love towards
man of our Lord Jesus Christ, through Whom,
and with Whom, be glory to the Father, with
the Holy Spirit, for ever and ever. Amen.


HOMILY V.


ROM.


“Even as they did not like to retain God in their
knowledge, God gave them over to a reprobate
mind, to do those things which are not convenient.”


Lest he should seem to be hinting at them
by delaying in his discourse so long over the
unnatural sin, he next passes on to other
kinds of sins also, and for this cause he car-
ries on the whole of his discourse as of other
persons. And as he always does when dis-
coursing with believers about sins, and wish-
ing to show that they are to be avoided, he
brings the Gentiles in, and says, “ Not in the
lust of concupiscence, even as the other Gen-
tiles which know not God.” (1 Thess. iv. 5.)
And again: “sorrow not, even as others
which have no hope.” (ib. 13.) And so here
too he shows that it-was to them the sins be-
longed, and deprives them of all excuse, For
he says, that their daring deeds came not of
ignorance, but of practice. And this. is why
he did not say, ‘‘and as they knew not God; ”
but, “as they did not like to retain God in
their knowledge ;” as much as to say, that the
sin was one of a perverted determination of
obstinacy, more than of a sudden ravishment,


I ats:


and shows that it was not the flesh (as some
heretics say) but the mind,’ to the wicked lust
whereof the sins belonged, and that it was
thence the fount of the evils flowed.* For
since the mind is become undistinguishing,”
all else is then dragged out of course and
overturned, when he is corrupted that held
the reins! (Plat. Phaedr. 246 A. B.)

Ver. 29. “ Being filled with all unrighteous-


1 Mss. the evil mind and negligence (or self-will, pa@uuias)
to which the sins belonged. See St. Aug. Con/. b. 3, c. 16, b.
5, c. 18, b. 7, c. 4, Oxf. Tr. pp. 40, 78, 110, etc.

* Chrys. is correct in denying that Paul refers sin to the
flesh (in the sense of the dedy), as its cause and seat. With
the apostle aapé is not the same as gwua in its relation to sin.
Sap comprehends the whole unregenerate man and not
merely his body or the impulses and passions connected with
his physical life. It is true that Paul regards the body as the
sphere in which sin makes many of its worst manifestations.
It may be due to this that he chose the word cap€ to denote
unrenewed human nature. With Paul the cause and seat
of sin are in the will. He nowhere identifies evil with the body
and therefore lays no basis for asceticism or for the contempt
or ill-treatment of the body. Of the * works of the flesh”
which he enumerates in Gal. v. 19-2t more than half are
sins having no special relation to the body and not manifest-
ing themselves through physical appetites or passions, as,
e. g. ‘idolatry, enmities, jealousies, divisions, heresies.’’—
GB:

2 addxcmos, usually rendered ‘‘reprobate”’ as in the text,
here seems to be used with a consciousness of its etymology,
as St. Paul plays on the word in ov« éSoxiuacav,


»


PS)


60


ness, wickedness, covetousness, malicious-
ness.”

See how everything here is intensitive.
For he says, “being filled,” and ‘ with all,”
and having named maliciousness in general,
he also further pursues the particulars, and
these too in excess, saying, “Full of envy,
murder,” for the latter of these comes from
the former, as was shown in Abel’s case and
Joseph’s, and then after saying, “ debate, de-
ceit, malignity ; ”

Ver. 30. “ Whisperers, backbiters, haters of
God, despiteful,” and classing things which to
many seem indifferent among his charges, he
further strengthens his accusation, going up
to the stronghold of their wickednesses, and
styles them “boasters.” For even worse than
sinning is it, even though sinning to be
haughty-minded. Wherefore also he charges
the Corinthians with it, saying, ‘Ye are puffed
Mp (CORI. For if in a good action he
that puffs himself up loseth all, if any one do
so among his sins, what vengeance is there of
which he is not worthy, since such an one can-
not repent any more? Next, he says, “i


in-
ventors of evil things;’


>


showing that they
were not content with those already existing,
but even invented others. And this again is
like men that are full purposed and in earnest,
not those that are hurried away and forced
out of their course ; and after mentioning the
several kinds of maliciousness, and showing
that here too they stood against nature itself
(for he says, “disobedient to parents’’), he
then goes on to the root of the great pesti-
lence, calling them,

Ver. 31. “ Without natural affection, impla-
cable.”

For this Christ Himself also pronounces to
be the cause of wickedness, saying, ‘“‘ When
iniquity shall abound, the love of many shall
wax -cold.7a( Matt. xxiv. m2). This ‘too. St
Paul here says, calling them ‘“‘ covenant-break-
ers, without natural affection, implacable, un-


merciful,” and showing that they were traitors |


even to the gift of nature. For we have a
sort of family feeling even by nature towards
one another, which even beasts have got
towards each other. “For every beast,” it
says, “loveth his like, and every man his
neighbor.” (Ecclus. xiii. 15.) But these be-
came more ferocious even than they. The
disorder then which resulted to the world by
evil doctrines, he proves to us by these wit-
nesses, and clearly shows that the malady in
either case came of the negligence of them
that were disordered. He _ shows besides,
what he did in the case of the doctrines, that
they were here also deprived of all excuse ;
and so he says,


THE WORKS OGF*ST. (CHER SOs Ont


| HomILy V.


Ver. 32. “Who knowing the judgment of
God, that they which commit such things are
worthy of death, not only do the same, but
have pleasure in them that do them.”

Having assumed here two objections, he in
the first place removes them. For what rea-
son have you to say, he means, that you know
not the things which ought to be done? At
best, even if you did not know, you are to
blame in having left God who instructs you.
But as it is by many arguments we have
shown that you do know, and transgress will-
ingly. But are you drawn by passion? Why
then do you both cooperate therewith and
praise it?’ For (they “not; only’ dolysueh
things,” he says, “‘but have pleasure in them
hat do them.” Having then put the more
grievous and the unpardonable sin first, that
he might have done with it (Or “ convict you
of it,” iva 4m) ; (for he that praiseth the sin is.
far worse than even he that trespasseth;) hav-
ing then put this the first, he by this method
grapples more powerfully with him in the
sequel, speaking on this wise,

Chap. ii. ver. 1. “ Therefore thou art inex-
cusable, O man; whosoever thou art that
judgest; for wherein thou judgest another,
thou condemnest thyself.”

These things he says, with an aim at the
rulers, inasmuch as that city then had the rule
of the world put into its hands.* He antici-
pated them therefore by saying, Thou art de-
priving thyself of defence, whoever thou may-
est be; for when thou condemnest an adul-
terer, and thyself committest adultery, al-
though no man condemneth thee, in thy judg-
ment upon the guilty person thou hast also
passed sentence against thyself. 4

Ver. 2. ‘“ For we are sure that the judgment
of God is according to truth against them who
commit such things.”

For lest any should say, until now I have


'escaped, to make him afraid, he says, that it
‘is not so with God as it is here.


For here
(Plato in Zhee?. ct Phedon.) one is punished,
and another escapes while doing the same
thing. But hereafter it is not so. That he
that judgeth then knoweth the right, he has.


* The author seems here to overlook the fact that Paul at
the beginning of ch. il. turns to the Jews. Chrys. speaks as
if he were now addressing specifically ‘‘ rulers.” But as the
argument goes on, the language shows more and more clearly
that he is here thinking of the Jewish world (see v. 12 sq and
esp. 17). The ‘‘therefore’’ grounds the fact of universal
condemnation upon the description of sin as universal,
contained in i. 18-32. The only peculiarity is that the state-
ment that this picture of Gentile depravity is a picture of
universal application, is made afterwards, ‘‘ For wherein,”’
etc. The argument proceeds as if after i. 32 the apostle had
been interrupted with | the objection, ‘‘ But your description
does not apply to us.’ ‘The apostle answers: ‘It does, for
you do the same things.” The “‘therefore”’ is proleptic so
far as it assumes as shown what he now asserts: Té yap avTa
mpaccets 0 Kpivwv. The conclusion is thus stated before the
major premiss.—G. B. S.


Homity V.]


said: but whence he knoweth it, he hath not
added; for it was superfluous. For in the
case of ungodliness, he shows both that the
ungodly was so even with a knowledge of God,
and also whence he got that knowledge,
namely, from the Creation. For inasmuch as
it was not plain to all, he gave the cause also ;
but here he passes it over as a thing admitted.
But when he says, “ whosoever thou art that
judgest,” he is not addressing himself to the
rulers only, but to private individuals and sub-
jects also. For all men, even if they have no
chair of state, nor executioners, nor stocks at
command, yet even they judge those that
offend, in conversations and public meet-
ings (Gr. KOLVOIC ov2Adyote) and by the vote
of their conscience. And no one would
venture to say, that the adulterer does not
deserve punishment. But it is others, he says,
they condemn, and not themselves. And for
this cause he stands forth vehemently against
them, and says,

Ver. 3. “And thinkest thou this” (4 Mss.
om. this), ‘‘ O man, that judgest those which do
such things, and doest the same, that thou
shalt escape the judgment of God?”

For since he had shown the sin of the world
to be great, from its doctrines, from its doings,
and that they did yet sin though wise, and
though they had the creation to lead them by
the hand, and not by leaving God only, but
also by choosing the images of creeping
things, and by their dishonoring virtue, and
deserting, in spite of nature’s drawings back,
to the service of vice even contrary to nature :
he goes on next to show, that they who do
such things are punished too. He did indeed
at once point out a punishment by mentioning
their very practice. For “ they received,” he
says, “in themselves that recompense of their
error which was meet.’ But as they do not


CHEV EPIS ELE TO ULHEAKROMANS.


perceive that, he mentions another also, which
they stood most in fear of. And indeed
already he chiefly pointed at this. For when
he says, “ That the judgment of God is accord-
ing to truth,” he is speaking of no other than
this. But he establishes the same again upon
other further grounds, saying thus, “ And
thinkest thou this, O man, that judgest them
which do such things, and doest the same,
that thou shalt escape the judgment of God?”
Thou hast not been acquitted of thine own
judgment, and wilt thou escape through
God’s? Who indeed would say this? And
yet thou hast judged thyself (3 Mss. “and not
been acquitted ’’). But since the rigorousness
of the judgment-court was such, and thou wert
not able to spare even thyself, how should not
God, that cannot do amiss, and who is in the
highest sense just, be much surer to do the|


301
same? But hast thou condemned thyself, and
is God to approve of thee and praise thee ?
And how can this be reasonable? And all
the while thou art deserving of a greater pun-
ishment, than he who is of thee condemned.
For sinning merely, is not the same thing with
falling again into the same sins you have chas-
tised another for committing. See, how he
has strengthened the charge! For if you, he
means, punish a person who has committed
less sins, though by it you will put yourself to
shame, how shall not God cast you in your
suit, and condemn you more severely, who
have committed greater transgressions, and
this too when He will never make Himself
ashamed, and you are already condemned by
your own reckoning. But if thou say, I know
that I deserve punishment; yet through His
long-suffering thinkest slightingly of it, and art
confident because thou dost not suffer punish-
ment forthwith; this surely is a reason why
thou oughtest to be afraid and tremble. For
the fact that thou hast not yet suffered pun-
ishment, will not result in thy not suffering
any punishment, but in thy suffering a more
severe one if thou abidest unamended.1 And
so he goes on to say:

Ver. 4. ““Or despiseth thou the riches of
His goodness and forbearance and long-suffer-
ing; not knowing that the goodness of God
leadeth thee to repentance ?”

For after praising God’s long-suffering,
showing the gain thereof to be very great to
them that heeded it (and this was the draw-
ing sinners to repentance); he adds to the
terror. For as to them, who avail themselves
of it aright, it is a ground of safety; so to them
that slight it, it is conducive to a greater ven-
geance. For whenever you utter this common
notion, that God doth not exact justice, be-
cause He is good and long-suffering, he says,
You do but mention what will make the ven-
geance intenser. For God showeth His good-
ness that you may get free from your sins, not
that you may add to them. If then thou
make not this use thereof, the judgment will
be more fearful. Wherefore it is a chief
ground for abstaining from sin, that God is
long-suffering, and not for making the benefit
a plea for obstinacy. For if He be long-
suffering, He most certainly punisheth.
Whence does this appear? from what is next
said. For if the wickedness be great and the
wicked have not been requited, it is absolutely
necessary that they should be requited. For
if men do not overlook these things, how


1 So Field. from Mss: the old reading would have to mean
‘¢For it is not that thou shouldst not suffer any punishment,
but that thou mayest suffer a worse if thou abide unamended,
that He delayeth—and may that never befall thee.”


362


THE. WORKS GES “CiisvoOs P@oT-


[HomiILy V.


should God make an oversight ? And so from
this point he introduces the subject of the
judgment. For the fact of showing many
who, if they repent not, are liable, yet still are
not punished here, introduces with it necessa-
rily the judgment, and that with increase.
Wherefore he says,

Ver. 5. “ But after thy hardness and impen-
itent heart treasurest up unto thyself wrath.”

For when a man is neither to be softened
by goodness nor to be turned back by fear,
what can be harder than such an one? For
after that he had showed the goodness of God
towards men, he then shows His vengeance
that it is unbearable for him who' does not
even so return to repentance. And observe
with what propriety he uses the words!
“Thou treasurest up unto thyself wrath,” he
says, so making it plain what is certainly laid
up, and showing that it is not He that judgeth,
but he that is condemned, who is the author
of this. For he says, “thou treasurest up for
thyself,” not God for thee. For He did all,
whatsoever things were fitting, and created
thee with a power to discern between good
and what was not so, and showed long-suffering
over thee, and called thee to repentance, and
threatened a fearful day, so by every means
drawing thee to repentance. But if thou
shouldst continue unyielding, “thou treasur-
est up unto thyself wrath against the day of
wrath and revelation and (so all Mss. but
two) the righteous judgment of God.” For
lest on hearing of wrath thou shouldest think
of any passion, he adds, “‘ the righteous judg-
ment of God.” And he said “revelation”
with good reason, for then is this revealed
when each man receives his desert. For here
many men often annoy and practise harm to
one without justice. But hereafter it is not
SO.

Ver. 6, 7. “Who will render to every man
according to his deeds, to them who by patient
continuance in well doing,” etc.

Since he had become awestriking and harsh
by discoursing of the judgment and of the
punishment that shall be, he does not forth-
with, as one might expect, enter upon the ven-
geance, but turns his discourse to what was
sweeter, to the recompense of good actions,
saying as follows,

Ver. 7. ‘To them who by patient continu-
ance in well doing seek for glory and honor
and immortality, eternal life.”

Here also he awakens those who had drawn
back during the trials, and shows that it is not
right to trust in faith only. For it is deeds
also into which that tribunal will enquire.


Or, “he” (St. Paul, according to Field) “15 terribly severe
upon him who:”’ for most Mss. omit ‘the shows that.’


But observe, how when he is discoursing
about the things to come, he is unable to tell
clearly the blessings, but speaketh of glory
and honor. For in that they transcend all
that man hath, he hath no image of them
taken from this to show, but by those things
which have a semblance of brightness among
us, even by them he sets them before us as
far as may be, by glory, by honor, by life.
For these be what men earnestly strive after,
yet are those things not these, but much
better than these, inasmuch as they are in-
corruptible and immortal. See how he has
opened to us the doors toward the resurrec-
tion of the body by speaking of incorruptibil-
ity. For incorruptibility belongs to the cor-
ruptible body. Then, since this sufficed not,
he added glory and honor. For all of us are
to rise incorruptible, but not all to glory, but
some to punishment, and some to life.

Ver. 8. “But unto them that are conten-
tious,” * he says. Again, he deprives of ex-
cuse those that live in wickedness, and shows
that it is from a kind of disputatiousness and
carelessness that they fall into unrighteous-
ness.

“And do not obey the truth, but obey un-
righteousness.” See, here is another accusa-
tion again. For what defence can he set up,
who flees from the light and chooses the dark ?
And he does not say, who are “‘ compelled by,”
“lorded over by,” but who “obey unrighte-
ousness,” that one may learn that the fall is
one of free choice, the crime not of necessity.

Ver. g. ‘‘ Indignation and wrath, tribulation
and anguish, upon every soul of man that
doeth evil.”

That is, if a man be rich, if a consul, if a very
sovereign (so Field: several Mss. and Edd.
“the emperor himself”), by none of them is
the account of the judgment out-faced. Since
in this dignities have no place. Having then
shown the exceeding greatness of the disease,
and having added the cause, that it was from
the carelessness of the disordered, and finally,
that destruction awaits them and that amend-
ment is easy, in the punishment also he again
gives the Jew the heavier lot. For he that had
enjoyed a larger share of instruction would
also deserve to undergo a larger share of ven-
geance if doing lawlessly. And so the wiser
or mightier men we are, the more are we pun-
ished if we sin. For if thou art rich, thou
wilt have more money demanded of thee than
of the poor; and if wiser than others, a
stricter obedience; and if thou hast been


* “Ep.deia is probably derived from €p.Oos, a hired laborer
and not from epts (strife) as commonly. Hence the meaning
: labor for hire—Lohxaréeit, party spirit. Better translate
tfactious ’ GR We) than ‘ contentious ” (A. V.). So. Weiss,
Thayer's Lex.—G. B.S


Homity V.|


THE EPISTLE! TO: THE: ROMANS. 363


invested with authority, more shining acts of
goodness; and so in the case of all the other
things, thou wilt have to bring in measures
proportioned to your power.

Ver. 10. “ But glory, honor, and peace to
every man that worketh good, to the Jew first,
and also to the Gentile.”

What Jew does he here mean? or about
what. Gentiles is he discoursing? It is of
those before Christ’s coming. For his dis-}i
course had not hitherto come to the times of
grace, but he was still dwelling upon the
earlier times, so breaking down first from afar
off and clearing away the separation between
the Greek and the Jew, that when he should
do this in the matter of grace, he might no
more seem to be devising some new and de-
grading view. For if in the earlier times
when this Grace had not shone forth in such
greatness, when the estate of the Jews was

solemn and renowned and glorious before all
men, there was no difference, what could they
say for themselves (riva a av éyouev Adyov eireiv;) NOW
after so great a display of grace? And this is
why he establishes it with so great earnestness.
For when the hearer has been informed that
this held in the earlier times, much more will
he receive it after the faith. But by Greeks
he here means not them that worshipped
idols, but them that adored God, that obeyed
the law of nature, that strictly kept all things,
save the Jewish observances, which contribute
to piety, such as were Melchizedek and his
{oi rept), such as was Job, such as were the
Ninevites, such as was Cornelius. Here
then he is first breaking through the par-
tition between the circumcision and_ the
uncircumcision: and at a distance dissi-
pates this distinction beforehand, so as
to do it without being suspected, and to
strike into it as compelled by another occa-
sion, which is ever a characteristic of his
Apostolic wisdom. For if he had showed it
in the times of grace, what he said would have
had a very suspicious look. But on describ-
ing the vice which possessed the world, and
where end the ways of wickedness, to pass
from that consecutively into the treatment of
these points renders his teaching unsuspected.
And that he means this, and for this purpose
so put this together, is plain from hence:
if he were not intent upon effecting this, it
were enough for him to have said, “* According
to thy hardness and impenitent heart thou
treasurest up unto thyself wrath against the
day of wrath;” and then to have dropped this
subject, since it would have been complete.
But in that what he had in view was not to
speak of the judgment to come only, but to
show also that the Jew had no advantage of


for |


such a Greek, and so was not to be haughty-
spirited, he advances farther, and speaks of
them in order. But consider! He had put
the hearer in fear, had advanced? against him
the fearful day, had told him what an evil it is
to be living in wickedness, had showed him
that no man sinneth of ignorance, nor with
impunity, but that even though he suffer no
 bedpecaley now, yet he certainly will suffer
: then he wishes to make good next that the
ae of the Law was not a thing of great
importance. For it is upon works that both
punishment and reward depend, not upon cir-
cumcision and uncircumcision. Since then
he had said, that the Gentile shall by no
means go unpunished and had taken this for
granted, and upon it had made good that he
shall also be rewarded, he next showed the
Law and circumcision to be superfluous. For
it is the Jews that he is here chiefly opposing.
For inasmuch as they were somewhat cap-
tiously disposed, first, of their haughtiness, not
deigning to be reckoned along with the Gen-
tiles, and secondly thinking it ridicu-
lous if the faith is to do away all ees
for this cause he accused the Gentiles first, i
whose behalf he is speaking, that without sus-
picion and with boldness of speech, he may
attack the Jews. And then having come to
the enquiry concerning the punishment, he
shows that the Jew is so far from being at all
profited by the Law, that he is even weighed
down by it. And this was his drift some way
back. For if the Gentile be on this score in-
excusable, because, when the creation Jed him
on and his own reasonings, he yet did not
amend, much more were the Jew so, who be-
sides these had the teaching of the Law also.
Having then persuaded him to a ready admis-
sion of these reasonings, in the case of other
men’s sins, he now compels him even against
his will to do so in the case of his own. And
in order that what he says may be more readily
allowed, he leads him forward with the better
things also in view, speaking on this wise:
* But glory and honor and peace to every
man that worketh good, to the Jew first, and
also to the Gentile.” For here whatever good
things a man hath, he hath with fightings, even
if he be rich, if a prince, if a king. Even if
he be not at variance with others, yet is he
often so with himself, and has abundant war
in his own thoughts. But there it is no such
thing, but all is still and void of trouble, and


in possession of true peace. Having then
made good from what was said above, that


they too which have not the Law are to enjoy


1 rafer Kexpyrat, see on V. 16.
2 érereixicer, Strictly, attacked him by planting in his heart
the thought of that fearful day.


364 THE WORKS OF


» U.. CHRYSOS Cant:


[HoMILy V.


the same blessings, he adds his reason in the
following words :

Ver. 11. “For there is no respect of per-
sons with God.”

For when he says that as well the Jew as
the Gentile is punished if he sin, he needs no
reasonings: but when he wants to prove that
the Gentile is honored also, he then needs a
foundation for it also; as it seemed wonderful
and extravagant if he who had heard neither
Law nor Prophets, were to be honored upon
his working good. And this is why (as I also
said before) he exercises their hearing in the
times before grace, that he might afterwards
more treatably bring in, along with the faith,
the acquiescence in these things also. For
here he is not at all suspected, as seeming not
to be making his own point good. Having
then said, ‘‘Glory and honor and peace to
every man that worketh good, to the Jew first,
and also to the Gentile,” he adds, “ For there
is no respect of persons with God.” Wonder-
ful! What more than victory has he gained!
For he shows, by reducing it to an absurdity,
that it was not meet with God that it should
be otherwise. For it would then be a case of
respecting of persons. But of such character
God is not. And he does not say, ‘‘ for if this
were not so, God would be a respecter of per-
sons,” but with more of dignity, “‘ For there is
no respect of persons with God.” That it is
not quality of persons, but difference of
actions. Which He maketh inquisition for.
By so saying he shows that it was not in
actions but in persons only that the Jew dif-
fered from the Gentile. The consequence of
this would be thus expressed; For it is not
because one is a Jew and the other a Gentile,
that one is honored and the other disgraced,
but it is from the works that either treatment
comes. But he does not say so, since it would
have roused the anger of the Jew, but he sets
down something more, so bringing their
haughty spirit yet lower, and quelling it for
the admission of the other. But what is this?
The next position.

Ver. 12. * For ’as ‘\amany,7 (bes says, “sas
have sinned without law shall also perish
without law: and as many as have sinned in
the law shall be judged by the law.”

For here, as I said before, he shows not
only the equality of the Jew and the Gentile,
but that the Jew was even much burdened by
the giftof the Law. For the Gentile is judged
without law. But this “ without law”’ (Gr. law-
lessly) here expresses not the worse plight
but the easier, that is, he has not the Law to
accuse him. For “without law” (that is,
without the condemnation arising from it), is
he condemned solely from the reasonings of


b]


nature, but the Jew, “in the Law,” that is,
with nature and the Law too to accuse him.
For the greater the attention he enjoyed, the
greater the punishment he will suffer. See
how much greater is the necessity which he
lays upon the Jews of a speedy recourse to
grace! For in that they said, they needed
not grace, being justified by the Law, he
shows that they need it more than the Gen-
tiles, considering they are liable to be pun-
ished more. Then he adds another reason
again, and so farther contends for what has
been said.*

Ver 13. “For not the hearers of the law
are just before God.”

Well doth he add “ before God ;” for haply
before men they may be able to appear digni-
fied and to vaunt great things, but before God
itis quite otherwise—the doers of the Law
alone are justified. You see with what ad-
vantage he combats, by turning what they
said to an opposite bearing. For if it is by
the Law you claim to be saved, in this re-
spect, saith he, the Gentile will stand before
you,t when seen to be a doer of what is
written in the Law. And how is it possible
(one may say) for one who hath not heard to
be a doer? Not this only, he says, is ‘pos-
sible, but what is much more even than this.
For not only is it possible without hearing to
be a doer, but even with hearing not to be so.
Which last thing he makes plainer, and that
with a greater advantage over them, when he
says, ‘Thou that teachest another, teachest
thou not thyself?” (Rom. it. 21.) But here
he is still making the former point good.

Ver. 14. “For when the Gentiles,” he says,
‘“‘ which have not the law, do by nature the
things contained in the law, these, having not
the law, are a law unto themselves.”

I am not, he means, rejecting the Law, but
even on this score I justify the Gentiles. You
see how when undermining the conceit of
Judaism, he giveth no handle against himself
as villifying the Law, but on the contrary by
extolling it and showing its greatness he so
makes good his whole position. But when-
ever he saith “by nature,” he means by the


* Verse 12 assigns the ground of v. rr. ‘Sin brings pen-
alty and death whether committed under the Mosaic law or
under the ethical law of conscience.” The first member of
the sentence (v. 12) applies to the Gentiles. They have
sinned without the standard and guidance of positive law ;
they are, therefore, not brought to the test of that law’s
demands, but to the tests of natural, moral law (which the
apostle will directly describe), and by that test their sins
meet their penalty. Death, as sin’s penalty, is coextensive
with szz, not with the Mosaic law. Sin existed before the
Mosaic law and apart fromit; it is imputed to the Gentiles—
not, indeed in the same way and degree (Rom. v. 13)—because
they have a law of conscience. Each class is judged by the
standard which has been given to them. All the terms relat-
ing to Zaw here signify the Mosaic law, which was to Paul the
specific statutory expression of the divine will and the
embodiment of moral principles and duties.—G, B. S.

1 mpwros cov. cf. St. John 1. 30. ;


HOMILY V.}


LE EPISTLE? TO: FRE


ROMANS. 365


reasonings of nature. And he shows that
others are better than they, and, what is more,
better for this, that they have not received the
Law, and have not that wherein the Jews
seem to have an advantage over them. For
on this ground he means they are to be ad-
mired, because they required not a law, and
yet exhibited all the doings of the Law, having
the works, not the letters, graven upon their
minds. For this is what he says,

Ver, 15. “ Which show the work of the Law
written in their hearts, their conscience also
bearing witness, and their thoughts the mean-
while accusing or else excusing one another.”

Ver. 16. “In the day when God shall judge
the secrets of men by Jesus Christ, according
to my Gospel.”

See how he again puts that day before
them, and brings it close to them, battering
down their conceit, and showing, that
those were to be the rather honored
who without the Law strove earnestly to fulfil
the things of the Law. But what is most to
be marvelled at in the discretion of the Apos-
tle, it is worth while to mention now. For
having shown, from the grounds given, that
the Gentile is greater than the Jew; in the in-
ference, and the conclusion of his reasoning,
he does not state it, in order not to exasperate
the Jew. But to make what I have said
clearer, I will give the very words of the
Apostle. For after saying, that it is not the
hearers of the Law, but the doers of the Law,
that shall be justified, it followed to say, ‘“ For
when the Gentiles, which have not the Law,
do by nature the things contained in the Law,”
they are much better than those who are in-
structed by the Law. But this he does not
‘say, but he stays at the encomium of the Gen-
tiles, and does not yet awhile carry on his dis-
course by way of comparison, that so at least
the Jew may receive what is said. And so he
does not word it as I was doing, but how?
“ For when the Gentiles, which have not the
Law, do by nature the things contained in
the Law, these, not having the Law, are a law
unto themselves ; which show the work of the
Law, written in their hearts, their conscience
also bearing witness.” For the conscience
and reason doth suffice in the Law’s stead.
By this he showed, first, that God made man
independent,! so as to be able to choose virtue


1 avrapxns, writing before the Pelagian controversy, he does
not notice the distinction between a sufficiency of knowledge,
etc., and asupply of grace which must be presupposed. See
Aug. ad Dardanum, Ep. 188, al. 143, c. 11, 12. See also De C.
D. x. c. 29 and 32. Conc. Araus. A. D. 529, cap. 19. Labbe IV.
1670, B. declares grace needed even before the fall, much more
after. See Bp. Bull on the state of man before the fall, Works,
II. also Vinc. Lir. c. 24. The question is here whether men
had means to attain salvation. It is taken for granted they
had power given them to choose the right, but whether in the
way of nature or of grace it is not defined. The grace given


and to avoid vice. And be not surprised that
he proves this point, not once or twice, but
several times. For this topic was very need-
ful for him to prove owing to those who say,
Why ever is it, that Christ came but now?
And where in times before was the (most
Mss. this mighty) scheme of Providence?
Now it is these that he is at present beating
off by the way, when he shows that even in
former times, and before the Law was given,
the human race (Gr. nature) fully enjoyed the
care of Providence. For “ that which may be
known of God was manifest in them,” and
they knew what was good, and what bad;
by means whereof they judged others, which
he reproaches them with, when he says,
“wherein thou judgest another, thou condemn-
est thyself.” But in the case of the Jews,
besides what has been mentioned, there was
the Law, and not reason or conscience only.
And why does he put the words “ accusing or
else excusing ?”—for, if they have a Law
written, and show the work of it in them, how
comes reason to be able to accuse them still ?
But he is not any longer speaking of those
only who do well, but also of mankind (Gr.
the nature) universally. For then our reason-
ings stand up, some accusing and some ex-
cusing. And at that tribunal a man needeth
no other accuser. Then to add to their fear,
he does not say the sins of men, but the
secrets of men. Forsince he said, “ Thinkest
thou, that judgest them that do such things,
and doest the same, that thou shalt escape the
judgment of God ;” that thou mayest not ex-
pect such a sentence as thou passest thyself,
but mayest know, that that of God is far more
exact than thine own, he brings in, “the
secrets of men,” and adds, “through Jesus
Christ according to my Gospel.” For men
sit in judgment upon overt acts alone. And
above too he spake of the Father alone, but
as soon as he had crushed them with fear, he
brought in the mention of Christ also. But
he does not do barely this, but even here, after
having made mention of the Father, he so in-
troduceth Him. And by the same things he
raises the dignity of his preaching. For this
preaching, he means, openly speaks out what
nature taught by anticipation. Do you see
with what wisdom he has bound them both to
the Gospel and to Christ, and demonstrated
that our affairs come not here to a stand, but
travel further. And this he made good before
also, when he said, ‘‘ thou treasurest up to thy-


to Christians was always regarded as so distinct from and
superior to everything granted to Jews or Heathens, that
it was difficult to speak of the manner in which they received
Divine assistance. But the gift spoken of by Justin Martyr,
Ap. i. 13, is clearly supernatural. See also. St. Basil, Const.
Mon. 16, t. 2, p. 559, B. and Macarius, Hom. 56.


366


THE WORKSOP 3h. CHRysOsron.


[Homily V.


’


self wrath against the day of wrath:” and
here again, ‘“‘God shall judge the secrets of
men.”

Now let each man enter into his own con-
science, and reckoning up his transgressions,
let him call himself to a strict account, that
we be not then condemned with the world.
(a, Cor. x1; 932.) |For tearfal iisethat* court,
awful the tribunal, full of trembling the
accounts, a river of fire rolls along (éAxeraz).
“A brother doth not redeem: shall man
redeem ?’”’, (Ps. 'xlixe (85) ERX) Gall. then
to mind what is said in the Gospel, the Angels
running to and fro, of the bridechamber being
shut, of the lamps going out, of the powers
which drag to the furnaces. And consider
this, that if a secret deed of -any one of us
were brought forth into the midst, to-day, be-
fore the Church only, what could he do but
pray to perish, and to have the earth to gape
for him, rather than have so many witnesses
of his wickedness? How then shall we feel,
when, before the whole world, all things are
brought into the midst, in a theatre so bright
and open, with both those known and _ those
unknown to us seeing into everything? But
alas! wherewith am I forced to affright you!
with men’s estimation! when I ought to use
the fear of God, and His condemnation. For
what, pray, is to become of us then when
bound, and gnashing our teeth, we are led
away to the outer darkness? Or, rather, what
shall we do (and this is the most fearful
thought of all) when we offend (cpockpoiowuev)
God? For if any one have sense and reason,
he has already endured a hell when he is out
of sight of God. But since this doth not pain,
fire is therefore threatened. For we ought to
smart not when we are punished, but when we
sin. Thus listen to Paul wailing and lament-
ing over sins, for which he was not to be pun-
isheds) Hor 7b jaminot. ymeet,+) he) * says;
“to be called an Apostle, because I perse-
cuted the Church.” (1 Cor. xv. 9.) Hear also
David, when he is set free from the punishment,
yet, as thinking that he had offended God,
calling vengeance down upon himself, and
saying, ‘* Let thy hand be upon me and upon
my father’s house.” (2 Sam. xxiv. 17.) For
to have offended God is more distressing than
to be punished. But now we are so wretch-
edly disposed, that, were there no fear of hell,
we should not even choose readily to do any
good thing. Wherefore were it for nothing
else, yet for this at least, we should deserve
hell, because we fear hell more than Christ
(several Mss. God). But not so the blessed
Paul, but contrariwise. But since we feel
otherwise, for this reason are we condemned
to hell: since, did we but love Christ as we


should love Him, we should have known that
to offend Him we love were more painful than
hell. But since we love Him not, we know
not the greatness of His punishment. And
this is what I bewail and grieve over the
most! And yet what has God not done, to be
beloved of us? What hath He not devised ?
What hath He omitted? We insulted Him,
when He had not wronged us in aught, but
had even benefited us with blessings count-
less and unspeakable. We have turned aside
from Him when calling and drawing us to
Him by all ways, yet hath He not even upon
this punished us, but hath run Himself unto
us, and held us back, when fleeing, and we
have shaken Him off and leaped away to the
Devil. And not even on this hath He stood
aloof, but hath sent numberless messengers to
call us to Him again, Prophets, Angels,}
Patriarchs : and we have not only not received
the embassy, but have even insulted those that
came. But not even for this did He spew us
out of His mouth, but like those slighted lovers
that be very earnest, He went round beseech-
ing all, the heaven, the earth, Jeremiah, Micah,
and that not that He might weigh us down,
but that He might speak in behalf of His
own ways }(S.4 is, 22 s)er, linmee nies
etc.; Mic. vi. 1): and along with the proph-
ets He went also Himself to those that
turned aside from Him, being ready to sub-
mit to examination, and deigning to con-
descend to.a conference, and drawing them
that were deaf to every appeal into a
disputation with Himself. For He saith, “O
my people, what have I done unto thee, and
wherein have I wearied thee? Answer me.”
(Mic. vi. 3.) After all this we killed the
Prophets, we stoned them, we did them other
cruel wrongs without number. What then?
In their place He sent no longer Prophets, no
longer Angels, no longer Patriarchs, but the
Son Himself. He too was killed when He
had come, and yet not even then did He
quench His love, but kindled it even more,
and keepeth on beseeching us, after even His
own Son was killed, and entreating us, and
doing all things to turn us unto Himself.
And Paul crieth aloud, saying, “ Now then
we are ambassadors for Christ, as though God
did beseech you by us: be ye reconciled to
God.” (2 Cor. v. 20.) None of these things
however reconciled us. Yet not even then
did He leave us, but keeps on both threaten-
ing hell, and promising a kingdom, that even
so He may draw us unto Himself. But we
be still in an insensible mood. What can be
worse than this brutishness? For had a man


1 Perhaps human ‘‘messengers,’”’ inspired teachers other
than those strictly called Prophets.


Homity V.j


Pires rte tie, TO THEY ROMANS. 307


done these things, should we not many times
over have let ourselves become slaves to him?
But God when doing so we turn us away from!
O what listlessness! O what unfeelingness !
We that live continually in sins and wicked-
nesses, if we happen to do any little good, like
unfeeling domestics, with what a niggardly
spirit do we exact it, and how particular are
we about the recompense made, if what we
have done has any recompense to come of it.
And yet the recompense is the greater if you
do it without any hope of reward. Why say-
ing all this, and making exact reckoning, is
language fitter for an hireling than a domestic
of willing mind. For we ought to do every-
thing for Christ’s sake, not for the reward, but
for Him. For this also was why He threat-
ened hell and promised the kingdom, that He
might be loved of us. Let us then so love Him
as we ought to love Him. For this is the
great reward, this is royalty and pleasure, this
is enjoyment, and glory, and honor, this is
light, this is the great happiness,} which
language (or reasoning) cannot set before us,
nor mind conceive. Yet indeed I do not
know how I was led so far in this way of
speaking, and came to be exhorting men who
do not even think slightly of power and glory
here for Christ’s sake, to think slightly of the
kingdom. Yet still those great and noble
men even attained to this measure of love.
Hear, for instance, how Peter burns with love
towards Him, setting Him before soul, and
life, and all things. And when he had denied
Him, it was not the punishment he was
grieved for, but that he had denied Him
Whom he longed for, which was more bitter
to him than any punishment. And all this
did he show before the grace of the Spirit was
given.2, And he perseveringly pressed the
question, “ Whither goest thou?” (John xiii.
36) and before this; “To whom shall we
go?” (vi. 67); and again; “I will follow
Thee whithersoever Thou goest.” (Luke
xxii. 33?) Thus He was all things to them,
and neither heaven nor the kingdom of heaven
did they count of, in comparison of Him they
longed for. For Thou art all these things
unto me, he means. And why doest thou
marvel that Peter was so minded? Hear
now what the Prophet says: “What have I
in heaven, and what is there upon earth, that
I should desire in comparison of Thee?”
(Ps. Ixxiii. 25.) Now what he means is
nearly this. Neither of things above nor of
things below desire I any, save Thee only.


but the Edd. have
’. which is more like


Ed. Ben. p.


1 The Ms. reading means no more:
MuptouaxapioTns ‘countless blessedness,
St. Chrysostom than a copyist.

2 Origen on Matt. xxvi. 69, notices the same.
913, D.


This is passion;* this is love. Can we so
love, it will not be things present only, but
even things to come, which we shall reckon
as nothing compared with that love-charm,
and even here shall we enjoy the Kingdom,
delighting ourselves in the love of Him. And
how is this to be? one may say. Let us
reflect how oft we insult Him after number-
less goodnesses, yet He standeth and calleth
us to Him, and how often we run by Him, but
He still doth not overlook us, but runneth to
us, and draweth us to Him, and catcheth us
in unto Himself. For if we consider these
things, and such as these, we shall be enabled
to kindle this longing. For if it were a com-
mon man that so loved, but a king who was
thus beloved, would he not feel a respect for
the greatness of the love? Most assuredly he
would. But when the case is reversed, and
His Beauty (S. “that beauty”) is unspeakable,
and the glory and the riches too of Him that
loveth us, and our vileness so great, surely we
deserve the utmost punishment, vile as we are
and outcasts, who are treated with so exceed-
ing great love by One so great and wonderful,
and yet wax wanton against His love? He
needeth not anything of ours, and yet He
doth not even now cease loving us. We need
much what is His, and for all that we cleave
not unto His love, but money we value above
Him, and man’s friendship, and ease of body,
and power, and fame, before Him who valueth
nothing more than us. For He had One Son,
Very (Lit. “true-born”) and Only-Begotten,
and He spared not even Him for us. But we
value many things above Him. Were there
not then good reason for a hell and torment,
even were it twofold or threefold or manifold
what it is? For what can we have to say for
ourselves, if even Satan’s injunctions we value
more than the Laws of Christ, and are reck-
less of our own salvation that we may choose
the works of wickedness, before Him who
suffered all things for us? And what pardon
do these things deserve? what excuse have
they? Not one even. (5 Mss. oid? wac.)
Let us stop then after this in our headlong
course, and let us grow again sober; and
reckoning up all these things, let us send up
glory unto Him by our works (for words
alone suffice not thereto), that we may also
enjoy the glory that cometh of Him, which
may we all attain unto by the grace and love
toward man of our Lord Jesus Christ, through
Whom, and with Whom, to the Father be
glory, with the Holy Spirit, for ever and ever.
Amen.


3 Epws . . . Girta: the whole of this glorious passage suffers
grievously in translation, owing to the impossibility of ex-
pressing the climax from ayarav, the common ecclesiastical
word, to dtAecv and even épav.


THE “WORKS: OF ST. (CHEsSOSiOm.


{[HomiLty VI


HOMILY VI.


ROM. II. 17, 18.


**Behold,! thou art called a Jew, and restest in the
Law, and makest thy boast of God, and knowest
His will, and approvest the things that are more
excellent, being instructed out of the Law.”


AFTER saying that the Gentile wanteth
nothing appertaining to salvation if he be a
doer of the Law, and after making that won-
derful comparison, he goes on to set down the
glories of the Jews, owing to which they
thought scorn of the Gentiles: and first the
very name itself, which was of great majesty,
as the name Christian is now. For even then
the distinction which the appellation made
was great. And so he begins from this, and
see how he takes it down. For he does not
say, Behold, thou art a Jew, but “art called ”
so, “and makest thy boast in God;”’ that is,
as being loved by Him, and honored above
all other men. And here he seems to me to
be gently mocking their unreasonableness,
and great madness after glory, because they
misused this gift not to their own salvation,
but to set themselves up against the rest of
mankind, and to despise them. ‘“ And know-
est His will, and approvest the things that are
more excellent.’ Indeed this is a disadvan-
tage, if without working: yet still it seemed to
be an advantage, and so he states it with
accuracy. For he does not say, thou doest,
but knowest; and approvest, not followest and
doest.*

Ver. 19. “ And art confident that thou thy-
self.’

Here again he does not say that thou
art “a guide of the blind,” but “thou art con-
fident,” so thou boastest, he says. So great
was the unreasonableness of the Jews.
Wherefore he also repeats nearly the very
words, which they used in their boastings.
See for instance what they say in the Gospels.


1 One Ms. appears to have et 6€ ‘‘ but if,’’? with most Mss.
of the N. T., instead of ide, ** behold,’’ which St. Chrysostom
appears to have read with the present T. R.

* From the 17th verse on the apostle speaks of the Jew by
name and clearly shows that he had him in mind from the
beginning of the chapter. The correct text reads et d€ instead
of iSe to which the question of v. 21 corresponds as apodosis.
Chrys.’ interpretation of Soxtmagers ta Svapepovra is that which
is followed by the Vulgate (‘‘ Arxodas utiliora’’), most anct.
vss., Wordsworth, Meyer, and our Eng. vss. The majority of
modern commentators, however, adopt the interpretation:
“‘testest things that differ.”” So Weiss, Godet, Wilke (Clavis
N. T.), Lange, Tholuck. Alford, Philippi. This interpretation
has the advantage of following the original meaning of both
verbs.—G. B.S.


“Thou wast altogether (440¢ 4 Mss. é4oc) born
in sin, and dost thou teach us?” (John ix.
34.) And all men they utterly looked down
upon, to convince them of which, Paul keeps
extolling them and lowering the others, that
so he may get more hold on them, and make
his accusation the weightier. Wherefore he
goes on adding the like things, and making
more of them by different ways of relating
them. For ‘Thou art confident,” he saith,
“that thou thyself art a leader of the
blind,”

Ver. 20. “An instructor of the foolish, a
teacher of babes, which hast the form of
knowledge and truth, which is in the
Tawee

Here again he says not, in the conscience
and in actions and in well-doings, but “in the
Law ;”’ and after saying so, he does here also
what he did with regard to the Gentiles. For
as there he says, “‘for wherein thou judgest
another, thou condemnest thyself,” so saith he
here also.

Ver. 21. “‘Thou therefore which teachest
another, teachest thou not thyself?”

But there he frames his speech with more
of sharpness, here with more of gentleness.
For he does not say, However on this score
thou deservest greater punishment, because
though entrusted with so great things thou
hast not made a good use of any of them, but
he carries his discourse on by way of question,
turning them on themselves (évzpérav), and
saying, ‘Thou that teachest another, teachest
thou not thyself?’ And here I would have
you look at the discretion of Paul in another
case. For he sets down such advantages of
the Jews, as came not of their own earnest-
ness, but by a gift from above, and he shows
not only that they are worthless to them if
neglectful, but that they even bring with them
increase of punishment. For neither is the
being called a Jew any well doing of theirs,
nor yet is the receiving of the Law, nor the
other things he has just enumerated, but of
the grace from above. And towards the
beginning he had said, that the hearing of the
Law is valueless unless the doing be thereto
added (“for not the hearers of the Law,” he
says, ‘‘are just before God,’’) but now he


Homity VI.]


he: ote ie FO THE “ROMANS.


369


shows further still, that not only the hearing,
but, what is more than the hearing, the teach-
ing of the Law itself willnot be able to screen
the teacher, unless he do what he says; and
not only will it not screen him, but will even
punish him the more. And he has used his
expressions well too, since he does not say,
Thou hast received the Law, but ‘‘ Thou rest-
est in the Law.” For the Jew was not
wearied with going about to seek what was to
be done, but had on easy terms the Law point-
ing the way leading tovirtue. For if even the
Gentiles have natural reason (and it is on this
ground that these are better than they, in that
they do the Law without hearing), yet still the
others had greater facility. Butif you say, I
am not only a hearer, but even a teacher, this
very thing is an aggravation of your punish-
ment. For because they prided themselves
upon this,’ from this above all he shows them
to be ridiculous. But when he says, “a guide
of the blind, an instructor of the foolish, a
teacher of babes,” he is speaking their own
pompous language. For they treated prose-
lytes extremely ill, and these were the names
they called them by. And this is why he
dwells at large upon what were supposed to
be their praises, well knowing that what was
said gave ground for greater accusation,
“Which hast the form of knowledge and of
the truth in the Law.” As if any one who
had a picture of the king, were to draw noth-
ing after it, and they that were not entrusted
with it were to imitate it exactly even without
the original. And then after mentioning the
advantages they had from God, he tells them
of their failings, bringing forward what the
prophets accused them of. ‘‘Thou therefore
which teachest another, teachest thou not thy-
self? Thou that preachest a man should not
steal, dost thou steal? Thou that sayest a
man should not commit adultery, dost thou
commit adultery? Thou that abhorrest idols,
dost thou commit sacrilege?” * For it was
strictly forbidden them to touch any of the
treasures upon the idols (so Field from the
Mss: Vulg. “in the idol temples’) by reason
of the defilement. But the tyranny of ava-
rice, he says, has persuaded you (4 Mss. and


1 The younger Buxtorf, in his preface to his father’s Syxa-
ee nears, gives specimens of their language, as from Cad

akkemach, ‘* Such is the power of Circumcision, that none
who is circumcised goeth down into Hell,’ and R. Abraham,
than the Israelites were ‘‘all wise, all understanding, all
skilled in the Law.”’ See also Smith's Select Discourses, No. 7.

* There are three interpretations of tepoavaAeis (22) (1)
“rob (heathen) temples.” § Wilke, Meyer, Godet, Philippi,
Alford, Conybeare and Howson, R. V. (2) ‘‘ Rob the temple ”
(at Jerusalem, by embezzling or withholding the temple-trib-
ute). So Hofmann, Ewald, Lange, Weiss. (3) ‘commit
sacrilege,’ Calvin, Bengel. Luther, A. V. marg. of R.V. The
contrast with o BdeA, ta eidwAa strongly favors (1) which is
adopted by Chrys. That such robbery had taken place among
the Jews seems implied in Acts xix. 37, and is clearly
referred to in Josephus’ 4 #/. iv. 8, 10.—G. B. S.


24


/mar. “us”’) to trample this Law also under
foot. Then he brings the far more grievous
charge afterwards, saying,

Ver. 23. “ Thou that makest a boast in the
Law through breaking the Law dishonorest
thou God?”

There are two accusations which he makes,
or rather three. Both that they dishonor,
and dishonor that whereby they were hon-
ored; and that they dishonor Him that hon-
ored them, which was the utmost extreme of
unfeelingness. And then, not to seem to be
accusing them of his own mind, he brings in
the Prophet as their accuser, here briefly and
concisely as it were in a summary, but after-
wards more in detail, and here Isaiah, and
after that David, when he had shown the
grounds of reproof to be more than one. For
to show, he means, that it is not I who speak
these things to your reproach, hear what
Isaiah saith.

Ver. 24. “For the name of God is blas-
phemed among the Gentiles through you.”
Gsi likes so Riz, xxxvi; 20,7231)

See again another double accusation. For
they not only commit insolence themselves,
but even induce others to do so. What then
is the use of your teaching when ye teach
not your own selves?


Above, however, he
merely said this, but here he has even turned
it round to the contrary. For not only your-
selves, but even others, do ye not teach what
should be done. And what is far worse—ye
not only teach not the things of the Law, but
ye even teach the opposite, viz. to blaspheme
God, which is opposite to the Law. But the
circumcision, one will say, is a great thing.
Yea, I also confess it, but when? when (So
all Mss. S. “then, when ”’) it hath the inward
circumcision. And observe his judgment, in
bringing in what he says about it so oppor-
tunely, For he did not begin straightway
with it, since the conceit men had of it was
great. But after he had shown them to have
offended in that which was greater” and to be
responsible for the blasphemy against God,
then having henceforth possession of the
reader’s judgment against them, and having
stripped them of their pre-eminence, he intro-
duces the discussion about circumcision, feel-
ing sure that no one will any more advocate
it, and says,

Ver. 25. “For circumcision verily profiteth,
if thou keep the Law.”

And yet, were this not so, a man might
have rejected it and said, What is circum-
|cision? for is it any good deed on his part
|that hath it? is it any manifestation of a right


2 amo Tov meigovos. Perhaps ‘‘the more guilty,’’ as having
offended with greater advantages.


370


THE WORKS .OF (Si. CHEY 20s One


[Homity VI.


choice? For it takes place at an unripe age,
and those in the wilderness too remained un-
circumcised for a long time. And from many
other points of view also, one might look at
it as not necessary. And yet it is not on
this foot that he rejects it, but upon the most
proper ground, from the case of Abraham.
For this is the most exceeding victory,—to
take the very reason for showing it to be of
small regard, whence it was held by them in
reverence. Now he might have said that even
the prophets call the Jews uncircumcised. But
this is no disparagement of circumcision, but
of those that hold ill to it. For what he aims
at is to show that even in the very best life,
it has not the least force. This is what he
next proves. And here he does not bring
forward the Patriarch, but having previously
overturned it upon other grounds, he keeps
him till afterwards, when he brings in what
he has to say of faith, on the words—** How
then was it reckoned” to Abraham? “ when
he was in circumcision, or in uncircumci-
sion?” For so long as it is struggling against
the Gentile and the uncircumcised, he is un-
willing to say aught of this, lest he should be
over irksome to them. But when it comes in
opposition to the faith, then he disengages
himself more completely for a combat with it.
Up to the present point then it is uncircum-
cision that the contest is against, and this is
why he advances in his discourse in a sub-
dued tone, and says,

“For circumcision verily profiteth if thou
keep the Law; but if thou be a breaker of
the Law, thy circumcision is made uncircum-
cision.” For here he speaks of two uncircum-
cisions, and two circumcisions, as also two
laws. For there is a natural law and there is
a written law. But there is one also between
these, that by works. And see how he points
these three out, and brings them before you.

“For when the Gentiles,” he says, “ which
have not the Law.” What Law, say? The
written one. ‘Do by nature the things of
the Law.” Of what Law? Of that by works.
“These having not the Law.” What Law?


The written one. “Are a law unto them-
selves.” How so? By using the natural
law. ‘‘Who show the work of the Law.”


Of what law? Of that by actions. For that
which is by writing lieth outside ; but this is
within, the natural one, and the other is in
actions. And one the writing proclaims ; and
another, nature; and another, actions. Of
this third there is need,’ for the sake of which
also those two exist, both the natural and the
written. And if this be not present they are


1 See Butler, 4 xaZ. //. 1. v. fin.


of no good, but even very great harm. And
to show this in the case of the natural he
said, ‘‘For wherein thou judgest another,
thou condemnest thyself.” But of the written
Law, thus—‘ Thou that preachest a man
should not steal, dost thou steal? Thus also
there are two uncircumcisions, one that of
nature, and the second from conduct: and
one circumcision in the flesh, and the other
from the will. I mean for instance, a man has
been circumcised upon the eighth day ; this is
circumcision of the flesh: a man has done all
the Law bids him; this is circumcision of the
mind which St. Paul requires above all, yea
rather the Law also. See now how having
granted it in words, he in deed does away
with it. For he does not say the circumcision
is superfluous, the circumcision is of no profit,
of no use. But what saith he? ‘“ Circumci-
sion verily profiteth if thou keepest the Law.”
(Deut. x. 165: xxx: 6.), He approves qt sear
saying, 1 confess and deny not that the cir-
cumcision is honorable. But when? When
it has the Law kept along with it.

“ But if thou be a breaker of the Law, thy
circumcision is made uncircumcision.” He
does not say, it is no more profitable, lest he
should seem to insult it. But having stripped
the Jew of it, he goes on to smite him. And
this is no longer any insult to circumcision,
but to him who through listlessness has lost
the good of it. As then in the case of those
who are in dignified stations and are after
convicted of the greatest misdemeanors, the
judges deprive them of the honors of their
stations and then punish them; so has Paul
also done. For after saying, if thou art a
breaker of the Law, thy “circumcision is
made uncircumcision,” and having shown him
to be uncircumcised, he condemns him after
that without scruple.

Ver. 26. “Therefore if the uncircumcision
keep the righteousness of the Law, shall not
his uncircumcision be turned? into circum-
cision ?”

See how he acts. He does not say that the
uncircumcision overcomes circumcision (for
this was highly grating to those who then
heard him), but that the uncircumcision hath
become circumcision. And he next enquires
what circumcision is, and what uncircumcision
and he says that circumcision is well doing
and uncircumcision is evil doing. And hav-
ing first transferred into the circumcision the
uncircumcised, who has good deeds, and


2 Four Mss. have metatpamynoetat, both here and a little be-
low: the others read Aoy.a@yoetat here, and then contradict
themselves, by putting tpawyjcetat there. The old Edd. have
mepitpamnoetac. Nearly all Mss. of the N. T. have Aoy:aOyoerar:
so we must either think with Heyse that St. Chrysostom ex-
presses his definite opinion in favor of weratp. or with Mat-
thiae that he made a slip of memory.


Homity VI]


THEY EEISTLE: SO THE ROMANS,


371


having thrust out the circumcised man that
lived a corrupt life into the uncircumcision,
he so gives the preference to the uncircum-
cised. And he does not say, To the uncir-
cumcised, but goes on to the thing itself,
speaking as follows: ‘‘Shall not his uncir-
cumcision be turned into circumcision?”
And he does not say “reckoned,” but “turned
to,” which was more expressive. As _ also
above he does not say thy circumcision is
reckoned uncircumcision, but has been made
SO.

Ver. 27. “ And shall not the uncircumcision
which is by nature judge?”

You see, he recognizes two uncircumcisions,
one from nature, and the other from the will.
Here, however, he speaks of that from nature,
but does not pause here, but goes on, ‘‘if it
fulfil the Law, judge thee, who by the letter
and circumcision dost transgress the Law?”
See his exquisite judgment. He does not
say, that the uncircumcision which is from
nature shall judge the circumcision, but while
where the victory had been, he brings in the
uncircumcision, yet where the defeat is, he
does not expose the circumcision as defeated ;
but the Jew himself who had it, and so by the
wording spares offending his hearer. And
he does not say, “ thee that hast the Law and
the circumcision,” but yet more mildly, “thee
who by the letter and circumcision dost
transgress the Law.” That is, such uncir-
cumcision even stands up for the circumcis-
ion, for it has been wronged and comes to the
Law’s assistance, for it has been insulted, and
obtains a notable triumph. For then is the
victory decided, when it is not by Jew that
Jew is judged, but by the uncircumcised ; as
when he says, “The men of Nineveh shall
rise in judgment against this generation, and
shall condemn it.” (Matt. xii. 41.) It is not
then the Law that he dishonors (for he rever-
ences it greatly), but him that does disgrace to
the Law. Next, having settled these grounds
clearly, he goes on confidently to define what
the Jew really is; and he shows that it is not
the Jew, nor the circumcision, but he that is
no Jew, and uncircumcised, whom he is re-
jecting. And he seemeth indeed to stand up
in its behalf, but’ yet does away with the
opinion regarding it, securing men’s concur-
rence by the conclusion he comes to. For he
shows not only that there is no difference
between the Jew and the uncircumcised, but
that the uncircumcised has even the advan-
tage, if he take heed to himself, and that
it is he that is really the Jew; and so he
says : 5

Ver. 28. “ For he is not a Jew which is one
outwardly.”


Here he attacks them as doing all things
for show.

Ver. 29. “‘ But he is a Jew which is one in-
wardly ; and circumcision is that of the heart,
in the spirit, and not in the letter.”

By saying this he sets aside all things bod-
ily. For the circumcision is outwardly, and
the sabbaths and the sacrifices and _purifica-
tions: all of which he hints in a single word,
when he says, “ For he is not a Jew which is
one outwardly.” But since much was made
of the circumcision, inasmuch! as even the
sabbath gave way to it (John vii. 22), he has
good reason for aiming more especially
against it. But when he has said “in the
spirit”? he thereafter paves the way for the
conversation ? of the Church, and introduces
the faith. For it too is in the heart and spirit
and hath its praise of God. And how cometh
he not to show that the Gentile which doeth
aright is not inferior to the Jew which doeth
aright, but that the Gentile which doeth
aright is better than the Jew which breaketh
the Law? It was that he might make the
victory an undoubted one. For when this is
agreed upon, of necessity the circumcision of
the flesh is set aside, and the need of a good
life is everywhere demonstrated. For when
the Greek is saved without these, but the Jew
with these is yet punished, Judaism stands
by doing nothing. And by Greek he again
means not the idolatrous Greek, but the relig-
ous and virtuous, and free from all legal ob-
servances.

Chap. iil. ver. 1.
hath the Jew?” *

Since he has set all aside, the hearing, the
teaching, the name of the Jew, the circumci-
sion, and all the other particulars by his say-
ing that “he is not a Jew which is one out-


“What advantage then


.wardly, but he which is one inwardly;” he


1 It might be observed, that all St. Paul’s reasoning here
and to the Galatians holds against circumcision and the Sab-
bath alike.

2 moActeia, We want a word to express at once the spiritual
citizenship and the corresponding life. ‘

* The passage iii. 1-8 considers four possible objections.
(1) ‘*This placing of Jews and Gentiles in the same
condition, takes away all the theocratic prerogatives.’”
(v. 1.) No, answers Paul, they have a great advantage
as to light and privilege, though none as to righteous-
ness. (v. 2.) (2) ‘‘ They have the O. T. scriptures, you say;
but what if those scriptures have not attained their end in
bringing the Jews to believe in Jesus as the Messiah? If
some have not believed, does not that render void God's
promises to his people in the O. T.,so that he is no longer
bound by them?” (v. 3.) The answer is: ‘‘No, God is
faithful to his promises in all conditions (v. 4). (3) ‘* Then the
unbelief of the Jews seems to be the occasion of eliciting
God’s faithfulness. The conclusion would be that falseness
contributes to God’s glory.’’ To this Paul gives no specific


reply but develops the argument so as to show that it leads
to a (5) position: “ Let us do evil that good may come.” (v.
8.) He thinks it enough to exhibit the logical conclusion of


such an objection. Itis enough to know that it obliterates
all moral distinctions and impugns the justice of God. Paul
might have shown that from God’s overruling of sin to his
praise the approval of sin does not follow. But he is content
to make it clear that the objection is inconsistent with a
righteous judgment of the world.—G. B. S.


372


next sees an objection which starts up, and
against this makes his stand. Now what is
this objection? If, he means, these things
are no use, what reason was there for that
nation being called, and the circumcision too
being given? What does he then and how
does he solve it? By the same means as he
did before: for as there, he told, not of their
praises, but the benefits of God; nor their
well doings (for to be called a Jew and to
know His Will and to approve the things
which are more excellent, was no well doing
of their own, but came of the grace of God:
and this the Prophet also says, upbraiding
them ; “ He hath not done so to any nation,
neither hath he showed His judgments unto
them ;” (Ps. cxlvii. 20.) and Moses again ;
“Ask now whether there hath been any such
thing as this?” he says, ‘did ever people
hear the voice of God speaking out of the
midst of the fire, and live?”) (Deut. iv. 32,
33), this then ‘he does ‘here also. For as,
when speaking of circumcision, he did not
say, Circumcision is valueless without a good
life, but, Circumcision is of value with a
good life, pointing out the same thing but in
a more subdued tone. And again he does
not say, If thou be a breaker of the Law, thou
who art circumcised art no whit profited, but
“thy circumcision is made uncircumcision:”
and after this again, ‘the uncircumcision,”
saith he, shall “ judge,”’ not the circumcision,
but “thee that dost transgress the Law,” so
sparing the things of the Law, and smiting
the persons. So he doth here also. For
after setting before himself this objection,
and saying, ‘what advantage then hath the
Jew?” he says not, None, but he concurs
with the statement, and confutes it again by
the sequel, and shows that they were even
punished owing to this preéminence. And
how he does so, I will tell you when I have
stated the objection. “What advantage
then,” he says, “hath the Jew,” or “ what
profit is there of circumcision ?”

Ver. 2. “‘Much every way: chiefly, because
that they were entrusted with the oracles of
God.”

Do you see that, as I said above, it is not
their well doings, but the benefits of God,
that he everywhere counts up? And what is
the word éx.oreifyoav ? (they were trusted.) It
means, that they had the Law put into their
hands because He held them! to be of so
much account that He entrusted to them ora-
cles which came down from above. I know
indeed that some take the “entrusted” not
of the Jews, but of the oracles, as much as to


1 See Gen. xviii. 19; Deut. iv. 37, and x. 15.


THE: WORKS OF Sis CHihysOsi@.


|Homiry VI.


say, the Law was believed in. But the con-
text does not admit of this being held good.
For in the first place he is saying this with a
view to accuse them, and to show that, though
in the enjoyment of many a blessing from
above, they yet showed great ingratitude.
Then, the context also makes this clear. For
he goes on to say, “ For what if some did not
believe?” If they did not believe, how do
some say, the oracles were believed in??
What does he mean then? Why that God
entrusted the same to them, and not that they
trusted to the oracles:* how else will the
context make sense? For he farther goes on


to say,

Ver. 3. “\ For) what if) somes) did mot
believe ? ” 4

And what comes next makes the same


point clear. For he again adds and follows ;
“Shall their unbelief make the faith of God
without effect?”

Ver. 4. “God forbid.” The word émare-
iyoav, then, proclaims God’s gift.

And I would have you here also note his
judgment. For again he does not bring in
his accusation of them on his own part, but as
it were by way of objection, as if he said,
But perhaps you will say, ‘What then is the
use of this circumcision since they used it
not as was fitting, since they were trusted
with the Law and were unfaithful to the
trust?’ And hitherto he is not a severe ac-
cuser, but as if to clear God of complaints
against Him, he by this means turns the
whole of the accusation round upon them-
selves. For why, he would say, do you com-
plain that they did not believe? and how
doth this affect God? For as for His benefit,
doth the ingratitude of those benefited over-
turn it? Or doth it make the honor to be no
honor? For this is what the words, ‘ Shall
their unfaithfulness make the faith of God
without effect,” amount to. ‘God forbid.”
As if one should say, I have honored such an
one. And if he did not receive the honor,
this gives no ground for accusing me, nor im-
pairs my kindness, but shows his want of feel-
ing. But Paul does not say this merely, but
what is much more. That not only does their
unbelief not leave the soil of complaint upon
God, but even shows His honor and love of
man to be the greater, in that He is seen to
have bestowed honor upon one who would
dishonor Him. See how he has brought them


2 For this use of the word, see 1 Tim. iii. 16.

3 Field reads Adyous ‘‘ His words:’’ probably by a misprint.

4 A practical, not a theoretical unbelief. It might be clearer
to use the word ‘‘unfaithful”’ throughout, but that amvorety is
treated as the exact negative of mortevewv: in fact we cannot
translate idiomatically all that either St. Paul or St. Chrysos-
tom has to say of mors, without using the three words
‘faith’? ‘‘trust’’ and ‘‘ belief’’ for it and its correlatives.


HomiLy VI.]


CHE EPISTLE: TO UTHE : ROMANS,


a7e


out guilty of misdemeanors by means of what
they gloried in; forasmuch as the honor with
which God treated them was so great, that
even when He saw what would come thereof,
He withheld not His good-will toward them !
Yet they made the honors bestowed on them
a means of insulting Him that Honor them!
Next, since he said, “ For what if some did
not believe?” (while clearly it was all of
them that did not believe,) lest by speaking
here too as the history allowed him, he should
seem to be a severe accuser of them like an
enemy, he puts that, which really took place,
in the method of reasoning and syllogism,
saying as follows: ‘Yea, let God be true,
but every man a liar.”” What he says is some-
thing of this sort. I do not mean, he says,
that some did not believe, but if you will, sup-
pose that all were unbelieving, so waiving
what really happened, to fall in with the objec-
tor, that he might seem overbearing or to be sus-
pected. Well, he says, in this way God is the
more justified. What does the word justified
mean? That, if there could be a trial and an
examination of the things He had done for
the Jews, and of what had been done on their
part towards Him, the victory would be with
God, and all the right on His side. And
after showing this clearly from what was said
before, he next introduces the Prophet also
as giving his approval to these things, and
saying, ‘that Thou mightest be justified in
Thy sayings, and clear when Thou art judged.”
(Ps. li. 4.) He then for His part did every-
thing, but they were nothing the better even
for this. Then he brings forward after this
another objection that arises, and says,

Ver. 5. “But if our unrighteousness com-
mend the righteousness of God, what shall we
say? is God unrighteous Who taketh ven-
geance? I speak as a man.”

Ver. 6. “God forbid.”

He solves one perplexity by another again.
Yet as this is not clear, we must needs declare
it more clearly. What is it then he means?
God honored the Jews: they did despite to
Him. This gives Him the victory, and shows
the greatness of His love towards man, in
that He honored them even such as they were.
Since then, he means, we did despite to Him
and wronged Him, God by this very thing be-
came victorious, and His righteousness was
shown to be clear.1 Why then (a man may
say) am I to be punished, who have been the
cause of His victory by the despite I did Him?
Now how does he meet this? It is, as I was


1 Field thinks that St. Chrysostom wrote ‘ Therefore if, be-
cause we did despite to Him was shown to be clear,
why am I to be punished.’”’ etc.? Heyse would have ‘t Then,
since through our despite and wrong God became victorious.

. why,” etc.?


saying, by another absurdity again. For if it
were you, he says, that were the cause of the
victory, and after this are punished, the thing
is an act of injustice. But if He is not unjust,
and yet you are punished, then you are no
more the cause of the victory. And note his
apostolic reverence ; (or caution : eizdBea) ; for
after saying, “ Is God unrighteous Who taketh
vengeance ?” he adds, “I speak as a man.”
As if, he means, any body were to argue in
the way men reason. For what things seem
with us to be justice, these the just judgment
of God far exceedeth, and has certain other
unspeakable grounds for it. Next, since it
was indistinct, he says the same thing over
again :

Ver. 7. ‘For if the truth of God hath more
abounded through my lie unto His glory : why
yet am I also judged as a sinner ?”

For if God, he means is shown to be a Lover
of man, and righteous, and good, by your acts
of disobedience, you ought not only to be
exempt from punishment but even to have
good done unto you. But if so, that absurdity
will be found to result, which is in circulation
with so many, that good comes of evil, and
that evil is the cause of good; and one of the
two is necessary, either that He be clearly un-
just in punishing, or that if He punish not, it
is from our vices that He hath the victory.
And both of these are absurd to a degree.
And himself meaning to show this too, he in-
troduces the Greeks (i. e. heathens) as the
fathers of these opinions, thinking it enough
to allege against what he has mentioned the
character of the persons who say these things.
For then they used to say in ridicule of us,
“let us do evil that good may come.” And
this is why he has stated it clearly in the fol-
lowing language.

Ver. 8. “If? not (as some affirm that we
say,) Let us do evil that good may come?
Whose damnation is just.”

For whereas Paul said,® ‘‘ where
abounded grace did much more abounc
(Rom. v. 20), in ridicule of him and_pervert-
ing what he said to another meaning, they
said, We must cling to vice that we may get
what is good. But Paulsaid not so; however
to correct this notion it is that he says, ‘‘ What
then ? shall we continue in sin that grace may
abound? God forbid!” (ib. vi. 1, 2.) For I
said it, he means, of the times which are past,
not that we should make this a practice. To
lead them away then from this suspicion, he


sin


”


2 So Field with most Mss. and Interp. d

3 €deyev. St. Chrysostom treats it as his habitual teaching, so
that it had been already misrepresented, though not yet em-
bodied in this Epistle.

4 youv. He is evidently aiming at some who still used such
reasonings.


374


THE WORKS OF Ss!) €CHRYSOSTOM,


[Homity VI.


said, that henceforth this was even impossible.
For “how shall we,” he says, “that are dead
unto sin, live any longer therein?” Against
the Greeks then he inveighs (xarédpauev) with-
out difficulty. For their life was exceeding
abandoned. But of the Jews, even if their
life seemed to have been careless, still they
had great means of cloaking these things in
the Law and circumcision, and the fact of God
having conversed with them, and their being
the teachers of all. And this is why he strips
them even of these, and shows that for these
they were the more punished, and this is the
conclusion to which he has here drawn his
discussion. For if they be not punished, he
would say, for so doing, that blasphemous lan-
guage—let us do evil that good may come—
must necessarily gain currency. But if this
be impious, and they who hold this language
shall be punished (for this he declared by
saying, ‘ whose damnation is just’’), itis plain
that they are punished. For if they who speak
it be deserving of vengeance, much more are
they who act it, but if deserving thereof, it is
as having done sin. For it is not man that
punishes them, that any one should suspect
the sentence, but God, that doeth all things
righteously. But if they are righteously pun-
ished, it is unrighteously that they, who make
ridicule of us, said what they did. For God
did and doth everything, that our conversa-
tion might shine forth and be upright-on every
side.

Let us then not be listless; for so we shall
be able to recover the Greeks also from their
error. But when we are in words lovers of
wisdom, but in deeds behave unseemly, with
what looks shall we face them? with what
lips shall we discourse concerning doctrines ?
For he? will say to each of us, How can you
that have failed in what is less, claim to teach
me about what is greater? you who as yet
have not learnt that covetousness is a vice,
how can you be wise upon the things in
heaven? But do you know that it is a vice?
Then, the charge is the greater, because you
transgress knowingly. And why speak I of
the Greek, for even our laws allow us not to
speak thus boldly when our life has become
abandoned. For to “the sinner,” it says,
“saith God, what hast thou to do to declare
my) statutes?” (Ps. 116.) aihere musta
time when the Jews were carried away cap-
tive, and when the Persians were urgent with
them, and called upon them to sing those
divine songs unto them, they said, “ How
shall we sing the Lord’s song in a strange
land?” (Ps, cxxxvii. 4.) Now if it were un-


_1 i.e. The Greek, see a few lines below.
tion was first corrected by the Benedictines.


Savile’s punctua-


lawful to sing the oracles of God in a strange
land, much less might the estranged soul do
it, For estranged ” the merciless soul is. If
the Law made those who were captives and
had become slaves to men in a strange land,
to sit in silence; much more is it right for
those who are slaves to sin and are in an
alien community (cojreia@) to have a curb
upon their mouths. And. however they
had their instruments then. For it says,

“Upon the willows in the midst ‘thereof
did we hang our instruments,” but still they
might not sing. And so we ‘also, though we

have a mouth and tongue, which are instru-
ments of speech, have no right to speak
boldly, so long as we be slaves to what is
more tyrannical than any barbarian, sin. For
tell me what have you to say to the Greek, if
you plunder, and be covetous? will you say,
Forsake idolatry, a¢knowledge God, and draw
not near to gold and silver? Will he not
then make a jest of you, and say, Talk to thy-
self first in this way? For it is not the same
thing for a Gentile to practise idolatry, and
a Christian to commit this same (4 Mss. om.
“same ”’) sin. For how are we to draw others
away from that idolatry if we draw not our-
selves away from this? For we are nearer
related to ourselves* than our neighbor is, -
and so when we persuade not ourselves, how
are we to persuade others? Forif he that
doth not rule well over his own house, will
not take care of the Church either (1 Tim.
ili. 5), how shall he that doth not rule even
over his own soul be able to set others right?
Now do not tell me, that you do not worship
an image of gold, but make this clear to me,
that you do not do those things which gold
bids you. For there be different kinds of
idolatry, and one holds mammon lord, and
another his belly his god, and a third some
other most baneful lust. But, “you do not
sacrifice oxen to them as the Gentiles do.”
Nay, but what is far worse, you butcher your
own soul. But “you do not bow the knee
and worship.” Nay, but with greater obedi-
ence you do all that they command you,
whether it be your belly, or money, or the
tyranny of lust. For this is just what makes
Gentiles disgusting, that they made gods of
our passions ; calling lust Venus, and anger
Mars, and drunkenness Bacchus. If then
you do not grave images as did they, yet do
you with great eagerness bow under the very
same passions, when you make the members


2 Bap8apos, Though this word is not equivalent to Barba-
rian, jit has force enough to give a fitness to the term “ merci-
less.’’ St. Chrysostom excels in these side-strokes, which he
so much admires too in the Apostle.

3 KaKioTos 0 mpos EavTOV xpwKEVOS TH MOXONpia, etc.
Eth. v.t.


Arist.


Homity VII.]


of Christ members of an harlot, and plunge
yourself into the other deeds of iniquity.
{x Cor. vi. 15.) JI therefore exhort you to
lay to heart the exceeding unseemliness
hereof, and to flee from idolatry :—for so doth
Paul name covetousness—and to flee not only
covetousness in money, but that in evil desire,
and that in clothing, and that in food, and
that in everything else: since the punishment
we shall have to suffer if we obey not God’s


El eee ee LOY Lv ey CONE LON.


375


laws is much severer. For, He says, “the
servant that knew his Lord’s will,” and did it
not, “shall be beaten with many stripes.”
(Luke xii. 47.) With a view then to escaping
from this punishment, and being useful both
to others and to ourselves, let us drive out all
iniquity from our soul and choose virtue.
For so shall we attain to the blessings which
are to come, whereto may it be granted us all to
attain by the grace and love toward man, etc.


; PGR EEL es KEPT:


ROM. III. 9-18.


“‘ What then have we more! than they?* For we
have proved both Jews and Gentiles, that they are
all under sin. As it is written, There is none
righteous, no, not one: there is none that under-
standeth, there is none that seeketh after God.
They are all gone out of the way, they are
together become unprofitable; there is none that
doeth good, no not one. Their throat is an open
sepulchre ; with their tongues have they used de-
ceit; the poison of asps is under their lips; whose
mouth is full of cursing and bitterness: their feet
are swift. to shed blood: destruction and misery
are in their ways: and the way of peace have
they not known: there is no fear of God before
EHeIT CyES.7


He had accused the Gentiles, he had ac-
cused the Jews; it came next in order to
mention the righteousness which is by faith.
For if the law of nature availed not, and the
written Law was of no advantage, but both
weighed down those that used them not
aright, and made it plain that they were
worthy of greater punishment, then after this
the salvation which is by grace was necessary.
Speak then of it, O Paul, and display it. But
as yet he does not venture, as having an eye
to the violence of the Jews, and so turns


1 So St. Chrysostom here and in the next homily, but in both
places some Mss. (and Vulg. ante Field) had inserted the
common reading of the text of the N. T. ‘‘ what then? are
we better than they? No, in no wise.”

* The meaning of mpoexoue8a here is much disputed. What
is its subject? Most agree (vs. Olshausen, Reiche) that it is
*Iovdator, Is mpoex. middle or passive? If middle. it may mean
(x) Do we hold (a place) before them? Are we superior to
them (the Gentiles) as respects the condition of sinfulness ?
So Vulgate (‘‘precellimus’’) Luther, Calvin, Bengel,
‘Tholuck, Baur, De Wette, Alford, Weiss; or (2) Do we hold
before us (any protection)? Have we any excuse or pretext?
So Meyer, Godet, Schaff, on the ground that (1) is against the
admitted advantage of the few (vv. 1,2). If passive, it can
mean (a) Are we held superior to them ?
sense given in the trans. of the R. V.: ‘* Are we in worse case
than they?”
points of v.1-8. It seemsto me that it is better to suppose
that he here breaks away from these special objections and
recurs to the larger subject. In this view the 7po in compos.
points back to such passages as i. 18-32; ii. 15 and 17-29. The
argument is: ‘“* We have established the sinfulness of all ; there-
fore we Jews have no advantage in relation to sin, repentance
and justification.’’—G. B. S.


This is substantially |
the same as (3) or (4) Are we surpassed by them? This is the |


It connects vy. 9 immediately with the special |


afresh to his accusation of them ; and first he
brings in as accuser, David speaking of the
same things at length, which Isaiah mentioned
allin short compass, so furnishing a strong
curb for them, so that they might not bound
off, nor any of his hearers, while the matters
of faith were laid open to them, might after
this start away; being beforehand safely held
down by the accusations of the prophets.
For there are three excesses which the
prophet lays down ; he says that all of them
together did evil, and that they did not do
good indifferently with evil, but that they fol-
lowed after wickedness alone, and followed it
also with all earnestness. And next that they
should not say, “ What then, if these things
were said to others?” he goes on:

Ver. 19. “Now we know that what things
soever the Law saith, it saith to them who are
under the Law.”

This then is why, next to Isaiah, who con-
fessedly aimed at them, he brought in David ;
that he might show that these things also be-
longed to the same subject. For what need
was there, he means, that a prophet who was
sent for your correction should accuse other
people. For neither was the Law given to
any else than you. And for what reason did
he not say, we know that what things soever
the prophet saith, but what things soever the
Law saith? It is because Paul uses to call
the whole Old Testament the Law. And-in
another place he says, “Do ye not hear the
Law, that Abraham had two sons?” (Gal.
iv. 21, 22.) And here he calls the Psalm the
Law? when he says, “ We know that what
things soever the Law saith, it saith to them
who are under the Law. Next he shows that


2 The term Law was commonly applied to all the Penta-
teuch by Jewish writers: but to the Psalms not so. They,
however, viewed the whole Old Testament as an evolved form
of the Law.


376


neither are these things he said merely for
accusation’s sake, but that he’ may again be
paving the way for faith. So close is the
relationship of the Old Testament with the
New, since even the accusations and reproofs
were entirely with a view to this, that the door
of faith might open brightly upon them that
hear it. For since it was the principal bane
of the Jews that they were so conceited with
themselves (which thing he mentioned as he
went on, “how that being ignorant of the
righteousness of God, and going about to
establish their own righteousness, they sub-
mitted not themselves to the righteousness of
God”) (Rom. x. 3), the Law and the Prophet
by being beforehand with them cast down their
high thoughts, and laid low their conceit, that
being brought to a consideration of their own
sins, and having emptied out the whole of
their unreasonableness, and seen themselves
in danger of the last extremity, they might
with much earnestness run unto Him Who
offered them the remission of their sins, and
accept grace through faith. And this it is
then which St. Paul hints even here, when he
says,

“Now we know that what things soever the
Law saith, it saith to them who are under the
Law, that every mouth may be stopped, and
all the world may become guilty before
God.”

Here then he exhibits them as destitute of
the boldness of speech which comes of works,
and only using a parade of words and behav-
ing in a barefaced way. And this is why he
uses so literal an expression, saying, “ that
every mouth may be stopped,” so pointing out
the barefaced and almost uncontrollable
pomposity of their language, and that their
tongue was now curbed in the strictest sense.
For as an unsupportable torrent, so had it
been borne along. But the prophet stopped
it. And when Paul saith, “that every mouth
may be stopped,” what he means is, not that
the reason of their sinning was that their
mouth might be stopped, but that the reason
of their being reproved was that they might
not commit this very sin inignorance. ‘“ And
all the world may become guilty before God.”
He does not say the Jew, but the whole of
mankind.” For the phrase, “that every
mouth may be stopped,” is the language of a
person hinting at them, although he has not
stated it clearly, so as to prevent the language
being too harsh. But the words “that all the

1 So Field with 2 Mss: others ‘‘ that the Word,” one Mss.
and Vulg. ‘‘ that the Law.”’

2 » dvots, here used probably for the particular nature or
kind in question, viz. the human. Somewhat in the same
manner it is used of individual beings. For the several uses


of the term, see Arist. J/etaph. 4, where he calls this use met-
aphorical.


THE, WORKS OF ST... CHR WwsosS Ge


[Homity VII-


world may become guilty before God,’ are
spoken at once both of Jews and of Greeks.
Now this is no slight thing with a view to take
down their unreasonableness. Since even
here they have no advantage over the
Gentiles, but are alike given up as far as sal-
vation is concerned. For he would be in
strict propriety called a guilty person, who
cannot help himself to any excuse, but
needeth the assistance of another: and such
was the plight of all of us, in that we had lost
the things pertaining to salvation.

Ver. 20. “ For by the Law is the knowledge
of sin.”

He springs upon the Law again, with for-
bearance however (for what he says is not an
accusation of it, but of the listlessness of the
Jews). Yet nevertheless he has been earnest
here with a view (as he was going to introduce
his discourse about faith) to show its utter fee-
bleness. For if thou boastest in the Law, he
means, it puts thee to the greater shame: it
solemnly parades forth your sins before you.
Only he does not word it in this harsh way,
but again in a subdued tone; “For by the
Law is the knowledge of sin.” And so the
punishment is greater, but® that because of


to)
the Jew. For the Law accomplished the


disclosure of sin to you, but it was your duty ~


then to flee it. Since then you have not fled it,
you have pulled the punishment more sorely
on yourself, and the good deed of the Law has
been made to youa supply of greater vengeance.
Now then having added to their fear, he next
brings in the things of grace, as. having
brought them to a strong desire of the remis-
sion of their sins, and says,

Ver. 21. ‘But now the righteousness of
God without the Law is manifested.” *

Here he utters a great thing, and such as
needed much proof. For if they that lived in
the Law not only did not escape punishment,
but were even the more weighed down
thereby, how without the Law is it possible
not only to escape vengeance, but even to be


3 Mss. ‘‘ yet not owing to the feebleness of the Law, but to
the listlessness of the Jews.”

* With iii. 21 begins the great central argument of the
epistle : the positive development of the doctrine of justifica—
tion by faith. He had prepared the way for this negatively
by showing that all men were sinners and could not hope for
justification on the condition of obedience to the law of God.
This he proved in regard to the Gentiles in i. 18-32, and im
regard to the Jews in ii. 1—iii. 20. Having now showed that
justification cannot be by law he proceeds to prove that it is b
faith. This central argument extends to the end of chap. viil.
It may be analyzed as follows ; (1) General introductory state-
ment, iii. 21-31. (2)O. T. proof, iv. (3) Consequences of justifi-
cation, v. 1-11. (4) Universality of the principles of sin and
grace, showed by the parallel between Adam and Christ,
Vv. 12-21. (5) Objections answered and false inferences refuted,
vi. vii. (6) Triumphant conclusion ; the blessedness of justifi-
cation, viii. This argument concludes the doctrinal portion of
the Epistle so far as the question of justification is concerned.
chaps. ix.-xi. treat of the reiection of the Jews and may be
considered a kind of doctrinal appendix to the main argument.
The remaining chaps. (xii.-xvi.) are chiefly practical.

2 BS:


Homity VII.]


justified? For he has here set down two
high points,’ the being justified, and the ob-
taining these blessings, without the Law.
And this is why he does not say righteousness
simply, but the righteousness of God, so by
the worthiness of the Person displaying the
greater degree of the grace, and the possi-
bility of the promise. For to Him all things
are possible. And he does not say, “was
given,” but “is manifested,” so cutting away
the accusation of novelty. For that which is
manifested, is so as being old, but concealed.
And it is not this only, but the sequel that
shows that this is no recent thing, For after
saying, “is manifested,” he proceeds :

“Being witnessed by the Law and the
Prophets.”

Do not be troubled, he means, because it
has but now been given, nor be affrighted as
though at athing new and strange. For of
old both the Law and the Prophets foretold
it. And some passages he has pointed out in
the course of this argument, and some he will
shortly, having in what came before brought
in Habakkuk as saying, “the just shall live
by faith” (i. 17), but in what comes. after,
Abraham and David, as themselves also con-
versing with us about these things. Now
the regard they had for these persons was
great, for one was a patriach and a prophet,
and the other a king and a prophet: and
further the promises about these things had
come to both of them. And this is why
Matthew in the first beginning of his Gospel
mentions both of these first, and then brings
forward in order the forefathers. For after
saying, “the Book of the Generation of Jesus
Christ” (Matt. i. 1), he does not wait after
Abraham to name Isaac also and Jacob, but
mentions David along with (5 Mss. “ after ”’)
Abraham. And what is wonderful indeed is,
that he has even set David before Abraham
speaking on this wise, “the Son of David,
the Son of Abraham,” and then begins the
catalogue of Isaac and Jacob, and all the
rest in order. And this is why the Apostle
here keeps presenting them in turns, and
speaks of the righteousness of God being wit-
nessed by the Law and the Prophets. Then
that no one should say, How are we to be
saved without contributing anything at all
to the object in view? he shows that we
also offer no small matter toward this, I
mean our faith. Therefore after saying,
“the righteousness of God,” he adds straight-
way, “by faith unto all and upon all that
believe.”


1 dxpa high or excellent things ; thus Longinus. Or perhaps
“terms.” See Arist. Azad. Pr. 1. i. where this use of the
word is explained.


Dae Broke lO. THE ROMANS:


B a

Here again the Jew is alarmed by his not
having anything better than the rest, and
being numbered with the whole world. Now
that he may not feel this, he again lowers him
with fear by adding, “For there is no differ-
ence, for all have sinned.” For tell me not
that it is such and such a Greek,” such and
such a Scythian, such and such a Thracian,
for all are in the same plight. For even if
you have received the Law, one thing alone is
there which you have learnt from the Law—
to know sin, not to flee from it. Next, that
they may say, “even if we have sinned, still
it is not in the same way that they did,” he
added, “and have come short of the glory of
God.” So that even if you have not done the
same sins as others, still you are alike bereft
of the glory, since you belong to those who
have offended, and he that hath offended be-
longeth not to such as are glorified, but to
such as are put to shame. Yet, be not afraid:
for the reason of my saying this was not that
I might thrust you into despair, but that I
might show the love of the Lord (Aeozérov)
toward man: and so he goes on;

Ver. 24,25. ‘“‘ Being justified freely by His
grace through the redemption that is in Christ
Jesus : Whom God hath set forth to be a pro-
pitiation through faith* in His blood, to de-
clare His righteousness.” *

See by how many proofs he makes good what
was said. First, from the worthiness of the
person, for it is not a man who doeth these
things, that He should be too weak for it, but
God all-powerful. For it is to God, he says,
that the righteousness belongs. Again, from
the Law and the-Prophets. For you need not
be afraid at hearing the “without the Law,”
inasmuch as the Law itself approves this.
Thirdly, from the sacrifices under the old dis-
pensation. For it was on this ground that he
said, “In His blood,” to call to their minds
those sheep and calves. For if the sacrifices
of things without reason, he means, cleared
from sin, much more would this blood. And
he does not say barely Avrpdcewc, but azozu-
rpocewe, entire redemption, to show® that we
should come no more into such slavery. And
for this same reason he calls it a propitiation,
to show that if the type had such force, much
more would the reality display the same. But
to show again that it was no novel thing or
recent, he says, “fore-ordained” (Auth.
Version marg.) ; and by saying God “ fore-or-


2 4 Mss. read 6 Setva ‘EAAny, etc. for o detva o ‘EAAnv, making
the sense, do not say (in contempt) ‘‘such an one is a Greek!
such an one a Scythian !”’ etc.

3 So Sav. Mor. Ben., against the Mss. and the Ed. of Ve~
rona, which omits these words.

4 vy. 26, 3 P. Mss. év to viv xatpo.

5 4 Mss. add, ‘to show that this was so brought about,”


378


THE ‘'WORKS+ OF Sf. CHEVYSOSTSrE


[HomiLy VII.


dained,’’ and showing that the good deed is
the Father’s, he showeth it to be the Son’s
also. For the Father “ fore-ordained,” but
Christ in His own blood wrought the whole
aright.

‘“To declare His righteousness.” What is
declaring of righteousness? Like the declar-
ing of His riches, not only for Him to be rich
Himself, but also to make others rich, or of
life, not only that He is Himself living, but
also that He makes the dead to live; and of
His power, not only that He is Himself pow-
erful, but also that He makes the feeble pow-
erful. So also is the declaring of His right-
eousness not only that He is Himself right-
eous, but that He doth also make them that
are filled with the putrefying sores (xatacarévrac)
of sin suddenly righteous. And it is to
explain this, viz. what is “ declaring,” that he
has added, “That He might be just, and the
justifier of him which believeth in Jesus.”
Doubt not then: for it is not of works, but of
faith: and shun not the righteousness of
God, for it is a blessing in two ways ; because
it is easy, and also open to all men. And be
not abashed and shamefaced. For if He
Himself openly declareth (évdeixvurac) Himself
to do so, and He, so to say, findeth a delight
and a pride therein, how comest thou to be
dejected and to hide thy face at what thy
Master glorieth in? Now then after raising
his hearers’ expectations by saying that what
had taken place was a declaring of the right-
eousness of God, he next by fear urges him on
that is tardy and remissful about coming; by
speaking as follows:

“On account of the relaxing’ of sins that
were before.’’ Do you see how often he keeps
reminding them of their transgressions?
Before, he did it by saying, ‘‘ through the Law
is the knowledge of sin;” and after by say-
ing, “that all have sinned,” but here in yet
stronger language. For he does not say for
the sins, but, “for the relaxing,” that is, the
deadness. For there was no longer any hope
of recovering health, but as the paralyzed
body needed the hand from above, so doth
the soul which hath been deadened. And
what is indeed worse, a thing which he sets
down as acharge, and points out that it isa
greater accusation. Now what is this? That
the last state was incurred in the forbearance
of God. For you cannot plead, he means,
that you have not enjoyed much forbearance
and goodness. But the words “at this time ”
are those of one who is pointing out the great-


1 rapeotv. Our translation cannot be kept without losing
St. Chrysostom’s meaning. He takes this word in a medical
sense, for the cessation of vital energy. It was sometimes
used thus, or for paralysis. It does not occur elsewhere in
the New Testament; the usual word for remission is adeots.


ness of the power (Sav. forbearance) and love
toward man. For after we had given all
over, (he would say,) and it were time to sen-
tence us, and the evils were waxed great and
the sins were in their full, then He displayed
His own power, that thou mightest learn how
great is the abundancy of righteousness with
Him. For this, had it taken place at the
beginning, would not have had so wonderful
and unusual an appearance as now, when
every sort of cure was found unavailing.

Ver. 27. ‘“‘ Where is boasting then? it is
excluded,” he says. “By what .law? of
works? Nay, but by the law of faith.”

Paul is at great pains to show that faith is
mighty to a degree which was never even
fancied of the Law. For after he had said
that God justifieth man by faith, he grapples
with the Law again. And he does not say,
where then are the well doings of the Jews?
where their righteous dealing? but, “where
is then the boasting?” so taking every oppor-
tunity of showing, that they do but use great
words, as though they had somewhat more
than others, and have no work to show. And
after saying, ‘Where then is the boasting?.”
he does not say, it is put out of sight and hath
come to an end, but “it is excluded,” which
word rather expresses unseasonableness ;
since the reason for it is no more. For as
when the judgment is come they that would
repent have not any longer the season for it,
thus now the sentence being henceforth
passed, and all being upon the point of perish-
ing, and He being at hand Who by grace
would break these terrors, they had no longer
the season for making a plea of amelioration
wrought by the Law. For if it were right to
strengthen themselves upon these things, it
should have been before His coming. But
now that He who should save by faith was
come, the season for those efforts 7 was taken
from them. For since all were convicted, He
therefore saveth by grace. And this is why
He is come but now, that they may not say,
as they would had He come at the first, that
it was possible to be saved by the Law and
by our own labors and well-doings. To curb
therefore this their effrontery, He waited a
long time: so that after they were by every
argument clearly convicted of inability to help
themselves, He then saved them by His grace.
And for this reason too when he had said
above, “To declare His righteousness,” he
added, “at this time.” If any then were to
gainsay, they do the same as if a person who
after committing great sins was unable to
defend himself in court, but was condemned


2 Or ‘* pleading the same.”’


Homity VII.|


tHe JB PlerbE FO: THE: ROMANS.


379


and going to be punished, and then being by
the royal pardon forgiven, should have the
effrontery aiter his forgiveness to boast and
say that he had done no sin. For before the
pardon came, was the time to prove it: but
after it came he would no longer have the
season for boasting. And this happened in
the Jews’ case. For since they had been
traitors to themselves, this was why He came,
by His very coming doing away their boasting.
For he who saith that he is a “teacher of
babes, and maketh his boast in the Law,”
and styles himself “an instructor of the
foolish,” if alike with them he needed a
teacher and a Saviour, can no longer have
any pretext for boasting. For if even before
this, the circumcision was made uncircum-
cision, much rather was it now, since it is cast
out from both periods. But after saying that
“it was excluded,” he shows also, how. How
then does he say it was excluded? ‘“ By what
law? of works? Nay, but by the law of
faith.” See he calls the faith also a law,
delighting to keep to the names, and so allay
the seeming novelty. But what is the “law
of faith?” It is, being saved by grace.
Here he shows God’s power, in that He has
not only saved, but has even justified, and led
them to boasting,! and this too without need-
ing works, but looking for faith only. And in
saying this he attempts to bring the Jew who
has believed to act with moderation, and to
calm him that hath not believed, in such way
as to draw him on to his own view. For he
that has been saved, if he be high-minded in
that he abides by the Law, will be told that
he himself has stopped his own mouth, himself
has accused himself, himself has renounced
claims to his own salvation, and has excluded
boasting. But he that hath not believed
again, being humbled by these same means,
will be capable of being brought over to the
faith. Do you see how great faith’s preémi-
nence is? How it hath removed us from the
former things, not even allowing us to boast
of them ?

Ver. 28. “‘ Therefore we conclude that a
man is justified by faith without the deeds of
the Law.”

When he had shown that by faith they were
superior to the Jews, then he goes on with
great confidence to discourse upon it also,
and what seemed therein to annoy he again
heals up. For these two things were what
confused the Jews; one, if it were possible
for men, who with works were not saved, to


1 The term xavxac@at, here rendered boasting, is used ina
good sense also, and sometimes rendered glorying in our Ver-
sion. See Rom. v. 2, 3,11; _xv.17; 1 Cor. i. 31; 2 Cor. x. 17; xii.
9; Gal. vi. 4 and 14; Phil. iii. 5; 1 Thess. ii. 19; James i. 9, etc.


be saved without them, and another, if it
were just for the uncircumcised to enjoy the
same blessings with those, who had during so
long a period been nurtured in the Law;
which last confused them more by far than
the former. And on this ground having
proved the former, he goes on to the other
next, which perplexed the Jews so far, that
they even complained on account of this
position against Peter after they believed.
What does he say then? “Therefore we
conclude, that by faith a man is justified.”
He does not say, a Jew, or one under the
Law, but after leading forth his discourse into
a large room, and opening the doors of faith
to the world, he says “a man,” the name
common to our race. And then having taken
occasion from this, he meets an objection not
set down. For since it was likely that the
Jews, upon hearing that faith justifieth every


man, would take it ill and feel offended, he
goes on,

Ver. 29. “Is ,Hethe: God.of the Jems
only?”


As if he said, On what foot does it then
seem to you amiss that every man should be


saved? Is God partial? So showing from
this, that in wishing to flout the Gentiles,


they are rather offering an insult to God’s
glory, if, that is, they would rot allow Him to
be the God of all. But if He is of all, then
He taketh care of all; and if He care for all,
then He saveth all alike by faith. And this is
why he says, ‘“‘ Is He the God of the Jews only ?
is He not also -of the Gentiles? Yes, of the
Gentiles also.” For He is not partial as the
fables of the Gentiles (cf. Ov. Tr. I. ii. 5. sqq)
are, but common to all, and One. And this
is why he goes on,

Ver. 30. “ Seeing it is one God.”

Thatis, the same is the Master of both
these and those. But if you tell me of the
ancient state of things, then too the dealings
of Providence were shared by both, although
in diverse ways. For as to thee was given
the written law, so to them was the natural ;
and they came short in nothing, if, that is,
only they were willing, but were even able to
surpass thee. And so he proceeds, with an
allusion to this very thing, “ Who shall justify
the circumcision by faith, ‘and the uncircumcis-
ion through faith,” so reminding them of what
he said before about uncircumcision and cir-
cumcision, whereby he showed that there was
no difference.2 But if then there was no
difference, much less is there any now, And
this accordingly he now establishes upon
still clearer grounds, and so demonstrates,


there was no difference ;*’ but most Mss.
must be supplied.


2 Field omits “
have the words ; and at any rate they


380 THE’ WORKS30On
that either of them stand alike in need of
faith.

Ver. 31.°""Do ‘we “then,” “hessays, amake
void the Law through faith? God forbid:
yea, we establish the Law.”

Do you see his varied and unspeakable
judgment? For the bare use of the word
“establish” shows that it was not then stand-
ing, but was worn out (karazedvuévov). And
note also Paul’s exceeding power, and how
superabundantly he maintains what he wishes.
For here he shows that the faith, so far from
doing any disparagement to the “ Law,” even
assists it, as it on the other hand paved the
way for the faith. For as the Law itself
before bore witness to it (for he saith, “ being
witnessed by the Law and the Prophets ’’), so
here this establisheth that, now that it is
unnerved. And how did it establish? he
would say. What was the object of the Law,
and what the scope of all its enactments?
Why, to make man righteous. But this it had
no power to do. “For all,” it says, “have
sinned:” but faith when it came accomplished
it. For when a man is once a believer, he is
straightway justified. The intention then of the
Law it did establish, and what all its enactments
aim after, this hath it brought to a consumma-
tion. Consequently it has not disannulled, but
perfected it. Here then three points he has
demonstrated ; first, that without the Law it
is possible to be justified; next, that this the
Law could not effect; and, that faith is not
opposed to the Law. For since the chief
cause of perplexity to the Jews was this, that
the faith seemed to be in opposition to it, he
shows more than the Jew wishes, that so far


from being contrary, it is even in close
alliance and codperation with it, which
was what they especially longed to hear
proved.


But since after this grace, whereby we were
justified, there is need also of a life suited to
it, let us show an earnestness worthy the gift.
And show it we shall, if we keep with earnest-
ness charity, the mother of good deeds. Now
charity is not bare words, or mere ways of
speaking (xpospjcevc) to men, but a taking care
(xpocracia) of them, and a putting forth of itself
by works, as, for instance, by relieving poverty,
lending one’s aid to the sick, rescuing from
dangers, to stand by them that be in difficul-
ties, to weep with them that weep, and to
rejoice with them that rejoice. (Rom. xii.
15.) For even, this last is a part of charity.
And yet this seems a little thing, to be rejoic-
ing with them that rejoice: nevertheless it is
exceedingly great, and requireth for it the
spirit of true wisdom. And we may find
many that perform the more irksome part


oT. (Gk YSOSMEaRE


[HomiLy VII.


(xeuxpérepov), and yet want vigor for this. For
many weep with them that weep, but still do
not rejoice with them that rejoice, but are in
tears when others rejoice; now this comes of
grudging and envy. The good deed then of
rejoicing when our brother rejoices is no
small one, but even greater than the other:
and haply not only greater than weeping with
them that weep, but even than standing by
them that are in danger. There are many, at
all events, that have shared danger with men
in danger, but were cut to the heart when
they came into honor. So great is the tyranny
of a grudging spirit! And yet the one isa
thing of toils and labors, and this of choice
and temper only. Yet at the same time
many that have endured the harder task have
not accomplished the one easier than it, but
pine and consume away when they see others
in honor, when a whole Church is benefited,
by doctrine, or in any other fashion. And
what can be worse than this? For such an
one doth not any more fight with his brother,
but with the will of God. Now consider this,
and be rid of the disease: and even if you be
unwilling to set your neighbor free, at least
set yourself free from these countless evils.
Why do you carry war into your own thoughts ?
Why fill vour soul with trouble ? why work up a
storm ? why turn things upside down? How
will you be able, in this state of mind, to ask
forgiveness of sins? For if those that allow
not the things done against themselves to pass,
neither doth He forgive, what forgiveness
shall He grant to those who go about to
injure those that have done them no injury?
For this is a proof of the utmost wickedness.
Men of this kind are fighting with the Devil,
against the Church, and haply even worse
than he. For him one can be on one’s guard
against. But these cloaking themselves under
the mask of friendliness, secretly kindle the
pile, throwing themselves the first into the
furnace, and laboring under a disease not
only unfit for pity, but even such as to meet
with much ridicule. For why is it, tell me,
that thou art pale and trembling and standing
in fear? What evil has happened? Is it
that thy brother is in honor, and looked up
to, and in esteem? Why, thou oughtest to
make chaplets, and rejoice, and glorify God,
that thine own member is in honor and looked


up to! But art thou pained that God is
glorified?" Seest thou to what issue the war
tends? But, some will say, it is not because


God is glorified, but because my brother is.
Yet through him the glory ascendeth up to
God: and so will the war from thee do also.


1 4 Mss. add what madness doth not this exceed ?


Homity VII.]


hike lah kt


O- THE, ROMANS. 381


own before His, thou wilt not ever gain even


But it is not this, he will say, that grieves me,
for I should wish God to be glorified by me.
Well then! rejoice at thy brother’s being in
honor, and then glorified is God again through
thee also; and* all will say, Blessed be God
that hath His household so minded, wholly
freed from envy, and rejoicing together at
one another’s goods! And why do I speak
of thy brother? for if he were thy foe and
enemy, and God were glorified through him,
a friend shouldest thou make of him for this
reason. But thou makest thy friend an enemy
because God is glorified by his being in honor.
And were anyone to heal thy body when in
evil plight, though he were an enemy, thou
wouldest count him thenceforward among the
first of thy friends: and dost thou reckon him
that gladdens the countenance of Christ’s
Body, that is, the Church, and is thy friend,
to be yet anenemy? Howelse then couldest
thou show war against Christ? For this
cause, even if a man do miracles, have celi-
bacy to show, and fasting, and lying on the
bare ground, and doth by this virtue advance
even to the angels, yet shall he be most
accursed of all, while he has this defect, and
shall be a greater breaker of the Law than
the adulterer, and the fornicator, and the
robber, and the violator of supulchres. And,
that no one may condemn this language of
hyperbole, I should be glad to put this question
to you. If any one were come with fire and
mattock, and were destroying and burning this
House, and digging down this Altar, would not
each one of those here stone him with stones as
accursed and a law-breaker? What then, if
one were to bring a flame yet more consuming
than that fire, I mean envy, that doth not ruin
the buildings of stone nor dig down an Altar of
gold, but subverteth and scornfully marreth
what is far more precious than either walls
or Altar, the Teachers’ building, what suffer-
ance would he deserve? For let no one tell
me, that he has often endeavored and been
unable: for it is from the spirit that the
actions are judged. For Saul did kill David,
even though he did not hit him. (1 Sam. xix.
10.) Tell me, dost thou not perceive that
thou art plotting against the sheep of Christ
when thou warrest with His Shepherd? those
sheep for whom also Christ shed His Blood,
and bade us both to do and to suffer all
things? Dost thou not remind thyself that


thy Master sought thy glory and not His)
own, but thou art seeking not that of thy)


Master but thine own? And yet if thou
didst see His then thou wouldst have ob-
tained thine own also. But by seeking thine


1 4 Mss. for ‘‘and’’ have ‘‘for when thou art so disposed
toward thy brother.”


this.

What then will be the remedy? Let us all
join in prayer, and let us lift up our voice
with one accord in their behalf as for those
possessed, for indeed these are more wretched
than they, inasmuch as their madness is of
choice. For this affliction needeth prayer and
much entreaty. For if he that loveth not his
brother, even though he empty out his money,
yea, and have the glory of martyrdom, is no
whit advantaged; consider what punishment
the man deserves who even wars with him
that hath not wronged him in anything; he is
even worse than the Gentiles: for if to love
them that love us does not let us have any
advantage over them, in what grade shall he
be placed, tell me, that envieth them that love
him? For envying is even worse than war-
ting; since he that warreth, when the cause
of the war is at an end, puts an end to his
hatred also: but the grudger would never
become a friend. And the one shows an open
kind of battle, the other a covert : and the one
often has a reasonable cause to assign for the
war, the other, nothing else but madness, and
a Satanic spirit. To what then is one to com-
pare a soul of this kind? to what viper? to
what asp? to what canker-worm? to what
scorpion ? since there is nothing so accursed
or so pernicious as a soul of this sort. For it
is this, it is this, that hath subverted the
Churches, this that hath gendered the here-
sies, this it was that armed a brother’s hand,
and made his right hand to be dipped in the
blood of the righteous, and plucked away the
laws of nature, and set open the gates for
death, and brought that curse into action, and
suffered not that wretch to call to mind
either the birth-pangs, or his parents, or any-
thing else, but made him so furious, and led
him to such a pitch of phrenzy, that even
when God exhorted him and said, ‘*‘ Unto thee
shall be his recourse,” and thou shalt rule over
him” (Gen. iv. 7, LXX.); he did not even
then give in. Yet did He both forgive him the
fault, and make his brother subject to him:
but his complaint is so incurable, that even if
thousands of medicines are applied, it keeps
sloughing with its own corruption. For
wherefore art thou so vexed, thou most miser-
able of men? Is it because God hath had
honor shown Him? Nay, this would show a
Satanical spirit. Is it then because thy
brother outstrips thee in good name? As for


2 aroorpody, “turning away,’’ some read éxcotpodpy, as Cyr.
Al. Glaph. ad. loc. who speaks of the arogrpody or turning
away of God’s face from Cain; but to render it thus here is
| inconsistent with Gen. iii. 16, and with St. Chrysostom’s inter-
pretation in Gen. iv. Hom. xix. which illustrates several ex-
pressions here.


382


that, it is open to thee in turn to outstrip him.
And so, if thou wouldest be a conqueror, kill
not, destroy not, but let him abide still, that
the material for the struggle may be preserved,
and conquer him living. For in this way thy
crown had been a glorious one; but by thus
destroying thou passest a harder sentence of
defeat upon thyself. But a grudging spirit
hath no sense of all this. And what ground
hast thou to covet glory in such solitude ? for
those were at that time the only inhabitants of
the earth. Still even then this restrained him
not, but he cast away all from his mind, and
stationed himself in the ranks of the devil; for
he it was who then led the war upon Cain’s
side. For inasmuch as it was not enough for
him that man had become liable to death, by
the manner of the death he tried to make the
tragedy still greater, and persuaded him to
become a fratricide. For he was urgent and
in travail to see the sentence carried into
effect, as never satisfied with our ills. As if
any one who had got an enemy in prison, and
saw him under sentence, were to press, before
he was out of the city, to see him butchered
within it, and would not wait even the fitting
time, so did the devil then, though he had
heard that man must return to earth, travail
with desire to see something worse, even a
son dying before his father, and a brother
destroying a brother, and a _ premature
and violent slaughter. See you what great
service envy hath done him? how it hath
filled the insatiate spirit of the devil, and hath
prepared for him a table great as he desired
to see?

Let us then escape from the disease ; for it
is not possible, indeed it is not, to escape from
the fire prepared for the devil, unless we get
free from this sickness. But free we shall get to
be if we lay to mind how Christ loved us, and
also how He bade us love one another. Now
what love did He show for us? His precious
Blood did He shed for us when we were ene-
mies, and had done the greatest wrong to
Him. This do thou also do in thy brother’s
case (for this is the end of His saying “A
new commandment I give unto you, That ye
so! love one another as I have loved you”
(John xiii. 34); or rather even so the measure
does not come to a stand. For it was in be-
half of His enemies that He did this. And
are you unwilling to shed your blood for your
brother? Why then dost thou even shed his
blood, disobeying the commandment even to
reversing it? Yet what He did was not as a
due: but you, if you do it, are but fulfilling
a debt. Since he too, who, after receiving the


1 ottws and éyw are not in the text in St. John. 1 Ms. (Bodl.)


here omits ovTws.


THE WORKS /OFMSi. (CHERVSOsS Rent


[Hominy VII.


ten thousand talents, demanded the hundred
pence, was punished not merely for the fact
that he demanded them, but because even by
the kindness done him he had not become
any better, and did not even follow where his
Lord had begun, or remit the debt. For on
the part of the servant the thing done was but
a debt after all, if it had been done. For all
things that we do, we do towards the payment
of a debt. And this is why Himself said,
‘‘“When ye have done all, say, We are un-
profitable servants, we have done that which
was our duty ‘todo.’ ((uuke; xvi.) ne)ite
then we display charity, if we give our goods
to them that need, we are fulfilling a debt;
and that not only in that it was He who first
began the acts of goodness, but because it is
His goods that we are distributing if we ever ?
do give. Why then deprive thyself of what
He willeth thee to have the right of? For the
reason why He bade thee give them to
another was that thou mightest have them
thyself. For so long as thou hast them to
thyself even thou thyself hast them not. But
when thou hast given to another, then hast
thou received them thyself. What charm
then will do as much as this? Himself
poured forth His Blood for His enemies: but
we not even money for our benefactor. He
did so with His Blood that was His own: we
will not even with money that is not ours.
He did it before us, we not even after His
example. He did it for our salvation, we will
not do it even for our own advantage. For
He is not to have any advantage from our
love toward man, but the whole gain accrueth
unto us. For this is the very reason why we
are bidden to give away our goods, that we
may not be thrown out of them. For as a
person who gives a little child money and
bids him hold it fast, or give it the servant to
keep, that it may not be for whoever will to
snatch it away, so also doth God. For He
says, Give to him that needeth, lest some one
should snatch it away from thee, as an in-
former, for instance, or a calumniator, or a
thief, or, after all these are avoided, death.
For so long as thou holdest it thyself, thou
hast no safe hold of it. But if thou givest it
Me through the poor, I keep it all for thee
exactly, and in fit season will return it with
great increase. For it is not to take it away
that I receive it, but to make it a larger
amount and to keep it more exactly, that I
may have it preserved for you against that
time, in which there is no one to lend or to
pity. What then can be more hard-hearted,
than if we, after such promises, cannot make


2 5 Mss. ‘if we give all.”


Homity VIL]


up our minds to lend to him? Yes, it is for
this that we go before Him destitute and
naked and poor, not having the things com-
mitted to our charge, because we do not de-
posit them with Him who keepeth them more
exactly than any. And for this we shall be
most severely punished. For when we are
charged with it, what shall we be able to say
about the loss of them ?* what pretext to put
forward ? what defence? For what reason is
there why you did not give? Do you disbe-
lieve that you will receive it again? And how
can this be reasonable? For He that hath
given to one that hath not given, how shall
He not much rather give after He has re-
ceived? Does the sight of them please you?
Well then, give much the more for this reason,
that you may there be the more delighted,
when no one can take them from vou. Since
now if you keep them, you will even suffer
countless evils. For as a dog, so doth the
devil leap upon them that are rich, wishing to
snatch from them, as from a child that hold-
eth a sippet ora cake. Letus then give them
to our Father, and if the devil see this done,
he will certainly withdraw: and when he has
withdrawn, then will the Father safely give
them all to thee, when he cannot trouble, in
that world to come. For now surely they that
be rich differ not from little children that are
troubled by dogs, while all are barking round
them, tearing and pulling; not men only, but
ignoble affections; as gluttony, drunkenness,
flattery, uncleanness of every kind. And
when we have to lend, we are very anxious
about those that give much, and look particu-
larly for those that are frank dealers. But
here we do the opposite. For God, Who
dealeth frankly, and giveth not one in the
hundred, but a hundred-fold, we desert, and
those who will not return us even the capital,
these we seek after. For what return will our
belly make us, that consumeth the larger
share of our goods? Dung and corruption.
Or what will vainglory? Envy and grudging.
Or what nearness? Care and anxiety. Or
what uncleanness? Hell and the venomous
worm! For these are the debtors of them
that be rich, who pay this interest upon the
capital, evils at present, and dreadful things
in expectation. Shall we then lead to these,
pray, with such punishment for interest, and
shall we not trust the same to Christ (4 Mss.
om. 7@) Who holdeth forth unto us heaven,
immortal life, blessings unutterable? And
what excuse shall we have? For how comest
thou not to give to Him, who will assuredly
return, and return in greater abundance?


1 Savile, ‘‘ about our own self-destruction,”’ rept THs amwAeias
€avTav, but the Mss, av’r@v, which makes better sense.


PE Heiske kh: TO THECROMANS: 38


Ve


es


Perhaps it is because it is so long before He
repays. Yet surely He repays even here,
For He is true which saith, “Seek the king-
dom of heaven, and all these things shall be
added to you.” (Matt. vi. 33.) Seest thou
this extreme munificence? Those goods, He
says, have been stored up for thee, and are
not diminishing: but these here I give by way
of increase and surplus. But, besides all this,
the very fact of its being so long before thou
wilt receive it, does but make thy riches the
greater: since the interest is more. For in
the case of those who have money lent them,
we see that this is what the lenders do, lend-
ing, that is, with greater readiness to those
who refund a long time after. For he that
straightway repays the whole, cuts off the
progression of the interest, but he that keeps
possession of it for a longer time, makes also
the gain from it greater. Shall we then, while
in man’s case we are not offended at the de-
lay, but even use artifices to make it greater,
in the case of God be so little-minded, as on
this very ground to be backward and to re-
tract? And yet, as I said, He both giveth
here, and along with the reason mentioned, as
planning also some other greater advantage to
us, He there keepeth the whole in store. For
the abundance of what is given, and the ex-
cellency of that gift, transcends this present
worthless life. Since in this perishable and
doomed body there is not even the possibility
of receiving those unfading crowns; nor in
our present state, perturbed and full of trouble,
and liable to many changes as it is, of attain-
ing to that unchangeable unperturbed lot.2
Now you, if any one were to owe you gold,
and while you were staying in a foreign coun-
try, and had neither servants, nor any means
to convey it across to the place of your abode,
were to promise to pay you the loan, would
beseech him in countless ways to have it paid
down not in the foreign land, but at home
rather. But do you think right to receive
those spiritual and unutterable things in this
world? Now what madness this would show!
For if you receive them here, you must have
them corruptible to a certainty; but if you
wait for that time, He will repay you them
incorruptible and unalloyed. If you receive
here, you have gotten lead; but if there, tried
gold. Still He does not even deprive thee of
the goods of this life. For along with that
promise He has placed another also, to the
following effect, That every one that loveth
the things of the world to come, shall receive
“an hundred-fold in this life present, and shall
inherit eternal life.” (Matt. xix. 29.) If then


2 Anéw, which may mean “ rest.”


384


THE "WORKS “OF ¥ST, GCHRYSOS Gon:


|Homity VII.


we do not receive the hundred-fold, it is our-
selves that are to blame for not lending to
Him Who can give so much, for all who have
given have received much, even though they
gave but little. For what great thing, tell me,
did Peter give? was it not a net that was
broken (Luke v. 6, 11), and a rod and a hook
only? Yet still God opened to him the
houses of the world, and spread before him
land and sea, and all men invited him to their
possessions. Or rather they sold what was
their own, and brought it to their’ feet, not
so much as putting it into their hands, for
they dared not, so great was the honor they
paid him, as well as their profuseness. But
he was Peter, you will say! And what of
this? Oman! For it was not Peter only to
whom He made this promise, neither said He,
Thou, O Peter, only art to receive an hun-
dred-fold, but ‘‘every one whosoever hath left
houses or brethren shall receive an hundred-
fold.” For it is not distinction of persons
that He recognizes, but actions that are
rightly done. But a circle of little ones is
round about me, one will say, and I am de-
sirous of leaving them with a good fortune.?
Why then do we make them paupers? For if
you leave them everything, you are still com-
mnitting your goods to a trust that may deceive
you. But if you leave God their joint-heir
and guardian, you have left them countless
treasures. For as when we avenge ourselves
God assisteth us not, but when we leave it to
Him, more than we expect comes about; so
in the case of goods, if we take thought about
them ourselves, He will withdraw from any
providence over them, but if we cast all upon
Him, He will place both them and our chil-
dren in all safety. And why art thou amazed
that this should be so with God? for even
with men one may see this happening. For
if you do not when dying invite any of your
relatives to the care of your children, it often
happens, that one who is abundantly willing
feels reluctancy, and is too modest to spring
to the task of his own accord. But if you
cast the care upon him, as having had a very
great honor shown him, he will in requital
make very great returns. If then thou would-
est leave thy children much wealth, leave them
God’s care. For He Who, without thy having
done anything, gave thee a soul, and formed
thee a body, and granted thee life, when He
seeth thee displaying such munificence and
distributing their goods to Himself along with
them, must surely open to them every kind of
riches. For if Elijah after having been


1 So the Mss. ; i. e. the Apostles’.
2 See St. Cypr. Of works and alms, c. 15; Treatises, pp. 243
Bas Our.


nourished with a little meal, since he saw that
that woman honored him above her children,
made threshing-floors and oil-presses appear
in the little hut of the widow, consider what
loving caring the Lord of Elijah will display!
Let us then not consider how to leave our
children rich, but how to leave them virtuous.
For if they have the confidence of riches, they
will not mind aught besides, in that they have
the means screening the wickedness of their
ways in their abundant riches. But if they
find themselves devoid of the comfort to be
got from that source, they will do all so as by
virtue to find themselves abundant consolation
for their poverty. Leave them then no
riches that you may leave them virtue. For
it is unreasonable in the extreme, not to make
them, whilst we are alive, lords of all our
goods, yet after we are dead to give the easy
nature of youth full exemption from fear.
And yet while we are alive we shall have
power to call them to good account, and to
sober and bridle them, if they make an ill use
of their goods: but if after we are dead we
afford them, at the time of the loss of our-
selves, and their own youthfulness, that power
which wealth gives, endless are the precipices
into which we shall thrust those unfortunate
and miserable creatures, so heaping fuel upon
flame, and letting oil drop into a fierce fur-
nace. And so, if you would leave them rich
and safe withal, leave God a debtor to them,
and deliver the bequest to them into His
hands. For if they receive the money them-
selves, they will not know even who to give it
to, but will meet with many designing and
unfeeling people. But if thou beforehand
puttest it out to interest with God, the treas-
ure henceforward remains unassailable, and
great is the facility wherewith that repayment
will be made. For God is well pleased at
repaying us what He oweth, and both looks
with a more favorable eye upon those who
have lent to Him, than on those who have
not; and loveth those the most to whom He
oweth the most. And so, if thou wouldest
have Him for thy Friend continually, make
Him thy Debtor to a large amount. For
there is no lender so pleased at having those
that owe to him, as Christ (6 Mss. God) is
rejoiced at having those that lend to Him.
And such as He oweth nothing to, He fleeth
from; but such as He oweth to, He even
runneth unto. Let us then use all means. to
get Him for our Debtor; for this is the season
for loans, and He is now in want. If then
thou givest not unto Him now, He will not
ask of thee after thy departing hence. For it
is here that he thirsteth, here that Heis an hun-
gered. He thirsteth, since He thirsteth after


Homity VIII.]


Ee EP heb TO THE ROMANS: 385


thy salvation; and it is for this that He even
begs; for this that He even goeth about
naked, negotiating immortal life for thee. Do
not then neglect Him; since it is not to be
nourished that He wishes, but to noyrish; it
is not to be clothed, but to clothe and to
accoutre thee with the golden garment, the
royal robe. Do you not see even the more
attached sort of physicians, when they are
washing the sick, wash themselves also, though
they need it not? In the same way He also
doth all for the sake of thee who art sick.
For this reason also He uses no force in de-
manding, that He may make thee great re-
turns: that thou mayest learn that it is not
because He is in need that He asketh of thee,
but that He may set right that thou needest.
For this reason too He comes io thee in a
lowly guise, and with His right hand held
forth. And if thou givest Him a farthing, He
turneth not away: and even if thou rejectest
Him, He departeth not but cometh again to


“What shall we then say that Abraham, our father as
pertaining to the flesh, hath found? For if Abra-
ham were justified by works, he hath whereof to
glory; but not before God.”


HE had said (5 Mss. eizev), that the world
had become guilty before God, and that all
had sinned, and that boasting was excluded,
and that it was impossible to be saved other-
wise than by faith. He is now intent upon
showing that this salvation, so far from being
matter of shame, was even the cause of a
bright glory, and a greater than that through
works. For since the being saved, yet with
shame, had somewhat of dejection in it, he
next takes away this suspicion too. And
indeed he has hinted at the same already, by
calling it not barely salvation, but “‘ righteous-
ness. Therein” (he says) “is the righteous-
ness of God revealed.” (Rom. i. 17.) For he
that is saved as a righteous man has a confi-
dence accompanying his salvation. And he
calls it not “ righteousness” only, but also the
setting forth of the righteousness of God.
But God is set forth in things which are glori-
ous and shining, and great. However, he
nevertheless draws support for this from what
he is at present upon, and carries his dis-


1 €pa; cf. p. 367, note 5,


25


thee. For He desireth,’ yea desireth exceed-
ingly, our salvation: let us then think scorn
of money, that we may not be thought scorn
of by Christ. Let us think scorn of money,
even with a view to obtain the money
itself, For if we keep it here, we shall
lose it altogether both here and hereafter.
But if we distribute it with abundant expendi-
ture, we shall enjoy in each life abundant
wealthiness. He then that would become
rich, let him become poor, that he may be
rich. Let him spend that he may collect, let
him scatter that he may gather. But if this
is novel and paradoxical, look to the sower,
and consider, that he cannot in any other
way gather more together, save by scattering
what he hath and, letting go of what is at
hand. Let us now sow and till the Heaven,
that we may reap with great abundance, and
obtain everlasting goods, through the grace
and love toward man, etc.


SOU Miya ag Oe


ROM: EVE 1,22:


course forward by the method of question.
And this he is always in the habit of doing
both for clearness sake, and for the sake of
confidence in what is said. Above, for
instance, he did it, where he says, “ What
advantage then hath the Jew?” (ib. iii. 1.)
and, ‘‘ What then have we more than they?” 2
(ib. 9) and again, “where then is boasting?
it is ‘excluded’ (Rom. i, 27): ‘and. here;
“what then shall we say that Abraham our
father ?”’ etc. Now since the Jews kept turn-
ing over and over the fact, that the Patriarch,
and friend of God, was the first to receive cir-
cumcision, he wishes to show, that it was by
faith that he too was justified. And this was
quite a vantage ground to insist upon (repiovsia
vikne xoA2#c). For for a person who had no
works, to be justified by faith, was nothing
unlikely. But for a person richly adorned
with good deeds, not to be made just from
hence, but from faith, this is the thing to
cause wonder, and to set the power of faith in
a strong light. And this is why he passes by
all the others, and leads his discourse back to
this man. And he calls him “father, as per-
taining to the flesh,” to throw them out of the


2 Rom. ili. 9, Tt obvy mpoxatréyouev mepiagov ; as 2 Mss. of
Matt. read at the beginning of the last Homily. So too some
Mss. of the text, and the Syriac version.


386 THE WORKS OF
genuine relationship (cvyyeveiac yvyoiac) to him,
and to pave the Gentiles’ way to kinsmanship!
with him. And then he says, “ For if Abra-
ham were justified by works, he hath whereof
to glory: but not before God.” After saying
that God “justified the circumcision by faith
and the uncircumcision through faith,” and
making the same sufficiently sure in what he
said before, he now proves it by Abraham
more clearly than he promised, and pitches
the battle for faith against works, and makes
this righteous man the subject of the whole
struggle; and that not without special mean-
ing. Wherefore also he sets him up very high
by calling him “forefather,” and putting a
constraint upon them to comply with him in
all points. For, Tell me not, he would say,
about the Jews, nor bring this man or that
before me. For I will go up to the very head
of all, and the source whence circumcision
took its rise. For “if Abraham,” he says,
“was justified by works, he hath whereof to
glory: but not before God.” ? What is here
said is not plain, and so one must make it
plainer. For there are two “ gloryings,’”’ one
of works, and one of faith. After saying then,
““if he was justified by works, he hath whereof
to glory ; but not before God;”’ he points out
that he might have whereof to glory from faith
also,*> yea and much greater reason for it.
For the great power of Paul is especially dis-
played in this, that he turns what is objected
to the other side, and shows that what seemed
rather to be on the side of salvation by works,
viz. glorying or boldness of claim (xappyordfeo-
6a:) belonged much more truly to that by
faith. For he that glorieth in his works has
his own labors to put forward: but he that
finds his honor in having faith in God, has a
much greater ground for glorying to show, in
that itis God that he glorifieth and magnifieth.
For those things which the nature of the visible
world tells him not of, in receiving these by
faith in Him, he at once displays sincere love
towards Him, and heralds His power clearly
forth. Now thisis the character of the noblest
soul, and the philosophic* spirit, and lofty
mind. For to abstain from stealing and mur-


1 ayxtoretav, which the orators use for right of inheritance
as next of kin. See verses 13, 14; c. viii. 173 ix. 8; Gal. iii. 7,
15, 16, 18; Heb. ix. 16, 26; which renders it probable that there
is reference to the death of Christ, (see Rev. xiii. 8.) and so to
the idea of ‘‘ Testament,”’ in the Ep. to the Galatians.

2 St. Chrysostom understands zpos Tov Gedy not ‘as claiming
credit with God,” but “glorying in reference to God,’ in
which He has a share. He takes the argument to be, ‘If
Abraham was justified by works, he hath not whereof to glor
before God’ (in this sense), ‘‘ but can only glory in himself:
as it is, he hath whereof to glory before God, and therefore
was not justified by works.”

rE 4 Mss. that he that is of faith might also have whereof to
glory.

4 didocddov yvauns, the word is used (as frequently by
Christian writers) in the sense of choosing wisdom for the
guide of life.


ol. (CIERYSOSTOmM: |Homity VIII.


dering is trifling sort of acquirement, but to.
believe that it is possible for God to do things
impossible requires a soul of no mean stature,
and earnestly affected towards Him; for this
is a sign of sincere love. For he indeed
honors God, who fulfils the commandments,
but he doth so in a much greater degree who
thus followeth wisdom (@Aosogav) by his faith.
The former obeys Him, but the latter receives
that opinion of Him which is fitting, and glo-
rifies Him, and feels wonder at Him more than
that evinced by works. For that glorying
pertains to him that does aright, but this
glorifieth God, and lieth wholly in Him.
For he glorieth at conceiving great things


concerning Him, which redound to His
glory. And this is why he speaks of
having whereof to glory before God.


And not for this only, but also for another
reason: for he who is a believer glorieth again,
not only because he loveth God in sincerity,
but also because he hath enjoyed great honor
and love from him. For as he shows his love
to Him by having great thoughts about Him,
(for this is a proof of love), so doth God also
love him, though deserving to suffer for
countless sins, not in freeing him from punish-
ment only, but even by making him righteous.
He then hath whereof to glory, as having been
counted worthy of mighty love. :

Ver. 4. “ For® to him that worketh is the
reward not reckoned of grace, but of debt.’

Then is not this last the greatest ? he means.
By no means: for it is to the believer that it
is reckoned. But it would not have been
reckoned, unless there were something that he
contributed himself. And so he too hath God
for his debtor, and debtor too for no common
things, but great and high ones. For to show
his high-mindedness and spiritual understand-
ing, he does not say “to him that believeth ”
merely, but

Ver. 5. “To him that believeth on Him
that justifieth the ungodly.”

For reflect how great a thing it is to be
persuaded and have full confidence that God
is able on a sudden not to free a man
who has lived in impiety from punishment
only, but even to make him just, and to count
him worthy of those immortal honors. Do
not then suppose that this one is lowered in
that it is not reckoned unto the former of
grace. For this is the very thing that makes
the believer glorious; the fact of his enjoying
so great grace, of his displaying so great faith.
And note too that the recompense is greater.
For to the former a reward is given, to the
latter righteousness. Now righteousness is


5 So the Mss., omitting v. 3.


Homily VIII.)


tht roe | TOVTRE ROMANS.


387


much greater than a reward. For righteous-
ness is a recompense which most fully com-
prehends several rewards. ‘Therefore after
proving this from Abraham, he introduces
David also as giving his suffrage in favor of
the statement made. What then doth David
say? and whom doth he pronounce blessed ?
is it him that triumphs? in works, or him that
hath enjoyed grace? him that hath obtained
pardon and a gift? And when I speak of
blessedness, I mean the chiefest of all good
things ; for as righteousness is greater than a
reward, so is blessedness greater than right-
eousness. Having then shown that the right-
eousness is better, not owing to Abraham’s
having received it only but also from reason-
ings (for he? hath whereof to boast, he says,
before God*); he again uses another mode
of showing that it is more dignified, by bring-
ing David in to give his suffrage this way.
For he also, he says, pronounces him blessed
who is so made righteous, saying,

Ver. 7. “Blessed are they whose iniquities
are forgiven.”

And he seems to be bringing a testimony
beside his purpose. For it does not say,
Blessed are they whose faith is reckoned for
righteousness. But he does so on purpose,
not through inadvertency, to show the greater
superiority. For if he be blessed that by
grace received forgiveness, much more is he
that is made just, and that exhibits faith.
For where blessedness is, there all shame is
removed, and there is much glory, since
blessedness is a greater degree both of reward
and of glory. And for this cause what is the
advantage of the other he states as unwritten,
““Now to him that worketh is the reward
reckoned not of grace ;”’ but what the advan-
tage of the faithful is, he brings Scriptural
testimony to prove, saying, As David saith,
“Blessed are they whose iniquities are for-
given, and whose sins are covered.” * What,
he means, is it that you say? Is it that “it is
not of debt but of grace that he® receives
forgiveness?” But see it is this person
who is pronounced blessed. For he would
not have pronounced him so, unless he saw
him in the enjoyment of great glory. And
he does not say this “forgiveness” then
comes upon the circumcision; but what saith
he?

Ver. 9. “Cometh this blessedness then ”


93


1 So Vulg. and Field: most Mss. have xapuovra “* that hath
foiled: ay

2 Or “‘it’’; i. e. the righteousness of faith.

3 So several Mss. Vulg. ‘‘ but not before God.’’ But the
text suits St. Chrysostom’s view of the argument: see p. 112,
note c.

4 6 Mss. om. and whose, etc.

5 So 5 Mss: Sav. ‘thou receivest,”
sense.


which scarcely makes


|


(which is thé greater thing) “upon the cir-
cumcision or upon the uncircumcision ?”

For now the subject of enquiry is, With
whom is this good and great thing to be
found; is it with the circumcision or with the
uncircumcision? And notice its superiority !
For he shows that it is so far from shunning
the uncircumcision, that it even dwelt gladly
with it before the circumcision. For since he
that pronounced it blessed was David, who
was himself also in a state of circumcision,
and he was speaking to those in that state,
see how eagerly Paul contends for applying
what he said to the uncircumcised. For after
joining the ascription of blessedness to right-
eousness, and showing that they are one and
the same thing, he enquires how Abraham
came to be righteous. For if the ascription
of blessedness belong to the righteous, and
Abraham was made righteous, let us see how
he was made righteous, as uncircumcised or
circumcised? Uncircumcised, he says.

“For we say that faith was reckoned to
Abraham for righteousness.”’*

After mentioning the Scripture above (for
he said, “What saith the Scripture? Abra-
ham believed in God, and it was counted unto
him for righteousness,”) here he goes on to
secure also the judgment of the speakers, and
shows that justification took place in the
uncircumcision. ‘Then from these grounds he
solves another objection which is starting up.
For if when in uncircumcision, one might say
he was justified, to what purpose was the cir-
cumcision brought in?

Verma.) Sable receineds ii): (ae Gaya tie
sign and® seal of the righteousness that was
by the faith, which he had being yet uncir-
cumcised.”

See you how he shows the Jews to be as it
were of the class of parasites (i. e. guests),
rather than those in uncircumcision, and that
these were added to the others?’ For if he


* Chrys. is free from the polemical treatment of the subject
of justification which has been so prominent in modern expo-
sitions. The following points may be suggested : (1) It is the
imputation of faith which here receives ne emphasis—
Aoyigerar n MicTLs avToU eis duxacogvyyy (VV. 3, 5, 6, 8, 9). (2) Al-
though AoyiGer@ar is an actus forensis, it has an ethical coun-
terpart involved in the very conception of faith and righteous-
ness. (3) While faith is not to be identified with righteousness,
it can be reckoned as such because it involves the soul’s com-
mitment toa life of fellowship with Christ, in which a perfect
righteousness is guaranteed and pee ee secured. This
righteousness is real as well as putative. (4) The power and
value of faith are in its object, not in its own inherent moral
excellence. It brings the believer into real and vital union
with God and Christ. The é&«catoovry Geov is the righteous-
ness of which God is the author but in faith we appropriate it
and God makes it ours. Man does not attain it by any act of
ppodsess, he receives it from God as a gift of grace. It is

od’s righteousness as coming from God ; it is man’s as being
imparted to him on condition of faith.—G: B. S.

6 Text, ‘‘the sign of circumcision, a seal,’
copies, howev er, and those of Matth. agree.
in fact, is paraphrased rather than quoted.

7 The meaning seems to be that the faithful Jews were
brought in as it were to the house of Abraham, and added to


etc. All our
The whole verse,


388


was justified and crowned while in uncircum-
cision, the Jews came in afterwards, Abraham
is then the father first of the uncircumcised,
which through faith appertain to him, and
then of those in the circumcision. For he is
a forefather of two lines. See you faith
lightening up? for till it came the patriarch
was not justified. See you the uncircum-
cision offering no hindrance? for he was
uncircumcised, yet was not hindered from
being justified. The circumcision therefore
is behind the faith. And why wonder that it
is behind the faith, when it is even behind the
uncircumcision. Nor is it behind faith only,
but very far inferior to it, even so far as the
sign is to the reality of which it is the sign ;
for instance, as the seal is to the soldier.
(See Hom. iii. on 2 Cor. at the end.) And
why, he says, did he want aseal then? He
did not want it himself. For what purpose
then did he receive it? With a view to his
being the father alike of them that believe in
uncircumcision and in circumcision. But
not of those in circumcision absolutely :
wherefore he goes on to say, “To them who
are not of the circumcision only.’ For if to
the uncircumcised, it is not in that he is
uncircumcised that he is their father, although
justified in uncircumcision ; but in that they
imitated his faith; much less is it owing to
circumcision that he is the forefather of those
in the state of circumcision, unless faith also
be added. For he says that the reason of
his receiving circumcision was that either of
us two parties might have him for a fore-
father, and that those in the uncircumcision
might not thrust aside those in the circum-
cision. See how the former had him for
their forefather first. Now if the circumcision
be of dignity owing to its preaching right-
eousness, the uncircumcision even hath no
small preéminence in having received it
before the circumcision. Then wilt thou be
able to have him as a forefather when thou
walkest in the steps of that faith, and art not
contentious, nor a causer of division in bring-
ing in the Law. What faith? tell me.

Ver. 12. ‘Which he had being yet uncir-
cumcised.”

Here again he lays low the lofty spirit of
the Jews by reminding them of the time of the
justification. And he well says, “the steps,”
that you as well as Abraham may believe in


the number of the faithful already existing as uncircumcised,
and children of Abraham by their faith. The reading of
Savile’s text, 7) kat TovTovs Tovs €v akpoBvoTia ExElvoLs TMpomEppLu-
évovs, meaas, ‘‘in that these too, that were in uncircumcision,
were added to them,”’ which is inconsistent with the context,
and is not noticed in the Ben. Edition. Possibly the passage
is still corrupt.

14 Mss. ‘‘and that neither those in circumcision might
thrust away the uncircumcised, nor the uncircumcised those
in circumcision.”


THE WORKS: OF ‘ST. CHRYVSOSTORE


[Homiry VIII.


the resurrection of bodies that are dead. For
he also displayed his faith upor this point.
And so if you reject the uncircumcision, be
informed for certain that the circumcision is
of no more.use unto you. For if you follow
not in the steps of his faith, though you were
ten thousand times in a state of circumcision,
you will not be Abraham’s offspring. For
even he received the circumcision for this
end, that the man in a state of uncircumcision
might not cast thee off. Do not then demand
this of him too.” For it was you whom the
thing was to be an assistance to, not he. But
he calls it a sign of the righteousness. And
this also was for thy sake, since now it is not
even this: for thou then wert in need of
bodily signs, but now there is no need of
them. ‘ And was it not possible,” one might
say, “‘from his faith to learn the goodness of
his soul?” Yes, it was possible but thou
stoodest in need of this addition also. For
since thou didst not imitate the goodness of
his soul, and wert not able to see it, a sensible
circumcision was given thee, that, after hav-
ing become accustomed to this of the body,
thou mightest by little and little be led on to
the true love of wisdom in the soul also, and
that having with much seriousness received it
as a very great privilege, thou mightest be
instructed to imitate and revere thine ances-
tor, This object then had God not only in
the circumcision, but in all the other rites.
the sacrifices, I mean, and the sabbath, and
feasts. Now that it was for thy sake that he
received the circumcision, learn from the
sequel. For after saying that he received a
sign anda seal, he gives the reason also as
follows. That he might be the father of the
circumcision—to those who received the spirit-
ual circumcision also, since if you have only
this (i. e. the carnal), no farther good will
come to you. For this is then a sign, when
the reality of which it is the sign is found with
thee, that is, faith ; since if thou have not this,
the sign to thee has no longer the power of a
sign, for what is it to be the sign of ? or what
the seal of, when there is nothing to be
sealed? much as if you were to show onea
purse with a seal to it, when there was noth-
ing laid up within. And so the circumcision
is ridiculous if there be no faith within. For
if it be asign of righteousness, but you have
not righteousness, then you have no sign
either, For the reason of your receiving a
sign was that you might seek diligently for
that reality whereof you have the sign: so
that if you had been sure of diligently seek-
ing thereafter without it, then you had not


i.e. *‘do not require him to be circumcised.’ See Rom.
MLVS 7) Galsevis ross ete:


Homity VIII]


RHE EPI LE UTO! THE ROMANS. 3


89


needed it. But this is not the only thing that
circumcision proclaims, namely righteousness,
but righteousness in even an uncircumcised
man. Circumcision then does but proclaim,
that there is no need of circumcision.

Ver. 14. “For if they which are of the
Law be heirs, faith is made void, and the
promise made of none effect.” *

He had shown that faith is necessary, that
it is older than circumcision, that it is more
mighty than the Law, that it establisheth the
Law. For if all sinned, it was necessary: if
one being uncircumcised was justified, it is
older: if the knowledge of sin is by the Law
and yet it was without the Law made evi-
dent,' it is more mighty: if it has testimony
borne to it by the Law, and establisheth the
Law, it is not opposed to it, but friendly and
allied to it. Again, he shows upon other
grounds too that it was not even possible by
the Law to attain to the inheritance, and
after having matched it with the circumcision,
and gained it the victory, he brings it besides
into contrast with the Law in these words,
“For if they which are of the Law be heirs,
faith is made void.” To prevent them any-
one from saying that one may have faith and
also keep up the Law, he shows this to be
impracticable. For he that clings to the Law,
as if of saving force, does disparagement to
faith’s power ; and so he says, “ faith is made
void,” that is, there is no need of salvation by
grace. For then it cannot show forth its own
proper power; “and the promise is made of
none effect.” This is because the Jew might
say, What need have I of faith? If then this
held, the things that were promised, would be
taken away along with faith. See how in all
points he combats with them from the early
times and from the Patriarch. For having
shown from thence that righteousness and
faith went together in the inheritance, he now
shows that the promise did likewise. For to
prevent the Jew from saying, What matters it
to me if Abraham was justified by faith?
Paul says, neither can what you are interested
with, the promise of the inheritance, come
into effect apart from it: which was what
scared them most. But what promise is he
speaking of? That of his. being “ the heir of


* According to vv. 14-17, the promise cannot be through the
law because that would annul faith and destroy the promise
entirely (14). The principle of law is gu¢d fro guo and on that
basis alone there is no room for faith and promise, Claim,
debt and reward, are the ideas which stand on the plane of law.
Justification by law would imply no act of trust, obedience or
Bene promise, but would be matter of reward simply.

ut since man is a Sinner, it is inconceivable that he be justi-
fied on this basis, and the gospel of a gracious salvation is the
only hope. To reject the latter is to exclude the possibility of
any salvation whatever. Only by clinging to the Gospel can
the Jew find any ground of hope in the ancient promises and
covenants.—G. B. S.

1 ji, e. as justifying. Rom. iii. 2r.


the world,” and that in him all should be
blessed. And how does he say that this
promise is made of none effect?

Ver. 15. ‘‘ Because the Law worketh wrath :
for where no Law is, there is no transgres-
sion.”

Now if it worketh wrath, and renders them
liable for transgression, it is plain that it
makes them so to a curse also. But they
that are liable under a curse, and _ punish-
ments, and transgression, are not worthy of
inheriting, but of being punished and rejected.
What then happens? faith comes, drawing on
it the grace, so that the promise comes into
effect. For where grace is, there is a remit-
ting, and where remitting is, there is no


punishment. Punishment then being re-
moved, and righteousness succeeding from
faith, there is no obstacle to our becoming
heirs of the promise.

Ver. 16. “Therefore it is of faith,” he says,
“that it might be by grace; to the end the
promise might be sure to all the seed.”

You see that it is not the Law only that
faith establisheth, but the promise of God also
that it will not allow to fall to the ground.
But the Law, on the other hand, by being
kept? to unseasonably, makes even the faith
of none effect, and hindereth the promise.
By this he shows that faith, so far from being
superfluous, is even necessary to that degree,
that without it there is no being saved. For
the Law worketh wrath, as all have trans-


gressed it. But this doth not even suffer
wrath to arise at all: for ‘“‘ where no Law is,”
he says, “there is no transgression.” Do
you see how he not only does away with sin
after it has existed, but does not even allow
it to be produced? And this is why he says
“by grace.” For what end? Not with a
view to their being put to shame, but to the
end that the promise might be sure to all the
seed. Here he lays down two blessings, both
that the things given are sure, and also that
they are to all the seed, so gathering in those
of the Gentiles, and showing that the Jews
are without, if they contend against the
faith. For this is a surer thing than that.
For faith doeth thee no hurt (be not conten-
tious), but even now thou art in danger from
the Law, it preserves thee. Next having said,
“to all the seed,” he defines what seed he
meaneth. That which is of faith, he says, so
blending with it* their relationship to the
Gentiles, and showing that they must not be
proud of Abraham who do not believe as he


2 These words are very important, as they show that the
Law was not held empty in itself, but at this time, i. e. since
Christianity.

3 Or perhaps “ fixing the relationship,”’ i. e. of Abraham to
| the Gentiles, cvvartwv.


390


THE WORKS: OF Si. CHRYSOsSieM:


{HomiLy VIII.


did. And see a third thing which faith
effected besides. It makes the relationship
tothat righteous man more definite (axpz Bearé-
pav), and holds him up as the ancestor of a
more numerous issue. And this is why he
does not say merely Abraham, but “our
father,” ours who believe. Then he also
seals what he has said by the testimony—

Ver! 17. “As it is written,” the’ says, **T
have made thee a father of many nations.”

Do you observe that this was ordered by
Providence from of old? What then, he
means, does He say this on account of the
Ishmaelites, or of the Amalekites, or of the
Hagarenes? This however, as he goes on
he proves more distinctly not to be said of
these. But as yet he presses forward to
another point, by which means he proves this
very thing by defining the mode of the rela-
tionship, and establishing it with a vast reach
of mind. What then does he say?

“ Before (or, answering to, xarévavr.) Him
Whom he believed, even God.”’

But his meaning is something of this sort,
as God is not the God of a part, but the
Father of all, so is he also. And again, as
God is a father not by way of the relation-
ship of nature, but by way of the affiance of
faith, so is he also, inasmuch as it is obedi-
ence that makes him father of us all. For
since they thought nothing of this relationship,
as clinging to that grosser one, he shows that
this is the truer relationship by lifting his dis-
course up to God. And along with this he
makes it plain that this was the reward of
faith that he received. Consequently, if it
were not so, and he were the father of all
the dwellers upon earth, the expression before
(or answering to) would be out of place, while
the gift of God would be curtailed. For the
“before,” is equivalent to ‘alike with.”
Since where is the marvel, pray, in a man’s
being the father of those sprung from himself ?
This is what is every man’s lot. But the
extraordinary thing is, that those whom by
nature he had not, them he received by the
gift of God. And so if thou wouldest believe
that the patriarch was honored, believe that
he is the father of all. But after saying,
“before Him Whom he believed, even God,”
he does not pause here, but goes on thus;
‘* Who quickeneth the dead, and calleth those
things which be not as though they were,”
so laying beforehand his foundations for dis-
coursing upon the resurrection. And it was
serviceable also to his present purpose. For
if He could “quicken the dead” and bring
in “those things that were not as though they
were,” then could He also make those who
were not born of him tobe his children. And


this is why he does not say, bringing in the
things which are not, but calling them, so show-
ing the greater ease of it. For as it is easy
to us to call the things which are by name, so
to Him it is easy, yea, and much easier to
give a subsistence to things that are not. But
after saying, that the gift of God was great
and unspeakable, and having discoursed con-
cerning His power, he shows farther that
Abraham’s faith was deserving of the gift,
that you may not suppose him to have been
honored without reason. And after raising
the attention of his hearers to prevent the
Jew from clamoring and making doubts, and
saying, “ And how is it possible for those whe
are not children to become children ?” he
passes on to speak of the patriarch, and
says,

Ver. 18. “ Who against hope believed in
hope, that he might become the father of many
nations, according to that which was spoken,
So shall thy seed be.”

How was it that he “believed in hope
againsthope?” It was against man’s hope,
in hope which is of God. “(For he is showing
the loftiness of the action, and leaving no
room for disbelieving what is said.) Things
which are contrary to one another, yet faith
blends them together. But if he were speak-
ing about such as were from Ishmael, this
language would be superfluous - for it was not
by faith but by nature that they were begotten.
But he bringeth Isaac also before us. For
it was not concerning those nations that he
believed, but concerning him who was to be
from his barren wife. If then it be a reward
to be father of many nations, it would be so
of those nations clearly of whom he so be-
lieved. For that you may know that he is
speaking of them, listen to what follows.

Ver. 19. “ And being not weak in faith, he
considered? his own body now dead.”

Do you see how he gives the obstacles, as
well as the high spirit of the righteous man
which surmounts all? “ Against hope,” he
says, was that which was promised: this is
the first obstacle. For Abraham had no other
person who had received a son in this way to
look to. They that were after him looked to
him, but he to no one, save to God only.
And this is why he said, “against hope.”
Then, “his body now dead.” This is a
second. And, “the deadness of Sarah’s
womb.” This is a third, aye and a fourth2
obstacle.

Ver. 20. “But he staggered not at the
promise of God through unbelief.”

For God neither gave any proof nor made


1 Nearly all Mss. omit *‘ not’’: as do the oldest of the N. T.
2 i. e. Sarah's personal barrenness, and her present age.


Homizy VIII.]


THE’ EPISTLE TO THE: ROMANS.


391


any sign, but there were only bare words
promising such things as nature did not hold
out any hopes of. Yet still he says, “he
staggered not.”’ He does not say, “ He did
not disbelieve,’ but, “He staggered not,”
that is, he neither doubted nor hesitated,
though the hindrances were so great. From
this we learn, that if God promise even count-
less impossibilities, and he that heareth doth
not receive them, it is not the nature of
things that is to blame, but the unreasonable-
ness of him who receiveth them not. ‘“ But
‘was strong in faith.” See the pertinacity of
Paul.’ For since this discourse was about
them that work and them that believe, he
shows that the believer works more than the
other, and requires more power, and great
strength, and sustains no common degree of
labor. For they counted faith worthless, as
having no labor in it. Insisting then upon
this, he shows that it is not only he that suc-
ceeds in temperance, or any other virtue of
this sort, but he that displays faith also who
requires even greater power, For as the one
needs strength to beat off the reasonings? of
intemperance, so hath the faithful also need
of a soul endued with power, that he may
thrust aside the suggestions of unbelief. How
then did he become “strong?” By trusting
the matter, he replies, to faith and not to
reasonings: else he had fallen. But how
came he to thrive in faith itself? By giving
glory to God, he says.

Ver. 21. “And being fully persuaded that
what He had promised, He was able also to
perform.”

Abstaining then from curious questionings
is glorifying God, as indulging in them is
transgressing. But if by entering into curious
questions, and searching out things below, we
fail to glorify Him, much more if we be over
curious in the matter of the Lord’s generation,
shall we suffer to the utmost for our insolence.
For if the type of the resurrection is not to be
‘searched into, much less those untterable and
awestriking subjects.* And he does not use
the word “believed” merely, but, “being
fully persuaded.” For such a thing is faith, it
is clearer than the demonstration by reasons,
and persuades more fully. For it is not pos-
sible for another reasoning succeeding to it to
shake* it afterwards. He indeed that is per-
suaded with words may have his persuasion


16 Mss. dtAoveckiav, Sav. didogodiav, 1 Ms, codiavy, which
makes better sense than the reading of Savile.

2 Aoytojovs. It may be used for imaginations, as by Maca-
‘rius: but perhaps St. Chrysostom is thinking of Arist. £72. vii.
iii. 9, 10.

3 Tertull. de Res. Carn. cap. xii. Yotus hic ordo revolubilis
rerum, etc.

4 Or, ‘‘ destroy ’’—écaddoar, for d:avadedoar. Savile’s read-
ing seems the most forcible, but the other makes good sense.


‘altered too by them. But he that stays him-


self upon faith, hath henceforward fortified his
hearing against words that may do hurt to it.
Having said then, that he was justified by
faith, he shows that he glorified God by that
faith; which is a thing specially belonging to
a good life. For, “Let your light so shine
before men, that they may see your good
works, and glorify your Father Which is in
heaven.” (Matt. v. 16.) But lo! this is
shown also to belong to faith! Again, as
works need power, so doth faith. For in their
case the body often shareth the toil, but in
the faith the well-doing belongeth to the soul
alone. And so the labor is greater, since it
has no one to share the struggles with it. Do
you observe how he shows that all that be-
longed to works attached to faith in a far
greater degree, as having whereof to glory
before God,—requiring power and labor,—
and again, glorifying God? And after saying,
that ‘‘ what He had promised, He is able also
to perform,” he seems to me to speak before-
hand of things to come. For it is not things
present merely that He promises, but also
things to come. For the present are a type
of the other. It is then a sign of a weak, lit-
tle, and pitiful mind not to believe. And so
when any make faith a charge against us, let
us make want of faith a charge against them
in return, as pitiful, and little-minded, and
foolish, and weak, and no better in disposition
than asses. For as believing belongs to a
lofty and high-bern soul, so disbelieving doth
to a most unreasonable and worthless one,
and such as is sunken drowsily (xarevyveyuévye)
into the senselessness of brutes. Therefore
having left these, let us imitate the Patriarch,
and glorify God as he gave Him glory. And
what does it mean, gave Him glory? He
held in mind His majesty, His boundless
power. And having formed a just conception
of Him, he was also “ fully persuaded” about
His promises.

Let us then also glorify Him by faith as
well as by works, that we may also attain to
the reward of being glorified by Him. ‘“ For
them that glorify Me, I will glorify” (1 Sam.
ii. 30), He says: and indeed, if there were
no reward, the very privilege of glorifying God
were itself a glory. For if men take a pride
in the mere fact of speaking eulogies of kings,
even if there be no other fruit of it; consider
how glorious it must be, that our Lord is glori-
fied by us: as again, how great a punishment
to cause Him to be by our means blasphemed.
And yet this very being glorified, He wisheth
to be brought about for our sakes, since He
doth not need it Himself. For what distance
dost thou suppose to be between God and


aoe


THE: WORKS/(OE ST. “CHEMSOSTOM:


[HomILy VIII.


man? as great as that between men and
worms? or as great as between Angels and
worms? But when I have mentioned a dis-
tance even thus great, I have not at all ex-
pressed it: since to express its greatness is
impossible. Would you, now, wish to have
a great and marked reputation among worms?
Surely not. If then thou that lovest glory,
wouldest not wish for this, how should He
Who is far removed from this passion, and so
much farther above us, stand in. need of glory
from thee? Nevertheless, free from the
want of it as He is, still He saith that. He


desireth it’ for iithy psake.y Mor, sb) He: .en-
dured for thy sake to become a slave,
why. wonders that) ley supon)/ ithe) same


ground layeth claim to the other particulars
also? For He counts nothing unworthy of
Himself which may be conducive to our salva-
tion. Since then we aware of this, let us
shun sin altogether, because by reason of it
He is blasphemed. For it says, “flee from
sin, as from the face of a serpent: if thou
comest too near unto it, it will bite thee”
(Ecclus. xxi. 2): for it is not it that comes to
us, but we that desert to it. God has so
ordered things that the Devil should not
prevail over us by compulsion (Gr. tyranny) :
since else none would have stood against his
might. And on this account He set him a
distant abode, as a kind of robber and tyrant.!
And unless he find a person unarmed and
solitary for his assaults, he doth not venture
to attack him. Except he see us travelling by
the desert,* he has not the courage to come
near us. But the desert and place of the
Devil is nothing else than sin. We then have
need of the shield of faith, the helmet of sal-
vation, the sword of the Spirit, not only that
we may not get evil intreated, but that ever
should he be minded to leap? upon us, we
may cut off his head. Need we have of con-
tinual prayer that he may be bruised under our
feet, for he is shameless and full of hardihood,
and this though he fights from beneath.
yet even so he gets the victory: and the rea-
son is, that we are not earnestly set upon
being above his blows. For he has not even
the power to lift himself very high, but he
trails along upon the ground. And of this the
serpent is a type. But if God set him in that
rank from the beginning, much more will He
now. But if thou dost not know what fighting


1 Tyrant was the name given to any rebel who set himself
up for Emperor.

2 See St. Chrys. on Matt. iv. 1; Hom.13 in St. Matt. p. 174
O. T., and the Catena Aurea on tne same place, Oxf. Trans.
p. 117, etc. Being alone is represented as always exposing us
to temptation, though it is sometimes done for holy purposes,
and for greater victory.

3 Alluding perhaps to the sons of Sceva, and then to Go-
liath.


‘choir of the Disciples.
But |


from beneath may be, I also will try to explain
to thee the manner of this war. What then
may this fighting “from beneath ” (John viii.
23) be? It is standing upon the lower things
of the world to buffet us, such as pleasure and
riches and all the goods of this life. And for
this reason, whoever he seeth flying toward
heaven, first, he will not even be able to leap.
so far. Secondly, even if he should attempt
he will speedily fall. For he hath no feet ; be’
not afraid: he hath no wings; fear not. He
trails upon the earth, and the things of the
earth. Do thou then have naught in common
with the earth, and thou wilt not need labor
even. For he hath not any knowledge of open
fight : but as a serpent he hideth him in the
thorns, nestling evermore in the “ deceitful-
ness.-of \riches.”. .( Matt, .xilis, 22.)a Ace
thou wert to cut away the thorns, he will
easily be put to flight, being detected: 4 and
if thou knowest how to charm him with the
inspired charms he will straightway be struck.
For we have, we surely have, spiritual charms,
even the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ and
the might of the Cross. This charm will not
only bring the serpent out of his lurking
places, and cast him into the fire (Acts
XXvill. 5), but even wounds it healeth. But if
some that have said this Name have not been
healed, it came of their own little faith, and
was not owing to any weakness in what they
said. For some did throng Jesus and press.
Him (Luke viii. 44, 45), and got no good
therefrom. But the woman with an issue,
without even touching His Body, but merely
the hem of His garment, stanched a flux of
blood of so long standing. (So St. Aug.
perm. LAI... i. 445 pee, see i
Name is fearful alike to devils, and to pas-
sions, and to diseases. In this then let us find
a pleasure, herewith let us fortify ourselves.
It was thus Paul waxed great, and yet he was
of the like nature with ourselves, so the whole
But faith had made
him a perfectly different person, and so much
did it abound in them, that even their gar-
ments had) great, force, (ets. samme)
What excuse then shall we deserve, if even the
shadows and the garments of those men drave:
off death (Acts v. 15), but our very prayers
do not so much as bring the passions down ?
What is the reason® of it? Our temper is
widely different. For what nature gives, is as
much ours as theirs. For he was born and
brought up just as we are, and dwelt upon the
earth and breathed the air, as we do. But im
other points he was far greater and better


4 Sav. mar. and 5 Mss. dyAos: Vulg. SevAos a coward.
5 Compare Bp. Taylor, Worthy Communicant, Sect. iv. 10
t. XV. p. 480.


Homity VIII.] THE


Pode EO} TERE ROLANS.


+


Pe)


93


in faith, and love. Let
us then imitate him. Let us allow Christ to
speak through us. He desireth it more than
we do: and by reason of this, He prepared
this instrument, and would not have it remain
useless and idle, but wisheth to keep it ever
in hand. Why then dost thou not make it
serviceable for the Maker’s hand, but lettest
it become unstrung, and makest it relaxed
through luxury, and unfittest the whole harp
for His use, when thou oughtest to keep the
members’? of it in full stretch, and well strung,
and braced with spiritual salt.* For if Christ
see our soul thus attuned, He will send forth
His sounds even by it. And when this taketh
place, then shalt thou see Angels leaping for
joy, (cxpravrac) and Archangels too, and the
Cherubim.
His spotless hands. Let us
strike even upon our heart. For He rather
needeth not any inviting. Only make it
worthy of that touch, and He will be foremost
in running unto thee. For if in consideration
of their attainments not yet reached, He run-
neth to them (for when Paul was not yet so
advanced He yet framed that praise for him)
when He seeth one fully furnished, what is
there that He will not do? But if Christ
shall sound forth and the Spirit shall indeed
light upon us, and we shall be better than the
heaven, having not the sun and the moon fixed
in our body, but the Lord of both sun and
moon and angels dwelling in us and walking
inus. And this say, not that we may raise
the dead, or cleanse the lepers, but that we
may show forth what is a greater miracle than
all these—charity. For wheresoever this
glorious thing shall be there the Son taketh up
His abode along with the Father, and the
grace of the Spirit frequenteth. For ‘“ where
two or three are gathered together in My
Name,” it says, “there am I in the midst of
them.” (Matt. xviii. 20.) Now this is for
great affection, and for those that are very
intimate friends, to have those whom they
love on either side of them. Who then, he
means, is so wretched as not to wish to have
Christ in the midst? We that are at variance
with one another! And haply some one may
ridicule me and ask, What is it that you
mean? JDo you not see that we are all within
the same walls, and under the same enclosure
of the Church, standing under the same fold
with unanimity; that no one fighteth, that we
be under the same shepherd, crying aloud
in common, listening in common to what is
being said, sending up our prayers in common,


than we are, in zeal,


invite Him to


1 Or tunes, the word is ambiguous in the original.
? The substance used was probably not salt, but something
possessing astringent properties.


Let us then become worthy of |


| ceedingly


—and yet méntion fighting and variance?
Fighting I do mention, and I am not mad nor
out of my sober mind. For I see what I see,
and know that we are under the same fold, and
the same shepherd. Yet for this cause I make
the greater lamentation, because, though
there are so many circumstances to draw us
together, we are at variance. And what sedi-
tion, it will be said, see you here? Here truly
I see none. But when we have broken up,
such an one accuses such another, an-
other is openly insulting, another grudges,
another is fraudulent, and_ rapacious,
and violent, another indulges in unlaw-
ful love, another frames countless schemes
of deceit. And if it were possible to open
your souls, then ye would see all things dis-
tinctly, and know that I am not mad. Do
you not see in a camp, that when it is peace,
men lay down their arms and cross over un-
armed and undefended into the camp of the
enemy, but when they are protected with
arms, and with guards and outposts, the
nights are spent in watching, and the fires are
kept continually burning, this state of things is
no longer peace but war? Now this is what
may be seen among us. For we are on our
guard against one another, and fear one an-
other and talk each of us into his neighbor’s
ear. And if we see any one else present, we
hold our peace, and draw in all we were go-
ing to say. And this is not like men that fee}
confidence, but like those that are strictly on
their guard. ‘“ But these things we do (some
one may say,) not to do wrong, but to escape
having it done us.” Yea, for this I grieve,
that living as we do among brethren, we need
be on our guard against having wrong done
us; and we light up so many fires, and set
guards and out-posts! The reason is the
prevalence of falsehood, the prevalence of
craft, the prevailing secession of charity, and
war without truce. By this means one may
find men that feel more confidence in Gentiles
(Greeks) than in Christians. And yet, how
ashamed we ought to be of this; how we
ought to weep and bewail atit! “What then,
some may say, is to become of me? such and
such an one is of ungainly temper, and
vexatious.” Where then is your religion
(Gr. philosophy )? where are the laws of the
Apostles, which bid us bear one another’s
burdens? (Gal. vi. 2.) For if you have no
notion of dealing well by your brother, when
are you to be able to do so by astranger? If
you have not learnt how to treat a member of
your own self, when are you likely to draw to
you any from without, and to knit him to your-
self? But how am I to feel? I am vexed ex-
almost to tears, for I could have


72


_<


304 THE WORKS? GE


ST. CHRYSOSTOM. [HomiLy VIII.


sent forth large fountains from mine eyes
(Jer. ix. 1), as that Prophet says, seeing as I
do countless enemies upon the plain more
galling than those he saw. For he said, upon
seeing the aliens coming against them, ‘“ My
bowels! Iam pained at my bowels.” (ib.
iv. 19.) But when I see men arrayed under one
leader, yet standing against one another, and
biting and tearing their own members, some for
money’s sake, and some for glory’s, and others
quite at random ridiculing and mocking and
wounding one another in countless ways, and
corpses too worse treated than those in war,
and that it is but the bare name of the
brethren that is now left, myself feel my ina-
bility to devise any lament fitting such a
catastrophe as this! Reverence now, oh
reverence, this Table whereof we all are
partakers! (1 Cor. x. 16-18.) Christ, Who
was slain for us, the Victim that is placed
thereon! (Heb. xiii. 10.) Robbers when
they once partake of salt, cease to be robbers
in regard to those with whom they have par-
taken thereof; that table changes their dis-
positions, and men fiercer than wild beasts it
makes gentler than lambs. But we though
partakers of such a Table, and sharers of such
food as that, arm ourselves against one
another, when we ought to arm against him
who is carrying on a war against ail of us, the
devil. Yet this is why we grow weaker and
he stronger every day. For we do not join to
form in defence against him, but along with
him we stand against each other, and use him
as a commander for such hostile arrays, when
itis he alone that we ought to be fighting
with. But now letting him pass, we bend the
bow against our brethren only. What bows,
you will say? Those of the tongue and the
mouth. For it is not javelins and darts only,
but words too, keener far than darts, that
inflict wounds. And how shall we be able to
bring this war to an issue? one will ask. If
thou perceivest that when thou speakest ill
of thy brother, thou art casting up mire out
of thy mouth, if thou preceivest that it is a
member of Christ that thou art slandering,
that thou art eating up thine own flesh (Ps.
Xxvil. 2), that thou art making the judg-
ment set for thee more bitter (fearful and
uncorrupt as it is), that the shaft is killing
not him that is smitten, but thyself that
shot it forth. But he did you some wrong,
may be, and injured you? Groan at it, and
do not rail. Weep, not for the wrong done
thee, but for his perdition, as thy Master
also wept at Judas, not because Himself
was to be crucified, but because he was a
traitor. Has he insulted thee and abused
thee? Beseech God for him, that He may


speedily become appeased toward him. He
is thy brother, he is a member of thee, the
the fruit of the same pangs as thyself, he
has been invited to the same Table. But
he only makes fresh assaults upon me, it
may be said. Then is thy reward all the
greater for this. On this ground then there
is the best reason for abating one’s anger,
since it is a mortal wound that he has re-
ceived, since the devil hath wounded him.
Do not thou then give a further blow, nor
cast thyself down together with him. For
so long as thou standest thou hast the means
of saving him also. But if thou dash thyself
down by insulting deeds in return, who is then
to lift you both up? Will he that is wounded ?
Nay, for he cannot, now that he is down.
But wilt thou that art fallen along with him?
And how shalt thou, that couldest not sup-
port thine own self, be able to lend a hand
to another? Stand therefore now nobly, and
setting thy shield before thee, and draw him,
now he is dead, away from the battle by thy
long-suffering. Rage hath wounded him, do
not thou also wound him, but cast out even
that first shaft. For if we associate with each
other on such terms, we shall soon all of us
become healthful. But if we arm ourselves
against one another, there will be no farther
need even of the devil to our ruin. For all
war is an evil, and civil war especially. But
this is a sorer evil than even a civil one, as
our mutual rights are greater than those of
citizenship, yea, than of kindred itself. Of
old, Abel’s brother slew him and shed the
blood of his kinsman. But this murder is
more lawless than that, in that the rights of
kinsmanship are greater, and the death a sorer
evil. For he wounded the body, but thou
hast whetted thy sword against the soul.
‘“* But thou didst first suffer ill.”’ Yes, but it
is not suffering ill, but doing it, that is really
suffering ill. Now consider; Cain was the
slayer, Abel was the slain. Who then was the
dead? He that after death crieth, (for He
saith, “The voice of thy brother’s blood
crieth to Me,’’) (Gen. iv. ro), or he who
while he lived was yet trembling and in fear?
He was, assuredly he was, more an object of
pity than any dead man. Seest thou how to
be wronged is better, though a man come even
to be murdered ? learn that to wrong is worse,
though a man should be strong enough even
to kill. He smote and cast down his brother,
yet the latter was crowned, the former was
punished. Abel was made away with and
slain wrongfully, but he even when dead
accused (comp. John v. 45), and convicted
and overcame: the other, though alive, was
speechless, and was ashamed, and was con-


a


Homity IX.]


foie EES - TO THE“ROMANS.


95


victed, and effected the opposite of what he
intended. For he made away with him be-
cause he saw him beloved, expecting to cast
him out of the love also. Yet he did but make
the love more intense, and God sought him
more when dead, saying, “ Where is thy brother
Abel?” (Gen. iv. 9.) For thou hast not
extinguished the desire towards him by thine
envy, but hast kindled it up the more. Thou
hast not lessened his honor by slaying him,
but hast made it the more ample. Yet before
this God had even made him subject to thee,
whereas since thou hast slain him, even when
dead, he will take vengeance upon thee. So
great was my love towards him. Who then
was the condemned person, the punisher or
the punished? He that enjoyed so great!
honor from God, or he that was given up to a!


certain novel ‘and unexpected punishment ?
Thou didst not fear him (he would say) while
alive, thou shalt fear him therefore when dead.
Thou didst not tremble when on the point of
thrusting with the sword. Thou shalt be
seized, now the blood is shed, with a continual
trembling, While alive he was thy servant,
and thou showedst no forbearance to him.
For this reason, now he is dead, he hath be-
come a master thou shalt be afraid of.
Thinking then upon these things, beloved, let
us flee from envy, let us extinguish malice, let
us recompense one another with charity, that
we may reap the blessings rising from it, both
in the present life and the life which is to
come, by the grace and love toward man, etc.
Amen.


PIO MIL Y,. 1x.


ROM. IV.


“ Now it was not written for his sake alone, that it |
was imputed to him for righteousness; but for us |
also, to whom it shall be imputed, if we believe on |
Him that raised up Jesus our Lord from the dead.”


AFTER saying many great things of Abra-|
ham, and his faith, and righteousness, and
honor before God, lest the hearer should say,
What is this to us, for it is he that was justi-
fied? he places us close to the Patriarch
again. So great is the power of spiritual
words. For of one of the Gentiles, one who
was recently come near, one who had done
no work, he not only says that he is in nothing
inferior to the Jew who believes (i.e. asa
Jew), but not even to the Patriarch, but
rather, if one must give utterance to the won-
drous truth, even much greater. Forso noble
is our birth, that his faith is but the type
of ours. And he does not say, If it was reck-
oned unto him, it is probable it will be also
to us, that he might not make it matter of
syllogism. But he speaks in authentic words
of the divine law, and makes the whole a
declaration of the Scripture. For why was it
written, he says, save to make us see that we
also were justified in this way? For it is the
same God Whom we have believed, and upon
the same matters, if it be not in the case of
the same persons. And after speaking of our
faith, he also mentions God’s unspeakable |
love towards man, which he ever presents on}
all sides, bringing the Cross before us. And
this he now makes plain by saying,


2


Ver. 25. “Who was delivered for our
offences, and was raised again for our justifi-
cation.”

See how after mentioning the cause of His
death, he makes the same cause likewise a
demonstration of the resurrection. For why,
he means, was He crucified? Not for any
sin of His own. And this is plain from the
Resurrection. For if He were a sinner, how
should He have risen? But if He rose, it is
quite plain that He was not a sinner. But}
if He was not a sinner, how came He to be
crucified ?—For others,—and if for others,
then surely he rose again. Now to prevent
your saying, How, when liable for so great
sins, came we to be justified? he points out
One that blotteth out all sins, that both from
Abraham’s faith, whereby he was justified,
and from the Saviour’s Passion, whereby we
were freed from our sins, he might confirm
what he had said. And after mentioning His
Death, he speaks also of His Resurrection.
For the purpose of His dying was not that
He might hold us liable to punishment and in
condemnation, but that He might do good
unto us. For for this cause He both died and
rose-again, that He might make us right-


} cous,


Chap. v. ver. 1. “ Therefore being justi-


1 If a fresh argument commences here, there is no vicious
circle. For there was independent proof of each proposition,
and so, when shown to involve one another, they were mutu-
ally confirmed.


390


THE WORKS OF (ST: "CHRYSOSTOR:


[Homity IX.


fied by faith, let us’* have peace with God
through our Lord Jesus Christ.”

What does “ Let us have peace” mean?
Some say, ‘* Let us not be at variance, through
a peevish obstinacy for bringing in the Law.”
But to me he seems to be speaking now of
our conversation. For after having said
much on the subject of faith, he had set it
before righteousness which is by works, to
prevent any one from supposing what he said
was a ground for listlessness, he says, “let us
have peace,” that is, let us sin no more, nor
go back to our former estate. For this is
making war with God. And “how is it pos-
sible,” saith one, “to sin no more?” How?
was the former thing possible? For if when
liable for so many sins we were freed from all
by Christ, much more shall we be able
through Him to abide in the estate wherein
we are. For it is not the same thing to
receive peace when there had been none, and
to keep it when it has been given, since to
acquire surely is harder than to keep. Yet
nevertheless the more difficult hath been
made easy, and carried out into effect. That
which is the easier thing then will be what we
shall easily succeed in, if we cling to Him
who hath wrought even the other for us. But
here it is not the easiness only which he
seems to me to hint at, but the reasonable-
ness. For if He reconciled us when we were
in open war with Him, it is reasonable that
we should abide in a state of reconciliation,’
and give unto Him this reward for that He
may not seem to have reconciled untoward
and unfeeling creatures to the Father.

Ver. 2. ‘* By Whom also we have access,”
he says, “ by faith unto this grace. (7 Mss.
add, unto, etc.)

If then He hath brought us near to Him-
self, when we were far off, much more will
He keep us now that we are near. And let
me beg you to consider how he everywhere


sets down these two points; His part, and


1 So nearly all Mss. here; and there is good authority for
the reading in the text of the N. T. both from Mss., versions,
and Fathers. It is accepted by Tregelles: Tischendorf re-
tains the received text ‘‘ we have.”

* The text of Chrys. adds confirmation to the strongly
attested €ywuev (sco N A. B D.) as against the reading
(€xouev) of the T. R. Strong and clear as is the external evi-
dence here, it is to me very doubtful whether it is not over-
borne by the internal evidence. There seems to be no appro-
priateness in an exhortation here. The thought has_ been
developed in a didactic form thus far and we should now
expect a didactic conclusion (ovv). Nor should we expect an
exhortation to have peace with God which would be the nat-
ural consequence of justification and scarcely the proper object
of an exhortation. De Wette, Meyer, Godet and Weiss reject
the better authenticated reading €xwpev on these grounds. It
is difficult to see how Chrys. can think that the Apostle is here
treating of our ‘‘ Conversation ’’—when he proceeds at once to
enumerate the new eomrols patience and hope which follow
from justification.—G. B.S.

2 3 Mss. If thou wilt consider how, etc.

3 Or perhaps ‘‘by the terms of reconciliation, ’ for so the
text may be understood. The reading in Savile’s margin, tots
xatadAayetor, seems also to bear the same sense.


our part. On His part, however, there be
things varied and numerous and diverse.
For He died for us, and farther reconciled
us, and brought us to Himself, and gave us
grace unspeakable. But we brought faith
only as our contribution. And so he says,”
“by faith, unto this grace.” What grace is
this? tell me. It is the being counted worthy
of the knowledge of God, the being forced
from error, the coming to a knowledge of the
Truth, the obtaining of ail the blessings that
come through Baptism. For the end of His
bringing us near was that we might receive
these gifts. For it was not only that we might
have simple remission of sins, that we were
reconciled; but that we might receive also
countless benefits. Nor did He even pause
at these, but promised others, namely, those
unutterable blessings that pass understanding
alike and language. And this is why he has
set them both down also. For by mentioning
grace he clearly points at what we have at
present received, but by saying, “And we
rejoice in hope of the glory of God,” he un-
veils the whole of things to come. And he
had well said, ‘‘ wherein also we stand.” For
this is the nature of God’s grace. It hath no
end, it knows no bound, but evermore is on
the advance to greater things, which in human
things is not the case. Take an instance of
what I mean. A person has acquired rule
and glory and authority, yet he does not stand
therein continuously, but is speedily cast out
of it. Or if man take it not from him, death
comes, and is sure to take it from him. But
God’s gifts are not of this kind; for neither
man, nor occasion, nor crisis of affairs, nor
even the Devil, nor death, can come and cast
us out of them. But when we are dead we
then more strictly speaking have possession
of them, and keep going on enjoying more
and more. And so if thou feelin doubt about
those to come; from those now present, and
what thou hast already received, believe in
the otheralso. For this is why he says, ‘‘ And
we rejoice (kavyouefa) in hope of the glory of
God,” that you may learn, what kind of soul
the faithful ought to have. For it is not only
for what hath been given, but for what is to
be given, that we ought to be filled with con-
fidingness, as though it were already given.
For one “ rejoices’ in what is already given.
Since then the hope of things to come is even
as sure and clear as that of what is given, he
says that in that too we in like manner “re-
joice.” For this cause also he called them
glory. For if it contributeth unto God’s
glory, come to pass it certainly will, though it
do not for our sakes, yet for Him it will.
And why am I saying (he means) that the


Homity 1X.]


blessings to come are worthy of being gloried
in (kavyjoewe) ? Why even the very evils of
this time present are able to brighten up our
countenances, and make us find in them even
our repose. Wherefore also he added,

Ver. 3. “ And not only so, but we glory in
tribulations also.”

Now, consider how great the things to
come are, when éven at things that seem to be
distressful we can be elated; so great is
God’s gift, and such a nothing any distasteful-
ness in them! For in the case of external
goods, the struggle for them brings trouble
and pain and irksomeness along with it; and
it is the crowns and rewards that carry the
pleasure with them. But in this case it is not
so, for the wrestlings have to us no less relish
than the rewards. For since there were sun-
dry temptations in those days, and the king-
dom existed in hopes, the terrors were at
hand, but the good things in expectation, and
this unnerved the feebler sort, even before the
crowns he gives them the prize now, by say-
ing that we should “glory even in tribula-
tions.” And what he says is not “you should
glory,” but we glory, giving them encourage-
ment in his own person. Next since what he
had said had an appearance of being strange
and paradoxical, if a person who is struggling
in famine, and is in chains and torments, and
insulted, and abused, ought to glory, he next
goes on to confirm it. And (what is more),
he says they are worthy of being gloried in,
not only for the sake of those things to come,
but for the things present in themselves.
For tribulations are in their own selves a
goodly thing. How so? It is because they
anoint us unto patient abiding. Wherefore
after saying we glory in tribulations, he has
added the reason, in these words, “ Knowing
that tribulation worketh patience.”’ Notice
again the argumentative spirit of Paul, how he
gives their argument an opposite turn. For
since it was tribulations above all that made
them give up the hopes of things to come, and
which cast them into despondency, he says that
these are the very reasons for confidingness,
and for not desponding about the things to
come, for “tribulation,” he says, “ worketh
patience.”

Ver. 4, 5. “And patience experience, and
experience hope; and hope maketh not
ashamed.” *


* The word rendered ‘‘ patience,’’ (vrowovn) means rather
patient endurance, constancy. It is active rather than
passive in meaning. Then the endurance which is developed
under tribulation helps to form a tried, tested character,
Aoxtuy means a tested state—approved character. The R. V.
renders ‘‘ probation,”’ which is more nearly correct than ‘‘ex-
perience’’(A. V.). We have no word which makes a felicitous
translation. The meaning is that steadfastness under trials
develops a tested moral manhood, and this kind of character


THE ORPIS@LE, 'TO“THE” ROMANS,


397


Tribulations, that is, are so far from con-
futing these hopes, that they even prove them.
For before the things to come are realized,
there is a very great fruit which tribulation
hath—patience ;} and the making of the man
that is tried, experienced. And it contributes
in some degree too to the things to come,? for
it gives hope a vigor within us, since there is
nothing that so inclines a man to hope for
blessings as a good conscience. Now no man
that has lived an upright life is unconfiding
about things to come, as of those who have
been negligent there are many that, feeling the
burden of a bad conscience, wish there were
neither judgment nor retribution. What then ?
do our goods lie in hopes? Yes, in hopes—
but not mere human hopes, which often slip
away, and put him that hoped to shame; when
some one, who was expected to patronize
him, dies, or is altered though he lives. No
such lot is ours; our hope is sure and unmove-
able. For He Who hath made the promise
ever liveth, and we that are to be the enjoyers
of it, even should we die, shall rise again, and
there is absolutely nothing which can put us to
shame, as having been elated at random, and
to no purpose, upon unsound hopes. Having
then sufficiently cleared them of all doubtful-
ness by these words of his, he does not let his
discourse pause at the time present, but urges
again the time to come, knowing that there
were men of weaker character, who looked too
for present advantages, and were not satisfied
with these mentioned. And so he offers a
proof for them in blessings already given.
For lest any should say, But what if God be
unwilling to give them to us? For that He
can, and that He abideth and liveth, we all


begets hope; it takes away fear for what the future may bring.
—G.B.S


1 We do not see what use patience will be of in a future
state, cf. Butler’s Azad. part i. c. v. § 4.

2 That such is the power of conscience even in a heathen is
plain from Plato, Rep. 1. § 5. Steph. p. 350. e. ““For you
must know, Socrates,’ said he, ‘that when a man is near the
time when he must expect to die, there comes into his mind a
fear and anxiety about things that were never so thought of
before. For the stories that are told of things in Hades, how
aman that has done wrong here must satisfy justice for it
there, which have hitherto been laughed at, come then to per-
plex his soul with alarms that they may be true. And even of
himself, whether from the infirmity of age, or in that he is in
a manner already nearer to that state, he sees somewhat more
of it. However it be, he becomes full of suspicion and alarm ;
and takes account and considers whether he has at all wronged
any one. And then a man who finds a number of guilty ac-
tions in his life is often roused by alarm from his sleep, like
children, and lives ever in expectation of misery. But one
who is conscious in himself of no wrong has a pleasing hope
ever with him, as the kind nurse of his old age, as Pindar too
savs. For beautifully indeed, Socrates, has he expressed this,
that whoever has passed his life in justice and holiness,


Sweet Hope, best helpmate of the heart,
With cheerful tenderness,
Soothes his declining years.
She whom we mortals trust
In many an anxious doubt
To sway life’s wavering helm.


Well said indeed! one wonders to think how well,”’ etc.


398


THE, WORKS ‘OF ST. “CHERYSOSTOM:


{Homiry IX.


know: but how do we know, that He is will-
ing, also, to do it? From the things which
have been done already. ‘“ What things
done?” The Love which He hath shown for
us. In doing what ? some may say, In giv-
ing the Holy Ghost. Wherefore after saying
“hope maketh not ashamed,” he goes on to
the proof of this, as follows :

“Because the love of God is,’ he does not
say “ given,” but “ shed abroad in our hearts,”
so showing the profusion of it. That gift
then, which is the greatest possible, He hath
given; not heaven and earth and sea, but what
is more precious than any of these, and hath
rendered us Angels from being men, yea sons
of God, and brethren of Christ. But what is
this gift? The Holy Spirit. Now had He
not been willing to present us after our labors
with great crowns, He would never have given
us such mighty gifts before our labors. But
now the warmth of His Love is hence made
apparent, that it is not gradually and little by
little that He honors us; but He hath shed
abroad the full fountain of His blessings, and
this too before our struggles. And so, if thou
art not exceedingly worthy, despond not, since
thou hast that Love of thy Judge as a mighty
pleader for thee. For this is why he himself
by saying, “‘hope maketh not ashamed,” has
ascribed everything not to our well-doings, but
to God’s love. But after mentioning the gift
of the Spirit, he again passes to the Cross,
speaking as follows:

Ver. 6-8. “For while we were yet without
strength, Christ in due time died for the un-


godly. For scarcely for a righteous man will
one die: yet pervadenture for a good man


some would even dare to die.* But God com-
mendeth His love towards us.”

Now what he is saying is somewhat of this
kind. For if for a virtuous man, no one
would hastily choose to die, consider thy
Master’s love, when it is not for virtuous men,
but for sinners and enemies that He is seen to
have been crucified—which he says too after
this, ‘In that, if when we were sinners Christ
died for us,”

Ver. 9, 10. “ Much more then, being now
justified by His Blood, we shall be saved from
wrath through Him. For if, when we were


* Meyer and Weiss make no distinction between é:caiov
and ayafov here. Most have held (I think, rightly) that the
latter expresses more than the former. It comprehends those
qualities of benevolence, kindness, etc., which may be consid-
ered as the peculiar bonds of friendship and would lead to the
greatest sacritices. Hofman, Godet and Weiss (following
Jerome) take tod aya@od as neuter. J. Miiller supposes it to
refer to God. The force of the argument is: For an up-
right man one would hardly be moved to die, but in the case
of a benefactor to whom one owed much, the motives of love
and pity might move one strongly enough to lead him to
summon up the resolution (roAma) to die, but this would be the
highest and a very improbable reach of human love. But
Christ died for his exemzzes, etc.—G. B. S.


enemies, we were reconciled to God by the
death of His Son, much more, being recon-
ciled, we shall be saved by His life.”

And what he has said looks indeed like tau-
tology, but it is not to any one who accurately
attends to it. Consider then. He wishes to
give them reasons for confidence respecting
things to come. And first he gives them a
sense of shame from the rigfteous man’s de-
cision, when he says, that he also “ was fully
persuaded that what God had promised He
was able also to perform;” and next from the
grace that was given; then from the tribuia-
tion, as sufficing to lead us into hopes; and
again from the Spirit, whom we have received.
Next from death, and from our former vicious-
ness, he maketh this good. And it seems in-
deed, as I said, that what he had mentioned
was one thing, but it is discovered to be two,
three, and even many more. _ First, that “ He
died : ” second, that it was “‘ for the ungodly ; ”
third, that He “reconciled, saved, justified ”
us, made us immortal, made us sons and heirs.
It is not from His Death then only, he says,
that we draw strong assertions, but from the
gift which was given unto us through His
Death. And indeed if He had died only for
such creatures as we be, a proof of the great-
est love would what He had done be! but
when He is seen at once dying, and yielding
usa gift, and that such a gift, and to such
creatures, what was done casts into shade our
highest conceptions, and leads the very dullest
on to faith. For there is no one else that will
save us, except He Who so loved us when
we were sinners, as even to give Himself up
for us. Do you see what a ground this topic
affords for hope? For before this there were
two difficulties in the way of our being saved;
our being sinners, and our salvation requiring
the Lord’s Death, a thing which was quite in-
credible before it took place, and required
exceeding love for it to take place. But
now since this hath come about, the other
requisites are easier. For we have become
friends, and there is no further need of Death.
Shall then He who hath so spared his ene-
mies as not to spare His Son, fail to defend
them now they are become friends, when He
hath no longer any need to give up his Son ?
For it is either because a person does not
wish it, or because though he may wish it per-
haps,’ yet he is unable to do it, that he does
not save. Now none of these things can be
said of God. For that He is willing is plain
from His having given up His Son.? But that
He is able also is the very thing He proved


1 rodAakus, Heind. ad Plat. Phed. p. 140, § 12.

2 So Field, from one Ms. and Brixius’ version: the old read-
ing could only mean ‘t Now none of these things can be said of
God, considering He hath given up.”’


HomIi_y IX.|


likewise, from the very fact of His having
justified men who were sinners. What is there
then to prevent us any more from obtaining
the things tocome? Nothing! ‘Then again,
lest upon hearing of sinners, and enemies, and
strengthless ones, and ungodly, thou shouldest
be inclined to feel abashed and blush; hear
what he says.

Ver. 11. “ And not only so, but we also
joy in God through our Lord Jesus Christ,
by Whom we have now received the atone-
ment.”

What meaneth the “not only so?” Not only
were we saved, he means, but we even glory!
for this very reason, for which some suppose
we ought to hide our faces. For, for us who
lived in so great wickedness to be saved, was
a very great mark of our being exceedingly
beloved by Him that saved us. For it was
not by angels or archangels, but by His Only-
begotten Son Himself, that He saved us.
And so the fact of His saving us, and saving
us too when we were in such plight, and do-
ing it by means of His Only-begotten, and
not merely by His Only-begotten, but by His
Blood, weaves for us endless crowns to glory
in. For there is not anything that counts so
much in the way of glory and confidence, as
the being treated as friends (@:Aeic#ar) by God,
and finding a Friend (dew) in Him that
loveth (ayar@vra) us. This it is that maketh
the angels glorious, and the principalities and
powers. This is greater than the Kingdom,
and so Paul placed it above the Kingdom.
For this also I count the incorporeal powers
blessed, because they love Him, and in all
things obey Him. And on this score the
Prophet also expressed his admiration at
them. ‘ Ye that excel in strength, that fulfil
His Word.” (Ps. ciii. 20.) And hence too
Isaiah extolleth the Seraphim, setting forth
their great excellency from their standing
near that glory, which is a sign of the greatest
love.

Let us then emulate the powers above, and
be desirous not only of standing near the
throne, but of having Him dwelling in us who
sitteth upon the Throne. He loved us when
we hated Him, and also continueth to love us.
“For He maketh His sun to rise on the evil
and on the good and sendeth rain on the just
and on the unjust.” (Matt. v. 45.) As then
He loveth us, do thou love Him. For He is
our Friend (Asi yap), And how cometh it,
some will say, that one who is our Friend
threateneth hell, and punishment, and ven-
geance? It is owing to His loving us alone.
For all He doeth and is busied with, is with


1 Same word as joy. See v. 2, etc.


RHE EPISiELE: TO THE ROMANS.


399


a view to strike out thy wickedness, and to
refrain with fear, as with a kind of bridle, thy
inclinableness to the worse side, and by
blessings and by pains recovering thee from
thy downward course, and leading thee up to
Him, and keeping thee from all vice, which is
worse than hell. But if thou mockest what is
said, and wouldest rather live continually in
misery, than be punished for a single day, it
is no marvel. For this is but a sign of thy
unformed judgment (areAove yuouye), drunken-
ness, and incurable disorder. Since little
children even when they see the physician
going to apply burning or the knife, flee and
leap away screaming and convulsed, and
choose to have a continual sore eating into their
body, rather than to endure a temporary pain,
and so enjoy health afterwards. But those
who have come to discretion, know that to be
diseased is worse than submitting to the knife,
as also to be wicked is worse than to be pun-
ished. For the one is to be cured and to be
healthy, the other to ruin one’s constitution
and to be in continual feebleness. Now that
health is better than feebleness, surely is plain
to every one. Thieves then ought to weep
not when they have their sides _ pierced
through, but when they pierce through walls
and murder. For if the soul be better than
the body (as it is), when the former is ruined
there is more reason to groan and lament ; but
if a man does not feel it, so much the more
reason to bewail it. For those that love with
an unchastened love ought to be more pitied
than those who have a violent fever, and those
that are drunken, than those that are under-
going torture. But if these are more painful
(some may say), how come we to give them
the preference? Because there are many of
mankind, who, as the proverb saith, like the
worse, and they choose these, and pass by
the better. And this one may see happening
as well in victuals as in forms of government,
in emulous aims of life too, and in the enjoy-
ment of pleasure, and in wives, and in houses,
and in slaves, and in lands, and in the case of
all other things. For which is more pleasur-
able pray, cohabiting with women or with
males ? with women or with mules? Yet still
we shall find many that pass over women, and
cohabit with creatures void of reason, and
abuse the bodies of males. Yet natural
pleasures are greater than unnatural ones.
But still many there are that follow after
things ridiculous and joyless, and accompanied
with a penalty, as if pleasurable. Well but to
them, a man may say, these things appear so.
Now this alone is ground enough to make
them miserable, that they think those things
|to be pleasurable which are not so. Thus


400 THE WORKS OF


they assume punishment to be worse than sin,
which it is not, but just the contrary. Yet, if
it were an evil to the sinner, God would not
have added evils to the evil; for He that
doeth everything to extinguish evil, would not
have increased it. Being punished then is no
evil to the man who has done wrong, but not
being punished, when in that plight, is evil,
just as for the infirm not to be cured. (Plat.
Gorg. p. 478, sqq.) For there is nothing so
evil as extravagant desire. And when [I say,
extravagant, I mean that of luxury, and that
of ill-placed glory, and that of power, and in
general that of all things which go beyond
what is necessary. For such is he who lives a
soft and dissolute life, who seems to be the
happiest of men, but is the most wretched, as
superinducing upon his soul harsh and tyran-
nical sovereigns. For this cause hath God
made the present a life of labor to us, that
He may rid us of that slavery, and bring us
into genuine freedom. For this cause He
threatened punishment, and made labors a
part of our portion in life, so muzzling our
vaunting spirit. In this way the Jews also,
when they were fettered to the clay and brick
making, were at once self-governed, and called
continually upon God. But when they were
in the enjoyment of freedom, then they mur-
mured, and provoked the Lord, and pierced
themselves through with countless evils.
What then, it may be said, will you say to
those frequent instances of men being altered
for the worse by tribulations? Why, that this
is no effect of tribulation, but of their own
imbecility. For neither if a man had a weak
stomach and could not take a bitter medicine
which would act as a purgative, but was made
even worse by it, would it be the drug we
should find fault with, but the weakness of
the part, as we should therefore here too with
the yieldingness of temper. For he who is
altered so by tribulation, is much more likely
to be affected in this way by laxity. If he
falls even when splinted, (or tied) (this is what
affliction is), much more will he when the
bandage is removed. If when braced up he
is altered, much more when in a state of
tumor (yavvoimevoc) And how am I, one
may ask, to keep from being so altered by
tribulation? Why, if thou reflectest that, wish
it or not, thou wilt have to bear the thing in-
flicted: but if thou dost it with a thankful
spirit, thou wilt gain very greatly thereby ; but
if thou art indignant at it,and ragest* and
blasphemest, thou wilt not make the calamity
lighter, but thou wilt render its wave more
troublous. By feeling then in this way, let us


1 Several Mss. “‘ art in pain.”


ST. GHEY SOS lem


[Homiry IX.


turn what is necessary into a matter of our
own choice. What I mean is this—suppose
one has lost his own son, another all his prop-
erty: if you reflect that it is not in the nature
of things for what has taken place to be un-
done, while it is to gain fruit from the mis-
fortune, though irremediable, even that of
bearing the circumstance nobly ; and if instead
of using blasphemous words, thou wert to
offer up words of thanksgiving to the Lord, so
would evils brought upon thee against thy
will become to thee the good deeds of a free
choice. Hast thou seen a son taken prema-
turely away? Say, ‘“ the Lord hath given, the
Lord hath taken away.” Do you see your
fortune exhausted ? Say, “naked came I out
of my mother’s womb, and naked shall I
return thither” «(Job. 4. 21.) Domyeugsee
evil men faring well, and just men faring ill
and undergoing ills without number, and dost
thou not know where to find the cause? Say,
““T became even as it were a beast before
Thee.» Yet. Tb amesever, swith “thee: ages
Ixxill. 22.) But if thou wilt search out the
cause, reflect that He has fixed a day in
which He will judge the world, and so you
will throw off perplexity, for then every man
will meet his deserts, even as Lazarus and
the rich man. Call to mind the Apostles, for
they too rejoiced at being scourged, at being
driven about and undergoing numberless suf-
ferings, because they were “counted worthy
to suffer shame for His Name’s sake.” (Acts
v. 41.) And do thou, then, if thou art sick,
bear it nobly, and own thyself indebted to
God for it, and thou shalt receive the same
reward with them. But how, when in feeble-
ness and pain, art thou to be able to feel grate-
ful to the Lord? Thou wilt if thou lovest Him
sincerely, Forif the Three Children who were
thrown into the furnace, and others who were
in prisons, and in countless other evils, ceased
not to give thanks, much more will they who
are in a state of disease, be able to do this.
For there is not, assuredly there is not, any-
thing which vehement desire doth not get the
better of. But when the desire is even that
of God, it is higher than anything, and neither
fire, nor the sword, nor poverty, nor infirmity,
nor death, nor aught else of the kind appeareth
dreadful to one who hath gotten this love, but
scorning them all, he will fly to heaven, and
will have affections no way inferior to those
of its inhabitants, seeing nothing else, neither
heaven, nor earth, nor sea, but gazing only at
the one Beauty of that glory. And neither
the vexations of this life present will depress
him, nor the things which are goodly and
attended with pleasure elate him or puff him
up. Let us then love with this love (for there


HomiLy X.|


THE, EPISTLE TO. THE, ROMANS,


is not anything equal unto it) both for the
sake of things present and for the sake of
things to come. Or rather, more than for
these, for the nature of the love itself. For
we shall be set free both from the punishments
of this life and of that which is to come, and
shall enjoy the kingdom. Yet neither is the
escape from hell, nor the fruition of the king-
dom, anything great in comparison of what is
yet to be said. For greater than all these
things is it to have Christ our beloved at once
and our lover. For if when this happens
with men it is above all pleasure; when


4Ol
both happen’ from God, what language
or what thought is able to set before
one the blessedness of this soul? There
is none that can, save the experience
of it only. That then we may by experience


come to know what is this spiritual joy, and
life of blessedness, and untold treasure of
good things, let us leave everything to cling
to that love, with a view as well to our own
joy as.to the glory of God. For unto Him
is the glory and power, with’ His Only-be-
gotten, and the Holy Ghost, now, and ever,
and unto all ages evermore. Amen.


FLOM) TaY id.


ROM.


** Wherefore as by one man sin entered into the world,
and death by sin, and so death passed upon
(dij 76ev 6 Mss. cic. . .) all men, for that all have
sinned.”’


As the best physicians always take great
pains to discover the source of diseases, and
go to the very fountain of the mischief, so
doth the blessed Paul also. Hence after
having said that we were justified, and having
shown it from the Patriarch, and from the
Spirit, and from the dying of Christ (for He
would not have died unless. He intended to
justify), he next confirms from other sources
also what he had at such length demonstrated.
And he confirms his proposition from things
opposite, that is, from death and sin. How,
and in what way? He enquires whence
death came in, and how it prevailed. How
then did death come in .and prevail?
“ Through the sin of one.” But what means,
“for that all have sinned?” This; he having
once fallen, even they that had not eaten of
the tree did ftom him, all of them, become
mortal.*

Ver. 13. “ For until the Law sin was in the
world, but sin is not imputed where there is
no law.”

The phrase “till the Law” some think he


* This whole passage is introduced to show the glory and
power of Christ's salvation as able to conquer the. power of
sin and death. The case of Adam’s sin is not introduced for
,its own sake but as a background on which to exhibit the
greatness of God’s grace. Two erroneous assumptions are
often made in respect to this passage (1) that Adam’s sin and
not God’s grace in Christ is the chief theme, and (2) that the
4 iad intends here to set forth a theory of original sin.
This verse contains four points (1) Sin came into the world by
the agency of one man—Adam. (2) In consequence of sin came
death. (3) In virtue of the causal relation between sin and
death, the latter extended itself to all men, for the reason (4)
that all sinned. The ®omep shows that this is used as an illus-
trative parallel to magnify the greatness of grace which is
mightier than sin (cf. roAA@ maddov vv. 15-17).—G. B. S.


26


used of the time before the. giving of the Law
—that of Abel, for instance, or of Noah, or of
Abraham—till Moses was born. What was
the sin in those days, at this rate? some say
he means that in Paradise. For hitherto it
was not done away, (he would say,) but the
fruit of it was yet in vigor. For it had borne
that death whereof all partake, which pre-
vailed and lorded over us. Why then does
he proceed, ‘“ But sin is not imputed when
there is no law?” It was by way of objec-
tion from the Jews, say they who have spoken
on our side,’ that he laid this position down
and said, if there be no sin without the Law,
how came death to consume all those before
the Law? But to me it seems that the sense
presently to be given has more to be said for
it, and suits better with the Apostle’s mean-
ing. .And what sense is this? In saying,
that “ till the Law sin was in the world,” what
he seems to me to mean is this, that after the
Law was given the sin resulting from the
transgression of it prevailed, and prevailed
too so long as the Law existed. For sin, he
says, can have no existence if there be no
law.ft If then it was this sin, he means, from


1 of Ta Huerepa eipnxores. The passage is corrupt in Savile:
most Mss. read dagiv and Aeyorta,

+ The apostle does not say that there can be no sin if there
isnolaw. He says the exact contrary. He elsewhere says
(iv. 15) that where there isno law there is no transgression.
By ‘‘law’”’ here he means positive, statutory commands and

rohibitions. His meaning here is : God does not reckon
amaptia as mapaBaots where there is no explicit commandment,
But sin was in the world during all this period previous to the
Mosaic law, as proved by the reign of death. ft extended its
sway and penalty even to those who had not sinned, as Adam
did, against positive enactment. We know well on what
principle the apostle justifies his position that there is sin even
where no written commandment is transgressed. The princi-

le has been already developed viz.: there is a moral law
implanted in the human heart (i. 19, 21; ii. 15). To offend
against this is sin (though not transgression, which implies
positive law) and induces death as its consequence.—G. B. S.


402


the transgression of the Law that brought
forth death, how was it that all before the
Law died? For if it is in sin that death hath
its origin, but when there is no law, sin is not
imputed, how came death to prevail? From
whence it is clear, that it was not this sin, the
transgression, that is, of the Law, but that of
Adam’s disobedience, which marred all things.
Now what is the proof of this? The fact that
even before the Law all died: for ‘death
reigned,’ he says, “from Adam to Moses,
even over them that had not sinned.”

How did it reign? “After the similitude
of Adam’s transgression, who is the figure of
Him that was to come.” Now this is why
Adam is a type of Christ. How a type? it
will be said. Why in that, as the former
became to those who were sprung from him,
although they had not eaten of the tree, the
cause of that death which by his eating was
introduced; thus also did Christ become to
those sprung from Him, even though they had
not wrought righteousness, the Provider’ of
that righteousness which through His Cross 2
He graciously bestowed on us all. For this
reason, at every turn he keeps to the “one,”
and is continually bringing it before us, when
he says, “ As by one man sin entered into the
world ’—and, “If through the offence of one:
many be dead:” and, “ Not as it was by one
that sinned, so is the gift;”’ and, “ The judg-
ment was by one to condemnation:” and
again, “If by one (or, the one) man’s offence
death reigned by one;” and “ Therefore as by
the offence of one.” And again, “ As by one
man’s disobedience many (or, the many) were
made sinners.” And so he letteth not go of
the one, that when the Jew says to thee, How
came it, that by the well-doing of this one
Person, Christ, the world was saved? thou
mightest be able to say to him, How by the
disobedience of this one person, Adam, came
it to be condemned? And yet sin and grace
are not equivalents, death and life are not
equivalents, the Devil and God are not equiv-
alents, but there is a boundless’ space
between them. When then as well from the
nature of the thing as from the power of Him
that transacteth it, and from the very suitable-


ness thereof (for it suiteth much better with |


God to save than to punish), the preéminence
and victory is upon this side, what one word
have you to say for unbelief, tell me? How-
ever, that what had been done was reasonable,
he shows in the following words.

Ver. 15. ‘‘ But not as the offence, so is also


1 rpoéevos.

2 The comparison of the two Trees is very frequent in the
Fathers; see St. Cyr. Cat. xiii. § 19, p. 152, O. T. Tert. adv.
Judeos, § 13.


THE WORKS. OF “STG RY¥SOsSTtere


[HomILy X.


the free gift. For if through the offence of
one many be dead, much more the grace of
God, and the gift by grace, which is by one
man, Jesus Christ, hath abounded unto the
many.”

For what he says is somewhat of this kind.
If sin had so extensive effects, and the sin of
one man too; how can grace, and that the
grace of God, not the Father only, but also
the Son, do otherwise than be the more abun-
dant of the two? For the latter is far the
more reasonable supposition. For that one
man should be punished on account of an-
other does not seem to be much in accord-
ance with reason. But for one to be saved
on account of another is at once more suitable
and more reasonable. If then the former
took place, much more may the latter. Hence
he has shown from these grounds the likeli-
hood and reasonableness of it. For when the
former had been made good, this would then
be readily admitted. But that it is even
necessarily so, he makes good from what fol-
lows. How then does he make it good?

Ver. 16. “And not as it was by one that
sinned, so is the gift. For the judgment was
by one to condemnation, but the free gift is of
many offences unto justification.”

And what is this that he is speaking of ?
It is that sin had power to bring in death and
condemnation; but grace did not do away
that one sin only, but also those that followed
after in its train. Lest then the words ‘“‘as”
and “so” might seem to make the measure of
the blessings and the evils equal, and that you
might not think, upon hearing of Adam, that
it was only that sin which he had brought in
which was done away with, he says that it was
from many offences that an indemnity was
brought about. How is this plain? Because
after the numberless sins committed after that
in paradise, the matter issued in justification.
But where righteousness is, there of necessity
follows by all means life, and the countless
blessings, as does death where sin was. For
righteousness is more than life, since it is
even the root of life. That there were several
goods then brought in, and that it was not
that sin only that was taken away, but all the
rest along with it, he points out when he
says, that “the gift was of many offences
unto justification.” In which a proof is nec-
essarily included, that death was also torn up
by the roots. But since he had said, that the
second was greater than the first, he is
obliged to give further grounds again for this
same thing. For, before, he had said that if
one man’s sin slew all, much more will the
grace of One have the power to save. After
that he shows that it was not that sin only


HomILy X.]


THE) Heist LE. TO THe ROMANS.


403


thiat was done away by the grace, but all the
rest too, and that it was not that the sins
were done away only, but that righteousness
was given. And Christ did not merely do the
same amount of good that Adam did of harm,
but far more and greater good. Since then
he had made such declarations as these, he
wants again here also further confirmation of
these. And how does he give this confirma-
tion? He says,

Ver. 17. “For if by one man’s offence
death reigned by one, much more they which
receive abundance of grace and of the gift
and (so Field with most Mss.) of righteous-
_ ness shall reign in life by one, Jesus Christ.”

What he says, amounts to this nearly,
What armed death against the world? The
one man’s eating from the tree only. If then
death attained so great power from one
offence, when it is found that certain received
a grace and righteousness out of all propor-
tion to that sin, how shall they still be liable
to death? And for this cause, he does not
here say “ grace,” but “ superabundance of
grace.” For it was not as much as we must
have to do away the sin only, that we received
of His grace, but even far more. For we
were at once freed from punishment, and put
off all iniquity, and were also born again from
above (John iii.3) and rose again with the
old man buried, and were redeemed, justified,
led up to adoption, sanctified, made brothers
of the Only-begotten, and joint heirs and of
one Body with Him, and counted for His
Flesh, and even as a Body with the Head, so
were we united unto Him! All these things
then Paul calls a ‘‘superabundance”’ of
grace, showing that what we received was not
a medicine only to countervail the wound, but
even health, and comeliness, and honor, and
glory and dignities far transcending our nat-
ural state. And of these each in itself was
enough to do away with death, but when all
manifestly run together in one, there is not
the least vestige of it left, nor can a shadow
of it be seen, so entirely is it done away. As
then if any one were to cast a person who
owed ten mites (63é/0vc) into prison, and not
the man himself only, but wife and children
and servants for his sake; and another were
to come and not to pay down the ten mites
only, but to give also ten thousand talents of
gold, and to lead the prisoner into the king’s
courts, and to the throne of the highest power,
and were to make him partaker of the highest
honor and every kind of magnificence, the
creditor would not be able to remember the
ten mites; so hath our case been. For Christ


hath paid down far more than we owe, yea as_


much more as the illimitable ocean is than a


little drop. Do not then, O man, hesitate as
thou seest so great a store of blessings, nor
enquire how that mere spark of death and sin
was done away, when such a sea of gifts was
brought in upon it, For this is what Paul
intimated by saying that “they who have
received the abundance of the grace and
righteousness shall reign in life.” And as he
had now clearly demonstrated this, he again
makes use of his former argument, clenching
it by taking up the same word afresh, and
saying that if for that offence all were pun-
ished, then they may be justified too by
these means.* And so he says,

Ver. 18. “Therefore as by the offence of
one judgment came upon all men to con-
demnation ; even so by the righteousness of
One the free gift came upon all men unto
justification of life.”

And he insists again upon it, saying,

Ver. 19. “For as by one man’s disobe-
dience many were made sinners, so by the
obedience of One shall many be made right-
eous.

What he says seems indeed to involve no
small question: but if any one attends to it
diligently, this too will admit of an easy
solution. What then is the question? It is
the saying that through the offence of one
many were made sinners. For the fact that
when he had sinned and become mortal,
those who were of him should be so also, is
nothing unlikely. But how would it follow
that from his disobedience another would
become a sinner? For at this rate a man of
this sort will not even deserve punishment, if,
that is, it was not from his own self that he
became a sinner. What then does the word
‘“‘sinners’”? mean here? To me it seems to
mean liable to punishment and condemned to
death. Now that by Adam’s death we all
became mortals, he had shown clearly and at
large. But the question now is, for what pur-
pose was this done? But this he does not go
on to add: for it contributed nothing to his
present object. For it is against a Jew that
the contest is, who doubted and made scorn
of the righteousness by One. And for this
reason after showing that the punishment too
was brought in by one upon all, the reason
why this was so he has not added. For he is
not for superfluities, but keeps merely to what
is necessary. For this is what the principles


* Chrys. has well apprehended v. 15-17 as an argument a
fortiori. Here are three contrasts between the principles of
sin and grace to show the superior power of the latter : (1) It is
a much more reasonable and supposable case that many should
find life in one man’s act than that many should suffer death in
consequence of one man’s sin, v. 15. (2) The condemnation
has in it (so to speak) only the power of one sin; the gracious
| gift overcomes many trespasses, v. 16. (3) Life in Christ must
| be greater than death in Adam.—G. B.S


404


THE ‘WORKS OR STAuCHkKYSOsS fo:


[Homi Ly X.


of disputation did not oblige him to say any
more than the Jew; and therefore he leaves it
unsolved. But if any of you were to enquire
with a view to learn, we should give this
answer: That we are so far from taking any
harm from this death and condemnation?, if
we be sober-minded, that we are the gainers
even by having become mortal, first, because
it is not an immortal body in which we sin;
secondly, because we get numberless grounds
for being religious (@Aooogiac). For to be
moderate, and to be temperate, and to be
subdued, and to keep ourselves clear of all
wickedness, is what death by its presence and
by its being expected persuades us to. But
following with these, or rather even before
these, it hath introduced other greater bless-
ings besides. For it is from hence that the
crowns of the martyrs come, and the rewards
of the Apostles. Thus was Abel justified,
thus was Abraham, in having slain his son,
thus was John, who for Christ’s sake was
taken off, thus were the Three Children, thus
was Daniel. For if we be so minded, not
death only, but even the devil himself will be
unable to hurt us. And besides there is this
also to be said, that immortality awaits us,
and after having been chastened a little while,
we shall enjoy the blessings to come without
fear, being as if in asort of school in the
present life, under instruction by means of
disease, tribulation, temptations, and poverty,
and the other apparent evils, with a view to
our becoming fit for the reception of the
blessings of the world to come.

Ver. 20. “ Moreover the Law entered: that
the offence might abound.”

Since then he had shown that the world
was condemned from Adam, but from Christ
was saved and freed from condemnation, he
now seasonably enters upon the discussion of
the Law, here again undermining the high
notions of it. For it was so far from doing
any good, he means, or from being any way
helpful, but the disorder was only increased
by its having. come in. But the particle
“that” again does not assign the cause, but
the result. For the purpose of its being given
was not “in order that” it might abound, for
it was given to diminish and destroy the
offence. But it resulted the opposite way,
not owing to the nature of the Law, but owing
to the listlessness of those who received it.*


1 j, e, since we have been redeemed. See on Rom. ix. 11.

* The Author’s view of iva mAcovacy cannot be exegetically
justified. Paul teaches that it was the purpose of the dispen-
sation of law which came in between Adam and Christ to
make transgression abound (cf. Gal. iii. 9). The meaning is
not that its purpose in coming in alongside (mapeconAOev) of this
reign of sin was to increase sin; but to make sin appear as
such, to exhibit it as transgression and to reveal it in its true
character to the consciousness of men. Only through the law
could sin appear as transgression and thus be apprehended by


But why did he not say the Law was given,
but “the Law entered by the way?” It was
to show that the need of it was temporary,
and not absolute or imperative. And this he
says also to the Galatians, showing the very
same thing another way. “For before faith
came,” he says,: “we were kept under the
Law, shut up unto the faith which should
afterwards be revealed.” And so it was not
for itself, but for another, that it kept the
flock. For since the Jews were somewhat
gross-minded, and enervated, and indifferent
to the gifts themselves, this was why the Law
was given, that it might convict them the
more, and clearly teach them their own condi-
tion, and by increasing the accusation might
the more repress them. But be not thou
afraid, for it was not that the punishment
might be greater that this was done, but that
the grace might be seen to be greater. And
this is why he proceeds,

“But where sin abounded, grace did much
more abound.”

He does not say did abound, but “did
much more abound.” For it was not remis-
sion from punishment only that He gave us,
but that from sins, and_life also. As if any
were not merely to free a man with a fever
from his disease, but to give him also beauty,
and strength, and rank; or again, were not to
give one an hungered nourishment only, but
were to put him in possession of great riches,
and were to set him in the highest authority.
And how did sin abound? some will say.
The Law gave countless commands. Now
since they transgressed them all, trangression
became more abundant. Do you see what a
great difference there is between grace and
the Law? For the one became an addition
to the condemnation, but the other, a further
abundance of gifts. Having then mentioned
the unspeakable munificence, he again dis-
cusses the beginning and the root both of
death and of life. What then is the root of
death? Itis sin. Wherefore also he saith,

Ver. 21. “That as sin reigned unto death,
even so might grace reign through righteous-
ness unto eternal life, through our Lord Jesus
Christ,”

This he says to show that the latter ranks
as a king, the former, death, as a_ soldier,
being marshalled under the latter, and armed
by it. If then the latter (i.e. sin) armed
death, it is plain enough that the righteous-
ness destructive hereof, which by grace was
introduced, not only disarms death, but even
destroys it, and undoes entirely the dominion
thereof, in that it is the greatest of the two,


men in the clearest manner as contrary to God’s will (cf. iv. 15
and v. 13).—G. B.S. ;


HomILy X.] inde LS PhS ple


TOIUTHEA ROGAMES.


405


as being brought in not by man and the
devil, but by God and grace, and leading our
life unto a goodlier estate, and to blessings
unlimited. For of it there will never be any
end (to give you a view of its superiority from
this also). For the other cast us out of our
present life, but grace, when it came, gave us
not the present life, but the immortal and
eternal one. But for all these things Christ
is our voucher. Doubt not then for thy life
if thou hast righteousness, for righteousness
is greater than life as being mother of it.

Chap. vi. ver. 1. “What then? shall we
continue in sin, that grace may abound?
God forbid.”

He is again turning off to exhortation, yet
introducing it not directly, lest he should
seem to many to be irksome and vexing, but
as if it rose out of the doctrines. For if, even
so diversifying his address, he was afraid of
their being offended at what he said, and
therefore said, “I have written the more
boldly unto you in some sort,” (Rom. xv. 15)
much more would he have seemed to them,
had he not done so, to be too harsh. Since
then he showed the greatness of the grace by
the greatness of the sins it healed, and owing
to this it seemed in the eyes of the unthink-
ing to be an encouragement to sin (for if the
reason, they would say, why greater grace
was shown, was because we had done great
sins, let us not give over sinning, that grace
may be more displayed still), now that they
might not say this. or suspect it, see how he
turns the objection back again. First he
does it by his deprecation. ‘‘God forbid.”
And this he is in the habit of doing at things
confessed on all hands to be absurd. And
then he lays down an irrefragable argument.
And what is it?

Ver. 2. “ How shall we,” he says, ‘ that are
dead to sin, live any longer therein?”

What does “ we are dead”” mean? Does it
mean that as for that, and as far as it goes,
we have all received the sentence! of death?
or, that we became dead to it by believing
any being? enlightened. This is what one
should rather say, since the sequel makes this
clearly right. But what is becoming dead to
it? The not obeying it in anything any
more. For this baptism effected once for
all, it made us dead to it. But this must of
our own earnestness thenceforth continually
be maintained, so that, although sin issue
countless commands to us, we may never
again obey it, but abide unmovable as a dead
man doth. And indeed he elsewhere saith
that sin itself is dead. But there he sets that


) anopaow edcéaueba, see the same phrase, Hom. vii. p. 382.
2 i. e. baptized, St. Cyr. Cat. Jztr. § 1. p. 1, O. T.


down as wishing to show that virtue is easy.
(Rom. vii. 8?) But here, as he earnestly
desires to rouse the hearer, he puts the death
on his side. Next, since what was said was
obscure, he again explains, using what he had
said also in the way of reproof.

Ver. 3, 4.“ Know, ye: not,” he. says, “ my
brethren, that so many of us as were baptized
into Christ were baptized into His death?
therefore we are buried with Him by baptism
into death.”

What does being “baptized into His
Death” mean? That it is with a view to
our dying as He did. For Baptism is the
Cross. What the Cross then, and Burial, is
to Christ, that Baptism hath been to us, even
if not in the same respects. For He died
Himself and was buried in the Flesh, but we
have done both to sin. Wherefore he does
not say, planted together in His Death, but in
the likeness of His Death. For both the one
and the other is a death, but not of the same
subject ; since the one is of the Flesh, that of
Christ; the other of sin, which is our own,
As then that is real, so is this, But if it be
real, then * what is of our part again must be
contributed. And so he proceeds,

“That as Christ was raised up from the
dead by the Glory of the Father, even so we
also should walk in newness of life.”

Here he hints, along with the duty of a care-
ful walk, at the subject of the resurrection. In
what way? Do you believe, he means, that
Christ died, and that He was raised again?
Believe then the same of thyself. For this is
like to the other, since both Cross and Burial
is thine. For if thou hast shared in Death
and Burial, much more wilt thou in Resurrec-
tion and Life. For now the greater is done
away with, the sin I mean, it is not right to
doubt any longer about the lesser, the doing
away of death.

But this he leaves for the present to the
conscience of his hearers to reason out, but
himself, after the resurrection to come had
been set before us, demands of us another,
even the new conversation, which is brought
about in the present life by a change of
habits. When then the fornicator becomes
chaste, the covetous man merciful, the harsh
subdued, even here a resurrection has taken
place, the prelude to the other. And how is
it a resurrection? Why, because sin is morti-
fied, and righteousness hath risen again, and
the old life hath been made to vanish, and


3 Or ‘still,’ et cai adnOs.

4 St. Gr. Naz. Jamé. xx. 271, p. 228 (in Ed. Ben. xxiv. 277. p.
so8). B. What? have I not the cleansing laver yet? A. You
have, but mind! B. Mind what? A. Not for your habits, but
for past transgressions. B. Nay, but for habits! What? A.
Only if thou be first at work to cleanse them. See Tert. de

en. § 6,7, and the beginning of the next Homily.


406


THE WORKS QF (SI... CHERYSOS Tear


[HomILy X.


this new and angelic one is being lived in.
But when you hear of a new life, look for a
great alteration, a wide change. But tears
come into my eyes, and I groan deeply to
think how great religiousness (éAocogiav) Paul
requires of us, and what listlessness we have
vielded ourselves up to, going back after our
baptism to the oldness we before had, and
returning to Egypt, and remembering the
garlic after the manna. (Num. xi. 5.) For
ten or twenty days at the very time of our
Illumination, we undergo a change, but then
take up our former doings again. But it is
not for a set number of days, but for our
whole life, that Paul requires of us such a
conversation. But we go back to our former
vomit, thus after the youth of grace building
up the old age of sins. For either the love of
money, or the slavery to desires not con-
venient, or any other sin whatsoever, useth to
make the worker thereof old. ‘Now that
which decayeth and waxeth old is ready to
vanish away.” (Heb. vili. 13.) For there is
no body, there surely is none, to be seen as
palsied by length of time, as a soul is de-
cayed and tottering with many sins. Such an
one gets carried on to the last degree of
doting, yielding indistinct sounds, like men
that are very old and crazed, being sur-
charged with rheum, and great distortion of
mind, and forgetfulness, and with scales upon
its eyes, and? disgustful to men, and an easy
prey to the devil. Such then are the souls of
sinners; not so those of the righteous, for
they are youthful and well-favored, and are in
the very prime of life throughout, ever ready
for any fight or struggle, But those of
sinners, if they receive even a small shock,
straightway fall and are undone. And it was
this the Prophet made appear, when he said,
that like as the chaff which the wind scat-
tereth from the face of the earth (Ps. i. 4),
thus are they that live in sin whirled to and
fro, and exposed to every sort of harm. For
they neither see like a healthy person, nor
hear with simplicity, they speak not articu-
lately, but are oppressed with great shortness
of breath. They have their mouth overflow-
ing with spittle. And would it were but
spittle, and nothing offensive! But now they
send forth words more fetid than any mire,
and what is worst, they have not power even
to spit this saliva of words away from them,
but taking it in their hand with much lewd-
ness, they smear it on again, so as to be
coagulating, and hard to perspire through.’
Perhaps ye are sickened with this description.


1 Mar. daveitat, 4 Mss. dacvopern.
2 Statuéw. ap. Hipp. p. 505. 10. Liddell & Scott, sub. v. or
to cut through, from étatéurw.


Ought ye not then to be more so at the
reality? For if these things when happening
in the body are disgustful, much more when
in the soul. Such was that son who wasted
out all his share, and was reduced to the
greatest wretchedness, and was in a feebler
state than any imbecile or disordered person.
But when he was willing, he became suddenly
young by his decision alone and his change.
For as soon as he had said, “I will return to
my Father,” this one word conveyed to him
all blessings; or rather not the bare word,
but the deed which he added to the word.
For he did not say, “‘ Let me go back,” and
then stay there; but said, Let me go back,
and went back, and returned the whole of
that way. Thus let us also do; and even if
we have gotten carried beyond the boundary,
let us go up to our Father’s house, and not
stay lingering over the length of the journey.
For if we be willing, the way back again is
easy and very speedy. Only let us leave the
strange and foreign land ; for this is what sin
is, drawing us far away from our Father’s
house ; let us leave her then, that we may
speedily return to the house of our Father.
For our Father hath a natural yearning
towards us, and will honor us if we be
changed, no. less than those that are unat-
tainted, if we change, but even more, just as
the father showed that son the greater honor.
For he had greater pleasure himself at receiv-
ing back his son. And how am I to go back
again ? one may say. Do but put a beginning
upon the business, and the whole is done.
Stay from vice, and go no farther into it, and
thou hast laid hold of the whole already. For
as in the case of the sick, being no worse may
be a beginning of getting better, so is the
case with vice also. Gono further, and then
your deeds of wickedness will have an end.
And if you do so for two days, you will keep
off on the third day more easily; and after
three days you will add ten, then twenty, then
an hundred, then your whole life. (Cf. Hom.
xvii. on St:;Matt: p:, 267,,0G..F.) . Koreibe
further thou goest on, the easier wilt thou see
the way to be, and thou wilt stand on the
summit itself, and wilt at once enjoy many
goods. For so it was when the prodigal
came back, there were flutes, and harps, and
dancings, and feasts, and assemblings: and


| he who might have called his son to account


for his ill-timed extravagance, and flight to
such a distance, did nothing of the sort, but
looked upon him as unattainted, and could
not find it in him even to use the language cf
reproach, or rather, even to mention barely to
him the former things, but threw himself upon
him, and kissed him, and killed the calf, and


Homity X.]


TITHE EPISTLE TO THE: ROMANS,


407


put a robe upon him, and placed on him
abundant honors. Let us then, as we have
such examples before us, be of good cheer
and keep from despair. For He is not so
well pleased with being called Master, as
Father, nor with having a slave as with hav-
ing ason. And this is what He liketh rather
than that. This then is why He did all that
He has done; and “spared not even His
Only-begotten Son” (Rom. viii. 32), that we
might receive the adoption of sons, that we
might love Him, not as a Master only, but as
a Father. And if He obtained this of us,
He taketh delight therein as one that has
glory given him, and proclaimeth it to all,
though He needeth nothing of ours. This is
what, in Abraham’s case for instance, He
everywhere does, using these words, “I am
the God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob.”
And yet it was they of His household who
should have found an honor in this; but now
it is the Lord evidently who does this; for
this is why He says to Peter, ‘ Lovest thou
Me more than these?” (John xxi. 17) to
show that He seeketh nothing so much as
this from us. For this too He bade Abraham
offer his son to Him, that He might make it
known to all that He was greatly beloved! by
the patriarch. Now this desire to be loved
exceedingly comes from loving exceedingly.
For this cause too He said to the Apostles,
“He that loveth father or mother more than
Me, is not worthy of Me.” (Matt. x. 37.) For
this cause He bids us esteem that even which
is in the most close connection with us, our
soul (or, life, v. 39, and John xii. 25), as
second to the love of him, since He wisheth
to be beloved by us with exceeding entire-
ness. For we too, if we have no strong feel-
ings about a person, have no strong desire for
his friendship either, though he be great and
noble ; whereas when we love any one warmly
and really, though the person loved be of low
rank and humble, yet we esteem love from
him as a very great honor. And for this
reason He Himself also called it glory not to
be loved by us only, but even to suffer those
shameful things in our behalf. (ib. 23.)
However, those things were a glory owing to
love only. But whatever we suffer for Him,
it is not for love alone; but even for the sake
of the greatness and dignity of Him we long
for, that it would with good reason both be
called glory, and be so indeed. Let us then
incur dangers for Him as if running for the
greatest crowns, and let us esteem neither
poverty, nor disease, nor affront, nor calumny,
nor death itself, to be heavy and burdensome,


1 This passage is one among many which show how the
Jides formata was that which the Fathers contemplated.


when it is for Him that we suffer these things.
For if we be right-minded, we are the great-
est possible gainers by these things, as neither
from the contrary to these shall we if not
right-minded gain any advantage. But con-
sider; does any one affront thee and war
against thee? Doth he not thereby set thee
upon thy guard, and give thee an opportunity
of growing like unto God? For if thou lovest
him that plots against thee, thou wilt be like
Him that “ maketh His Sun to rise upon the
evil and good.”’ (Matt. v. 45.) Does another
take thy money away? If thou bearest it
nobly, thou shalt receive the same reward
as they who have spent all they have upon the
poor. For it says, “Ye took joyfully the
spoiling of your goods, knowing that ye have
in heaven a better and an enduring sub-
stance.” (Heb. x. 34.) Has any one reviled
thee and abused thee, whether truly or falsely,
he weaves for thee a very great crown if thou
bearest meekly his contumely; since he too,
who calumniates, provides for us an abundant
reward. For “rejoice,” it says, “and be ex-
ceeding glad, when men say all manner of
evil against you falsely, because great is your
reward in Heaven.” (Matt. v. 11.) And
he too that speaketh truth against us is of the
greatest service, if we do but bear meekly
what is said. For the Pharisee spake evil of
the Publican, and with truth, still instead of a
Publican he made him a righteous man.
(Luke xviii. rr.) And what need to go into
particular instances. For any one that will
go to the conflicts of Job may learn all these
points accurately. And this is why Paul said,
“God for us, who against us?” (Rom. viii.
31.) As then by being earnest, we gain even
from things that vex us, so by being listless,
we do not even improve from things that
favor us. For what did Judas profit, tell me,
by being with Christ? or what profit was the
Law to the Jew? or Paradise to Adam? or
what did Moses profit those in the wilderness ?
And so we should leave all, and look to one
point only, how we may husband aright our
own resources. And if we do this, not even
the devil himself will ever get the better of
us, but will make our profiting the greater, by
putting us upon being watchful. Now in this
way it is that Paul rouses the Ephesians, by
describing his fierceness. Yet we sleep and
snore, though we have to do with so crafty an
enemy. And if we were aware of a serpent °
nestling by our bed, we should make much
ado to kill him. But when the devil nestleth
in our souls, we fancy that we take no harm,
but lie at our ease; and the reason is, that


1 ies


=


2 See Macarius on the Avefing of the Heart, c, 1. translated
in Penn's /ustitutes of Christian Perfection, Pp. 2.


408


we see him not with the eyes of our body.
And yet this is why we should rouse us the
more and be sober. For against an enemy
whom one can perceive, one may easily be on,
guard ; but one that cannot be seen, if we be
not continually in arms, we shall not easily
escape. And the more so, because he hath no
notion of open combat (for he would surely
be soon defeated), but often under the ap-
pearance of friendship he insinuates the
venom of his cruel malice. In this way it
was that he suborned Job’s wife, by putting
on the mask of natural affectionateness, to
give that wretchless advice. And so when
conversing with Adam, he puts on the air of
one concerned and watching over his inter-
ests, and saith, that “your eyes shall be
opened in the day that ye eat of the tree.”
(Gen. iii. 5.) “hus Jephtha too he persuaded, |


THE WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[HomiLy XI.


under the pretext of religion, to slay his
daughter, and to offer the sacrifice the Law
forbade. Do you see what his wiles are,
what his varying warfare? Be then on thy
guard, and arm thyself at all points with the
weapons of the Spirit, get exactly acquainted
with his plans, that thou mayest both keep
from being caught, and easily catch him.
For it was thus that Paul got the better of
him, by getting exactly acquainted with these.
And so he says, “for we are not ignorant of
his. devices!” (@ Cota mr ye weer ais epeens
also be earnest in learning and avoiding his
stratagems, that after obtaining a victory over
him, we may, whether in this present life or in
that which is to come, be proclaimed con-
querors, and obtain those unalloyed blessings,
by the grace and love toward man, etc.


MOM LY, eek.


ROM. VI. 5.


ness of His death, we shall be also in the likeness
of His resurrection.”


Wuat I had before occasion to remark,
that I mention here too, that he continually
digresseth into exhortation, without making
any twofold division as he does in the other
Epistles, and setting apart the former portion
for doctrines, and the latter for the care of
moral instruction. Here then he does not do
so, but blends the latter with the subject
throughout, so as to gain it an easy admission.
Here then he says there are two mortifyings,
and two deaths, and that one is done by
Christ in Baptism, and the other it is our duty
to effect by earnestness afterwards. For that
our former sins were buried, came of His
_gift. But the remaining dead to sin after
baptism must be the work of our own earn-
estness, however much we find God here also
giving us large help. For this is not the only
thing Baptism has the power to do, to oblit-
erate our former transgressions; for it also
secures against subsequent ones. As then in
the case of the former, thy contribution was
faith that they might be obliterated, so also
in those subsequent to this, show thou forth
the change in thine aims, that thou mayest
not defile thyself again. For it is this and
the like that he is counselling thee when he


?


“For if we have been planted together* in the like


* Better: ‘‘ United with him by the likeness’’ or ‘‘ united
S


with the likeness.” See, note *, p. 409.—G. B.S.


says, “for if we have been planted together
in the likeness of His Death, we shall be also
in the likeness of His Resurrection.” Do
you observe, how he rouses the hearer by
leading him straightway up to his Master,
and taking great pains to show the strong
likeness? This is why he does not say “in
death,” lest you should gainsay it, but, “in
the likeness of His Death.” For our essence
itself hath not died, but the man of sins, that
is, wickedness. And he does not say, “ for
if we have been” partakers of “the likeness
of His Death;” but what? “If we have
been planted together,” so, by the mention of
planting, giving a hint of the fruit resulting to
us fromit. For as His Body, by being buried
in the earth, brovght forth as the fruit of it
the salvation of the world; thus ours also,
being buried in baptism, bore as fruit right-
eousness, sanctification, adoption, countless.
blessings. And it will bear also hereafter the
gift of the resurrection. Since then we were
buried in water,. He in earth, and we in
regard to sin, He in regard to His Body, this
is why he did not say, “we were planted to-
gether in His Death,” but “in the likeness of
His Death.” For both the one and the other
is death, but not that of the same subject.
If then he says, “we have been planted to-
gether in His Death,’ we shall be in that


1 The construction here is harsh, and seems to require “ in
the likeness of.”


—_


Homity X1.]


PEEP EPISTLE ‘TO THE ROMANS:


409


)


of His Resurrection,’ speaking here of the
Resurrection which (Gr. be of His Resurrec-
tion) is to come. For since when he was
upon the subject of the Death before, and
said, “‘ Know ye not, brethren, that so many
of us as were baptized into Christ were bap-
tized into His Death?” he had not made any
clear statement about the Resurrection, but
only about the way of life after baptism, bid-
ding men walk in newness of life; therefore
he here resumes the same subject, and pro-
ceeds to foretell to us clearly that Resurrec-
tion. And that you may know that he is not
speaking of that resulting from baptism, but
about the other, after saying, ‘“‘for if we were
planted together in the likeness of His
Death,” he does not say that we shall be in
the likeness of His Resurrection,’ but we
shall belong to the Resurrection.* For to
prevent thy saying, and how, if we did not die
as He died, are we to rise as He rose ? when
he mentioned the Death, he did not say,
“planted together in the Death,” but, “in the
likeness of His Death.” But when he men-
tioned the Resurrection, he did not say, ‘in
the likeness of the Resurrection,” but we
shall be “of the Resurrection” itself. And
he does not say, We have been made, but we
shall be, by this word again plainly meaning
that Resurrection which has not yet taken
place, but will hereafter. Then with a view
to give credibility to what he says, he points
out another Resurrection which is brought
about here before tbat one, that from that
which is present thou mayest believe also that
which is to come. For after saying, “we
shall be planted together in the Resurrec-
tion,” he adds,

Ver. 6. “Knowing this, that our old man
is crucified with Him, that the body of sin
might be destroyed.”

So putting together both the cause and the


1 The word likeness in our version is in italics as an addi-
tion, and unless it is understood, the construction is scarcely
grammatical; but this interpretation favors the reading ques-
tioned in the last note. Perhaps also St. Chrysostom may
have taken the words thus, ‘‘If we have been in likeness
planted together with His Death,’’ which would be a parallel
construction.

* The word ovudevto. should be rendered ‘‘united with”
(as in R V.)—literally ‘‘ grown together,’ from cvy—¢vw, not
‘‘planted together’? (A. V.) as if from cvv—devtevw. The
Dat. to Ovowmuat. may be taken as instrumental after avp.
yeyov. (R. V., Weiss), or (I think better), after ovv in composi-
tion (Thayer’s Lex., Meyer), because there is no indirect ob-
ject’expressed and on the former view one must be supplied (as
avT®, Or xptoT»). We must supply in the apodosis, cvudevtor
T® Omowwmatt. The ouotwua here means that which corre-
sponds to the death and resurrection of Christ, 1. e. our moral
death to sin and resurrection toa holy life (vid. vv. 2, 4), or
(dropping the figure) the cessation of the old life and the be-
ginning of the new. If the former occurs, the latter also must
take place and thus the objection that if sin makes grace
abound we should continue in sin, contradicts the very idea of
the Christian life which is that of freedom from sin and con-
tinuance in holiness. The interp. of Chrys. is somewhat con-
fused, apparently by not clearly apprehending the fact that
Paul is dealing with an exadogy to the death and resurrection
of GhriaeG: Se


demonstration of the Resurrection which is to
come. And he does not say is crucified, but
is crucified with Him, so bringing baptism
near to the Cross. And on this score also it
was that he said above, “We have been
planted together in the likeness of His Death
that the body of sin might be destroyed,” not
giving that name to this body of ours, but to
alliniquity. For as he calls the whole sum of
wickedness the old man, thus again the
wickedness which is made up of the different
parts of iniquity he calls the body of that
man. And that what I am saying is not mere
guesswork, hearken to Paul’s own interpreta-
tion of this very thing in what comes next.
For after saying, “that the body of sin might
be destroyed,” he adds, “that henceforth we
should not serve sin.”’f For the way in
which I would have it dead is not so that ye
should be destroyed and die, but so that ye
sin not. And as-he goes on he makes this
still clearer.

Ver. 7. “ For he that is dead,” he says, “is
freed (Gr. justified) from sin.”

This he says of every man, that as he that
is dead is henceforth freed from sinning,
lying as a dead body, so must? he that has
come up from baptism, since he has died
there once for all, remain ever dead to sin.
If then thou hast died in baptism, remain
dead, for any one that dies can sin no more ;
but if thou sinnest, thou marrest God’s gift.
After requiring of us then heroism (Gr. phi-
losophy) of this degree, he presently brings in
the crown also, in these words.

Ver. 8. “ Now if we be dead with Christ.”

And indeed even before the crown, this is
in itself the greater crown, the partaking with


our Master. But he says, I give even
another reward. Of what kind is it? It is
life eternal. For ‘“‘we believe,” he says,
“that we shall also live with Him.” And


whence is this clear?

Ver. 9. “That Christ being raised from the
dead, dieth no more.”

And notice again his undauntedness,® and
how he makes the thing good from opposite
grounds. Since then it was likely that some
would feel perplexed at the Cross and the


+ Verse 6 urges the same thought under the specific figure of
the crucifixion of the body. he use of this figure almost
necessitates the use of the word éedy to carry it out. As the
one is figurative, so is the other. By c@ma rns auaprtias is not
meant ‘‘the body which is sin—or sinful,’ but the body
which is under the sway of sin. Inthe moral process of the
new life the body so far as ruled by sin—as being the seat of
evil passions and desires—is destroyed in this character,
Paul could hardly have employed this figure had he not re-
garded a ‘body as the special manifestation-point of sin,
—G. B.S.

2 The necessity spoken of is clearly, from the context, that
of obligation.

3 diAdovecxiay, his determination to take the highest ground,


| and give up no single point.


410


Death, he shows that this very thing is a
ground for feeling confident henceforward.

For suppose not, he says, because He once
died, that He is mortal, for this is the very
reason of His being immortal. For His
death hath been the death of death, and be-
cause He did die, He therefore doth not die.
For even that death

Ver. 10. “He died unto sin.”

“ What does “unto sin” * mean? It means
that He was not subject even to that one, but
for our sin, that He might destroy it, and cut
away its sinews and all its power, therefore
He died. Do you see how he affrighteth
them? Forif He does not die again, then
there is no second laver, then do thou keep
from all inclinableness to sin. For all this
he says tomake a stand against the “let us
do evil that good may come. Let us remain
in sin that grace may abound.” To take
away this conception then, root and branch,
it is, that he sets down all this. But in that
“*He liveth, He liveth unto God,” he says,—
that is, unchangeably, so that death hath no
more any dominion over Him. For if it was
not through any liability to it that He died
the former death, save only for the sin of
others, much less will He die again now that
He hath done that sin away. And this he
says in the Epistle to the Hebrews also,
“But now once,” he says, “in the end of the
world hath He appeared to put away sin by the
Sacrifice of Himself. And as it is appointed
unto men once to die, and after that the
judgment; so Christ was once offered to bear
the sins of many, and unto them that look for
Him shall He appear the second time without
sin unto salvation.” (Heb. ix. 26-28.)
And he both points out the power of the
life that is according to God, and also the
strength of sin. For with regard to the
life according to God, he showeth that
Christ shall die no more. With regard
to sin, that if it brought about the
death even of the Sinless, how can it do
otherwise than be the ruin of those that are
subject to it? And then as he had dis-
coursed about His life; that none might say,
What hath that which you have been saying
to do with us? he adds,

Ver, 11. “Likewise reckon ye also your-
selves to be dead indeed unto sin, but alive
unto God.”

He well says, “reckon,” because there is no
setting that, which he is speaking of, before
the eyes as yet. And what are we to reckon?
one may ask. That we “are dead unto sin,
but alive unto God. In Jesus Christ our


2 Or “ by sin.”


THE WORKS jOFTS?. CHRYSOSTOM:


[HomiLy XI.


Lord.” For he that so liveth will lay hold of
every virtue, as having Jesus Himself for his
ally. For that is what, “in Christ,” means,
for if He raised them when dead, much more
when alive will He be able to keep them
sO.

Ver. 12. “Let not sin therefore reign in
your mortal body, that ye should obey it in
the lusts thereof.”

He does not say, let not the flesh live or
act, but, “‘let not sin reign,” ? for He came
not to destroy our nature, but to set our free
choice aright. Then to show that it is not
through any force or necessity that we are
held down by iniquity, but willingly, he does
not say, let it not tyrannize, a word that
would imply a necessity, but let it not reign.
For it is absurd for those who are being con-
ducted to the kingdom of heaven to have sin
empress over them, and for those who are
called to reign with Christ to choose to be the
captives of sin, as though one should hurl
the diadem from off his head, and choose to
be the slave of a frantic woman, who came
begging, and was clothed in rags. Next
since it was a heavy task to get the upper
hand of sin, see how he shows it to be even
easy, and how he allays the labor by saying,
‘in your mortal body.”
the struggles were but fora time, and would
soon bring themselves to a close. At the
same time he reminds us of our former evil
plight, and of the root of death, as it
was from this that, contrary even to its be-
ginning, it became mortal. Yet it is pos-
sible even for one with a mortal body not to
sin. Do you see the abundancy of Christ’s
grace? For Adam, though as yet he had not
a mortal body, fell. But thou, who hast re-
ceived one even subject to death, canst be
crowned. How then, is it that “sin reigns? ”
he says. It is not from any power of its own,
but from thy listlessness. Wherefore after
saying, “let it not reign,” he also points out
the mode of this reigning, by going on to say
“that ye should obey it in the lusts thereof.”
For it is not honor to concede to it (i. e. to the
body) all things at will, nay, it is slavery in
the extreme, and the height of dishonor; for
when it doth what it listeth, then is it bereft of
all liberties; but when it is put under re-
straints, then it best keeps its own proper
rank.

Ver. 13. “ Neither yield ye your members
as instruments of unrighteousness unto sin
. ... but as instruments of righteousness.”

The body then is indifferent between vice


2 In all this there is a design to obviate Manichzan notions
concerning matter, and the opinion resulting from them, that
we must be content to live in sin as unavoidable.


For this shows that.


Bf


HomiLy XI.]


DHE ERISTLE -TO: THE? ROMANS:


4II


and virtue, as also instruments (or arms) are.
But either effect is wrought by him that useth
it. As if a soldier fighting in his country’s
behalf, and a robber who was arming against
the inhabitants, had the same weapons for
defence. For the fault is not laid to the suit
of armor, but to those that use it to an ill
end. And this one may say of the flesh too,
which becomes this or that owing to the
mind’s decision, not owing to its own nature.
For if it be curious after the beauty of
another, the eye becomes an instrument of
iniquity, not through any agency of its own
(for what is of the eye, is but seeing, not see-
ing amiss), but through the fault of the
thought which commands it. But if you
bridle it, it becomes an instrument of right-
eousness. Thus with the tongue, thus with the
hands, thus with all the other members. And
he well calls sin unrighteousness. For by
sinning a man deals unrighteously either by
himself or by his neighbor, or rather by him-
self more than by his neighbor. Having
then led us away from wickedness, he leads
us to virtue, in these words:

“ But yield yourselves unto God, as those
that are alive from the dead.”

See how by his bare words he exhorts
them, on that side naming “sin” and on this
“God.” For by showing what a difference
there is between the rulers, he casts out of all
excuse the soldier that leaveth God, and
desireth to serve under the dominion of sin.
But it is not only in this way, but also by the
sequel, that he establishes this; by saying,
“as alive from the dead.” For by these he
shows the wretchedness of the other, and the
greatness of God’s gift. For consider, he
says, what you were, and what you have been
made. What then were ye? Dead, and
ruined by a destruction which could not from
any quarter be repaired. For neither was
there any one who had the power to assist
you. And what have ye been’ made out of
those dead ones? Alive with immortal life.
And by whom? By the all-powerful God.
Ye ought therefore to marshal yourselves
under Him with as much cheerful readiness,
as men would who had been made alive from
being dead.

“And your members as
righteousness.”

Hence, the body is not evil, since it may
be made an arm! of righteousness. But by
calling it an arm, he makes it clear that there
is a hard warfare at hand for us. And for
this reason we need strong armor, and also
a noble spirit, and one acquainted too with


instruments of


1 Orda is most usualiy arms, secondarily any instruments.


the ways of this warfare; and above all we
need a commander. ‘The Commander how-
ever is standing by, ever ready to help us,
and abiding unconquerable, and has _fur-
nished us with strong arms likewise. Farther,
we have need of a purpose of mind to handle
them as should be, so that we may both obey
our Commander, and take the field for our
country. Having then given us this vigorous
exhortation, and reminded us of arms, and
battle, and wars, see how he encourages the
soldier again and cherishes ? his ready spirit.

Ver. 14. “For sin shall no more _ have
dominion over you; for ye are not under the
Law, but under grace.”

If then sin hath no more dominion over us,
why does he lay so great a charge upon them
as he does in the words, “ Let not sin reign
in your mortal body,” and, “ yield not ye your
members as instruments of unrighteousness
unto sin?” What does that here said mean
then? He is sowing a kind of seed in this state-
ment, which he means to develop afterwards,
and to cultivate in a powerful argument.
What then isthis statement? It is this; that
our body, before Christ’s coming, was an easy
prey to the assaults of sin. For after death a
great swarm of passionsentered also. And for
this cause it was not lightsome for running the
race of virtue. For there was no Spirit pres-
ent to assist, nor any baptism of power to
mortify. (John vii. 39.) But as some horse
(Plato Phedr. § 74) that answereth not the
rein, it ran indeed, but made frequent slips,
the Law meanwhile announcing what was to
be done and what not, yet not conveying into
those in the race anything over and above
exhortation by means of words. But when
Christ had come, the effort became afterwards
more easy, and therefore we had a more dis-
tant goal (ueifova ra cxdwuara) Set us, in that the
assistance we had given us was greater.
Wherefore also Christ saith, ‘“‘ Except your
righteousness shall exceed the righteousness
of the Scribes and Pharisees, ye shall in no
case enter into the Kingdom of Heaven.
(Matt. v. 20.) But this he says more clearly
in the sequel. But at present he alludes here
briefly to it, to show that unless we stoop
down very low to it, sin will not get the better
of us. For it is not the Law only that
exhorteth us, but grace too which also remitted
our former sins, and secures us against future
ones. For it promised them crowns after
toils, but this (i. e. grace) crowned them first,
and than led them to the contest. Now it
seems to me that he is not signifying here the


2 aAeitder. anoints. Hannibal, before his victory on the
Trebia, sent oil round to his battalions to refresh their limbs.
Tgnibus ante tentoria factis, oleogue per manipulos, ut miol-
lirent artus, misso, et ctho per otium capto, etc. Liv. xxi. 55.


412


THE WORKS OF Si. “GHiRYSOsTOs:


|HomiLy XI.


whole life of a believer, but instituting a com-
parison between the Baptism and the Law.
And this he says in another passage also;
“The letter killeth, but the Spirit giveth life.”
(2 Cor. iii..6.) For the Law convinceth of
transgression, but grace undoes transgression,
As then the former by convincing establisheth
sin so the latter by forgiving suffereth us not
to be under sin. And so thou art in two
ways set free from this thraldom; both in thy
not being under the Law, and in ‘thy enjoying
grace. ‘After then he had by these words
given the hearer a breathing time, he again
furnishes him a safeguard, by introducing an
exhortation in reply to an objection, and by
saying as follows.

Ver. 15. “What then ? shall we sin, because
we are not under the Law, but under grace?
God forbid.”

So he first adopted a form of adjuration,
because it was an absurb thing he had named.
And then he makes his discourse pass on to
exhortation, and shows the great facility of
the struggle, in the following words. *

Ver. 16. ‘Know ye not, that to whom ye
yield yourselves servants to obey, his servants
ye are to whom ye obey; whether of sin unto
death, or of obedience unto righteousness ?

I do not, he would say, mention hell as yet,
nor that great (Ms. Bodl. long) punishment,
but the shame it is in this world, when ye
become slaves, and slaves of your own accord
too, and sin’s slaves, and when the wages are
such as a second death. For if before bap-
tism, it wrought death of the body, and the
wound required so great attendance, that the
Lord of all came down to die, and so puta
stop to the evil; if after so great a gift, and
so great liberty, it seize thee again, while thou
bendest down under it willingly, what is there
that it may not do? Do not then run into
such a pit, or willingly give thyself up. For
in the case of wars, soldiers are often given up
even against their will. But in this case, unless
thou desertest of thyself, there is no one who
will get the better of thee. Having then tried
to shame them by a sense of duty, he alarms
them also by the rewards, and lays before
them the wages of both; righteousness, and
death, and that a death not like the former,
but far worse. For if Christ is to die no
more, who is to do away with death? No
one! We must then be punished, and have


* The Argument of the vv. 15-23 is briefly this: Does the
rinciple that we are not under the (Mosaic) law lead to law-
essness and sin? No! for, although we are freed fromthe
Mosaic law as such, we are still under the law of righteousness
(cf. x Cor. ix. 21 ‘‘ Not being without law to God, but under
law to Christ). We are free from the law and free from
sin, but are bondsmen to righteousness. See esp. 18. ‘‘ And
being made free from sin, ye became servants of righteous-
ness.’’°—G. B.S.


vengeance taken upon us forever. For a
death preceptible to the senses is not still to
come in this case, as in the former, which
gives the body rest, and separates it from the
soul. ‘“‘ For the last enemy, death, is des-
troyed” (1 Cor. xv. 26), whence the punisn-
ment will be deathless. But not to them that
obey, for righteousness, and the blessings
springing from it, will be their rewards.

Wet. (ity: “But God be thanked, that ye
were the servants of sin, but ye have obeyed
from the heart that form of doctrine which
was delivered unto you.” (Lit. “into which
ye were delivered.’’)

After shaming them by the slavery, ‘after
alarming them by the rewards, and so exhort-
ing them, he again rights them by calling the
benefits to mind. For by these he shows that
they were great evils from which they were
freed, and that not by any labors of their own,
and that things henceforth would be more
manageable. Just as any one who has rescued
a captive from a cruel tyrant, and advises him
not to run away back to him, reminds him of
his grievous thraldom; so does Paul set the
evils passed away most emphatically before
us, by giving thanks to God. For it was no
human power that could set us free from all
those evils, but, ‘ thanks be to God,” who was
willing and able to do such great things.
And he well says, “ Ye have obeyed from the
heart.” Ye were neither forced nor pressed,
but ye came over of your own accord, with
willing mind. Now this is like one that
praises and rebukes at once. For after hav-
ing willingly come, and not having had any
necessity to undergo, what allowance can you
claim, or what excuse can you make, if you
run away back to your former estate? Next
that you may learn that it came not of your
own willing temper only, but the whole of it
of God’s grace also, after saying, “ Ye have
obeyed from the heart,” he adds,“ that form of
doctrine which was delivered you.” For the
obedience from the heart shows the free will.
But the being delivered, hints the assistance
from God. But what is the form of doc-
trine?? It is living aright, and in conformity
with the best conversation.

Ver. 18. “ Being then made free from sin,
ye became the servants of righteousness.”

There are two gifts of God which he here
points out. The “freeing from sin,” and also
the ‘making them servants to righteousness,”
which is better than any freedom. For God
hath done the same as if a person were to


MAD Hey i, eg ee Tim. i. 10; are instances of a similar use of
the term “ doctrine.’ Compare Eph. iv. 19-24, from which
context the phrase, ‘‘Even as Truth is in Jesus,’ appears to
be used nearly in the same sense.


done in our case.


-holds in admiration, saying


Homity XI.]


ME VEPISTLEnTONTHe ROMANS.


413


|
take an orphan, who had been carried away


by savages into their own country, and were
not only to free him from captivity, but were
to set a kind father ever him, and bring him
to very great dignity, And this has been
For it was not our old
evils alone that He freed us from, since He
even led us to the life of angels, and paved
the way for us to the best conversation, hand-
ing us over to the safe keeping of righteous-
ness, and killing our former evils, and dead-
ening the old man, and leading us to an
immortal life.

Let us then continue living this life; for
many of those who seem to breathe and to
walk about are in a more wretched plight
than the dead. For there are different kinds
of deadness; and one there is of the body,
according to which Abraham was dead, and
still was not dead. For “God,” He says, “ is
not a God of the dead, but of the living.”
(Matt. xxii. 32.) Another is of the soul,
which Christ alludes to when He says, “ Let
the dead bury their dead.” (ib. viii. 22.)
Another, which is even the subject of praise,
which is brought about by religion (gAoco¢iac),
of which Paul saith, “ Mortify your members
which are upon the earth.” (Col. iii. 5.)
Another, which is the cause even of this, the
one which takes place in baptism. “ For our
old man,” he says, “has been crucified ”
(ver. 6), that is, has been deadened. Since
then we know this, let us flee from the dead-
ness by which, even though alive, we die.
And let us not be afraid of that with which
common death comes on. But the other two,
whereof one is blissful, having been given by
God, the other praiseworthy (cf. Ar. Eth. i.
12), which is accomplished by _ ourselves
together with God, let us both choose and be
emulous of. And of those two, one doth


‘David pronounce blessed, when he says,


“Blessed are they whose iniquities are for-
given” (Ps. xxxii. 1); and the other, Paul

g, and writing to
the Galatians, “They that be Christ’s have
crucified the flesh.” (Gal. v.24.) But of the
other couple, one Christ declares to be easy
to hold in contempt, when He says, “ Fear
not them which kill the body, but are not able
to kill the soul:”? and the other fearful, for,
“Fear” (He says) “Him that is able to
destroy both body and soul in hell.” (Matt.


x. 28.) And therefore let us flee from this, |


and choose’ that deadness which is held
blessed and admirable; that of the other two,
we may escape the one and not? fear the
other : for it is not the least good to us to see


1 So 4 Mss.
quires it.


Sav. and 3 Mss. omit ‘‘not,’’ but the sense re-


|


the sun, and to eat and drink, unless the life
of good words be with us. For what would
be the advantage, pray, of a king dressed in a
purple robe and possessed of arms, but with-
out a single subject, and exposed to all that
had a mind to attack and insult him? In like
manner it will be no advantage to a Christian
to have faith, and the gift of baptism, and yet
be open to all the passions. In that way the
disgrace will be greater, and the shame more.
For as such an one having the diadem and
purple is so far from gaining by this dress any
honor to himself, that he even does disgrace
to that by his own shame: so the believer
also, who leadeth a corrupt life, is so far from
becoming, as such, an object of respect, that
he is only the more one of scorn. ‘ For as
many,” it says, “‘as sinned without law, shall
also perish without law ; and as many as have
sinned in the law, shall be judged by the law.”
(Rom. ii. 12). And in the Epistle to the
Hebrews, he says, “‘ He that despised Moses’
law died without mercy under two or three
witnesses : of how much sorer punishment,
suppose ye, shall he be thought worthy, who
had trodden under foot the Son of God?”
(Heb. x. 28, 29.) And with reason. For I
placed (He might say) all the passions in sub-
jection to thee by baptism. How then comes
it that thou hast disgraced so great a gift, and
hast become one thing instead of another?
I have killed and buried thy former transgres-
sions, like worms—how is it that thou hast
bred others ?—for sins are worse than worms,
since these do harm to the body, those to the
soul; and those make the more offensive
stench. Yet we perceive it not, and so we
are at no pains to purge them out. Thus the
drunkard knows not how disgustful the stale
wine is, but he that is not drunken has a dis-
tinct perception of it. So with sins also, he
that lives soberly knows thoroughly that other
mire, and the stain. But he that gives him-
self up to wickedness, like a man made
drowsy with drunkenness, does not even know
the very fact that he,is ill. And this is the
most grievous part of vice, that it does not
allow those who fall into it even to see the
greatness of their own bane, but as they lie in
the mire, they think they are enjoying per-
fumes. And so they have not even the
power of getting free, but when full of worms,
like men that pride themselves in precious
stones, so do they exult in these. And for
this reason they have not so much as the will
to kill them, but they even nourish these up,
and multiply them in themselves, until they
send them on to the worms of the world to
come. For these are providers for those, and
are not only providers, but even the fathers of


414


THE: WORKS’ OF (ST. ‘CHR YsOstGnrr


[HomiLy XI,


those that never die; as it says, ‘‘ their worm
shall not die.” (Mark ix. 44.) These kindle
the hell which never extinguishes. To pre-
vent this from happening then, let us do away
with this fountain of evil, and extinguish
the furnace, and let us draw up the root of
wickedness from beneath, since you will do no
good by cutting the tree off from above, if the
root remains below, and sends up fresh shoots
of the same kind again. What then is the
root of the evils? Learn from the good hus-
bandman (i. e. St. Paul 1 Cor. ili. 6-9), who
has an accurate knowledge of such things,
and tends the spiritual vine and cultivates the
whole world. Now what does he say is the
cause of all the evils? The love of money.
For the ‘love of money is the root of all
evils:” "(x im: vi. 20) Ekence ‘come ‘fight-
ings, and enmities and wars; hence emula-
tions, and railings, and suspicions, and insults ;
hence murders, and thefts, and violations of
sepulchres. Through this, not cities and
countries only, but roads and habitable and
inhabitable parts, and mountains, and groves,


and hills, and, in a word, all places are
filled with blood and murder. And _ not
even from the sea has this. evil with-


drawn, but even there also with great fury
hath it revelled, since pirates beset it on
all sides, thus devising a new mode of rob-
bery. Through this have the laws of nature
been subverted, and the claims of relation-
ship set aside, and the laws of piety itself?
broken through. For the thraldom of money
hath armed, not against the living only, but
even against the departed too, the right
hands of such men. And at death even, they
make no truce with them, but bursting open
the sepulchres, they put forth their impious
hands even against dead bodies, and not even
him that hath let go of life will they suffer to
be let go from their plotting. And all the
evils that you may find, whether in the house
or in the market-place, or in the courts of law,
or in the senate, or in the king’s palace, or
in any other place whatsoever, it is from this


that you will find they all spring. For
this evil it is, this assuredly, which fills
all places with blood and _ murder, this


lights up the flame of hell, this makes cities
as wretchedly off as a wilderness, yea, even
much worse. For those that beset the high
roads, one can easily be on one’s guard
against, as not being always upon attack.
But they who in the midst of cities imitate
them are so much the worse than them, in
that these are harder_ to guard against, and
dare to do openly what the others do with


1 So Field from one Ms. Vulg. ‘‘ of our very being,’’—ovgvas
for ogtas,


secrecy. For those laws, which have been
made with a view to stopping their iniquity,
they draw even into alliance and fill the
cities with this kind of murders and pollu-
tions. Is it not murder, pray, and worse than
murder, to hand the poor man over to famine,
and to cast him into prison, and to expose
him not to famine only, but to tortures too,
and to countless acts of insolence? For even
if you do not do these things yourself to him,
yet you are the occasion of their being done,
you do them more than the ministers who exe-
cute them. The murderer plunges his sword
into a man at once, and after giving him pain
for a short time, he does not carry the torture
any farther. But do you who by your calum-
nies, by your harassings, by your plottings,
make light darkess to him, and set him upon
desiring death ten thousand times over, con-
sider how many deaths you perpetrate instead
of one only? And what is worse than all, you
plunder and are grasping, not impelled to it
by poverty, without any hunger to necessitate
you, but that your horse’s bridle may be spat-
tered over with gold enough, or the ceiling of
your house, or the capitals of your pillars.
And what hellis there that this conduct
would not deserve, when it is a brother, and


one that has shared with yourself in blessings —


unutterable, and has been so highly honored
by the Lord, whom you, in order that you may
deck out stones, and floors, and the bodies of
animals with neither reason, nor perception of
these ornaments, are casting into countless
calamities? And your dog? is well attended
too, while man, or rather Christ, for the sake
of the hound, and all these things I have
named, is straitened with extreme hunger.
What can be worse than such confusion?
What more grievous than such lawlessness as
this? What streams of fire will be enough for
such a soul? He that was made in the Image
of God stands in unseemly plight, through thy
inhumanity ; but the faces of the mules that
draw thy wife glisten with gold in abundance,
as do the skins and woods which compose
that canopy. And if it is a seat that is to be
made, or a footstool, they are all made of
gold and silver. But the member of Christ,
for whom also He came hither from Heaven,
and shed His precious Blood, does not even
enjoy the food that is necessary for him,
owing to thy rapaciousness. But the couches
are mantled with silver on every side, while
the bodies of the saints are deprived even of
necessary clothing. And to thee Christ is
less precious than anything else, servants, or
mules, or couch, or chair, or footstool; for I


2 Or ‘the pillar’’ and so in the next line xy and xova tor
Kuwy and Kura.


Homi y XI.]}


pass over furniture of still meaner use than
these, leaving it to you to know of it. But if
thou art shocked at hearing this, stand aloof
from doing it, and then the words spoken will
not harm thee. Stand aloof, and cease from
this madness. For plain madness it is, such
eagerness about these things. Wherefore let-
ting go of these things, let us look up, late as
it is, towards Heaven, and let us call to mind
the Day which is coming, let us bethink our-
selves of that awful tribunal, and the exact
accounts, and the sentence incorruptible.
Let us consider that God, who sees all these
things, sends no lightnings from Heaven;
and yet what is done deserves not thunder-
bolts merely. Yet He neither doth this, nor
doth He let the sea loose upon us, nor doth
He burst the earth in twain, He quencheth
not the sun, nor doth He hurl the heaven with
its stars upon us. He doth not move aught
from its place, but suffereth them to hold
their course, and the whole creation to minis-
ter to us. Pondering all this then, let us be
awestruck with the greatness of His love
toward man, and let us return to that noble
origin which belongs to us, since at present
certainly we are in no better plight than the
creatures without reason, but even in a much
worse one. For they do love their kin, and
need but the community of nature to cause
affection towards each other. But thou who
besides nature hast countless causes to draw
thee together and attach thee to the members
of thyself ; the being honored with the Word,
the partaking in one religion, the sharing in
countless blessings; art become of wilder
nature than they, by displaying so much care-
fulness about profitless things, and leaving
the Temples of God to perish in hunger and
nakedness, and often surrounding them also
with a thousand evils. For if it is from love of
glory that you do these things, itis much more
binding on you to show your brother atten-
tion, than your horse. For the better the
creature that enjoys the act of kindness, the
brighter the crown that is woven for such
carefulness. Since now while thou fallest
into the contrary of all this, thou pullest upon
thyself accusers without number, yet per-
ceivest it not. For who is there that will not
speak ill of thee? who that will not indite
thee as guilty of the greatest atrocity and mis-
anthrophy, when he sees that thou disre-
gardest the human race, and settest that of
senseless creatures above men, and besides
senseless creatures, even the furniture of thy
house? Hast thou not heard the Apostles
say, that they who first received the word sold
both “houses and lands” (Acts iv. 34), that
they might support the brethren? but you


THE EPISCLE: TO “THE ‘ROMANS:


415


plunder both houses and lands, that you may
adorn a horse, or wood-work, or skins, or
walls, or a pavement, And what is worse is,
that it is not men only, but women too are
afflicted with this madness, and urge their hus-
bands to this empty sort of pains, by forcing
them to lay out their money upon anything
rather than the necessary things. And if any
one accuse them for this, they are practised
with a defence, itself loaded with much to be
accused. For both the one and the other are
done at once, says one. What say you? are
you not afraid to utter such a thing, and to
set the same store by horses and mules and
couches and footstools, as by Christ an
hungered? Or rather not even comparing
them at all, but giving the larger share to
these, and to Him meting out with difficulty a
scant share? Dost thou not know that all
belongs to Him, both thou and thine? Dost
thou not know that He fashioned thy body, as
well as gave thee a soul, and apportioned thee
the whole world? but thou art not for giving a
little recompense to Him. But if thou lettest
a little hut, thou requirest the rent with the
utmost rigor, and though reaping the whole of
His creation, and dwelling in so wide a world,
thou hast not courage to lay down even a
little rent, but has given up to vainglory thy-
self and all thou hast. For this is that where-
of all these things come. The horse is none
the better above his natural excellence for
having this ornament, neither yet is the per-
son mounted upon him, for sometimes he is
only in the less esteem for it; since many
neglect the rider and turn their eyes to the
horse’s ornaments, and to the attendants
behind and before, and to the fan-bearers,
But the man, who is lackeyed by these, they
hate and turn their heads from, as a common
enemy. But this does not happen when thou
adornest thy soul, for then men, and angels,
and the Lord of angels, all weave thee a
crown. And so, if thou art in love with glory,
stand aloof from the things which thou art
now doing, and show thy taste not in thy
house, but in thy soul, that thou mayest be-
come brilliant and conspicuous. For now
nothing can be more cheap than thou art, with
thy soul unfurnished, and but the handsome-
ness of thy house for a screen, But if thou
art impatient of hearing me speak in this way,
listen to what one of those that are without
did, and at all events be shamed by their phi-
losophy. For it is said that a certain one of
them, who went into a palace that shone with
gold in abundance, and glistened with the
great beauty of the marbles and the columns,
when he saw the floor strewed with carpets in
all directions, spat in the face of the master


416


THE WORKS:OF ST. CokysOs TGar.


[HomILy XII.


of the house, and when found fault with for it
said, that since there was no other part of the
house where he could/do this, he was obliged
to do this affront to his face. See how ridic-
ulous a man is, who displays his taste in exte-
riors, and how little he is in the eyes of all
reasonable men. And with good _ reason.
For if a person were to leave thy wife to be
clad in rags, and to be neglected, and clothed
thy maid-servants with brilliant dresses, thou
wouldest not bear it meekly, but wouldest be
exasperated, and say that it was insulting in
the extreme. Reason then in this way about
your soul. When you display your taste in
walls then, and pavement, and furniture, and
other things of the kind, and do not give liber-
ally in alms, or practise the other parts of a re-
ligious life (g:Aocodiav) ; you do nothing less than
this, or rather what is worse than this by far.
For the difference between servant and mis-
tress is nothing, but between soul and flesh,
there is a great disparity.. But if it be so with


the flesh, much more is it with a house or a
couch or a footstool. What kind of excuse
then dost thou deserve, who puttest silver on
all these, but for it hast no regard, though it
be covered with filthy rags, squalid, hungry,
and full of wounds, torn by hounds unnum-
bered (Luke xvi. 20, 21); and after all this
fanciest that thou shalt get thee glory by dis-
playing thy taste in externals wound about
thee? And thisis the very height of phrenzy,
while ridiculed, reproached, disgraced, dishon-
ored, and falling into the severest punishment,
still to be vain of these things! Wherefore, I
beseech you, laying all this to heart, let us be-
come sober-minded, late as it is, and become
our own masters, and transfer this adorning
from outward things to our souls. For so it
will abide safe from spoiling, and will make
us equal to the angels, and will entertain us
with unaltering good, which may we all attain
by the grace and love toward man, etc.


HOME ee


ROM. VI. 19.


“IT speak after the manner of men because of the
infirmity of your flesh: for as ye have yielded your
members (so 4 Mss. Sav. the members of your
flesh) servants to uncleanness and to iniquity unto
iniquity; even so now yield your members
servants to righteousness unto holiness.’’


StncE he had required great strictness of
life, charging us to be dead to the world, and
to have died unto wickedness, and to abide
with no notion towards the workings of sin,
and seemed to be saying something great and
burdensome, and too much for human nature ;
through a desire to show that he is not mak-
ing any exorbitant demand, nor even as
much as might be expected of one who
enjoyed so great a gift, but one quite moder-
ate and light, he proves it from contraries,
and says, “‘ I speak after the manner of men,”
as much as to say, Going by human reason-
ings; by such as one usually meets with.
For he signifies either this, or the moderate-
ness of it, by the term applied, “after the
manner of men.” For elsewhere he uses the
same word. ‘There hath no temptation
taken you but such as is common to man”
(1 Cor. x. 13), that is, moderate and small.
“For as ye have yielded your members
servants to uncleanness and to iniquity unto
iniquity; even so now yield your members


servants to righteousness unto holiness.”
And truly the masters are very different ones,
but still it is an equal amount of servitude
that I ask. For men ought to give a much
larger one, and so much the larger as this is
a greater and better mastership than the
other. Nevertheless I make no greater
demand “ because of the infirmity,” and that,
he does not say of your free will or readiness
of spirit, but “of your flesh,” so making what
he says the less severe. And yet on one side
there is uncleanness, on the other holiness : on
the one iniquity, and on the otherrighteousness.
And who is so wretched, he says, and in such
straits aS not to spend as much earnestness
upon the service of Christ, as upon that of sin
and the devil? Hear then what follows, and
you will see clearly that we do not even spend
this little. For when (stated in this naked
way) it does not seem credible or easy to
admit, and nobody would endure to hear that
he does not serve Christ so much as he did
serve the devil, he proves it by what foilows,
and renders it credible by bringing that
slavery before us, and saying how they did
serve him.*


* The ground for Paul’s speaking ‘‘ after the manner of men
because of the infirmity of their flesh’’ can hardly be, as
Chrys. suggests, because he would only demand for the ser-


a te


Homity XII.]


Ver. 20. “ For when ye were the servants
of sin, ye were free from righteousness.”’

Now what he says is somewhat of this kind,
When ye lived in wickedness, and impiety,
and the worst of evils, the state of compliance
ye lived in was such that ye did absolutely no
good thing atall. For this is, “ye were free
from righteousness.” Thatis ye were not sub-
ject toit, but estranged from it wholly. For ye
did not even so much as divide the manner
of servitude between righteousness and sin,
but gave yourselves wholly up to wickedness.
Now, therefore, since ye have come over to
righteousness, give yourselves wholly up to
virtue, doing nothing at all of vice, that the
measure you give may beat least equal. And
yet it is not the mastership only that is so
different, but in the servitude itself there is a
vast difference. And this too he unfolds with
great perspicuity, and shows what conditions
they served upon then, and what now. And
as yet he says nothing of the harm accruing
from the thing, but hitherto speaks of the
shame.

Ver. 21. “What fruit had ye then in those
things whereof ye are now ashamed ?”

So great was the slavery, that even the
recollection of it now makes you ashamed ;
but if the recollection makes one ashamed,
the reality would much more. And so you
gained now in two ways, in having been freed
from the shame, and also in having come to
know the condition vou were in; just as then
ye were injured in two ways, in doing things
deserving shame, and in not even knowing to
be ashamed. And this is worse than the
former. Yet still ye keptin a state of servi-
tude. Having then proved most abundantly
the harm of what took place then from the
shame of it, he comes to the thing in question.
Now what is this thing?

“ For the end of those things is death.”

Since then shame seems to be no such
serious evil, he comes to what is very fearful,
I mean death; though in good truth what he
had before mentioned were enough. For
consider how exceeding great the mischief
must be, inasmuch as, even when freed from
the vengeance due to it, they could not get
free of the shame. What wages then, he says,
do you expect from the reality, when from the


vice of the gospel an earnestness equal to that which they
had formerly displayed in sin. The reference to the infirmity
of their flesh gives the reason for his manner of speech in illus-
trating the character of the Christian life, rather than a
ground for the moderateness of his demand. His meaning
might be thus expressed : ‘‘I am carrying the figure of bond-
age to its utmost length in applying it to righteousness be-
cause I wish to make it clear to you that we are not in a law-
less condition, but are still «xder authority ; hence I use the
strongest language and press it almost beyond its proper limits
in han our relation to God and righteousness a servitude.”


27


Cite EPist lee TO! THE ROMANS.


417


bare recollection, and that too when you are
freed from the vengeance, you hide your face
and blush, though under such grace as you
are! But God’s side is far otherwise.

Ver. 22. “For now being made free from
sin, and become servants to God, ye have
your fruit unto holiness, and the end everlast-
ing life.”’

Of the former, the fruit was shame, even
after the .being sef free. Of tese, he
fruit is holiness, and where holiness is,. there
is all confidence. But of those things the end
is death, and of these everlasting life. Do
you see how he points out some things as
already given, and some as existing in hope,
and from what are given he draws proof of
the others also, that. is from the holiness of
the life. For to prevent your saying (i. e. as
an objection) everything lies in hope, he points
out that you have already reaped fruits, first
the being freed from wickedness, and such
evils as the very recollection of puts one
to shame; second, the being made a servant
unto righteousness; a third, the enjoying of
holiness ; a fourth, the obtaining of life, and life
too not for a season, but everlasting. Yet with
all these, he says, do but serve as ye served
it. For though the master is far preferable,
and the service also has many advantages,
and the rewards too for which ye are serving,
still I make no further demand. Next, since
he had mentioned arms and a king, he keeps
on with the metaphor in these words:

Ver. 23. “For the wages of sin is death,
but the gift of God is eternal life, through
Jesus Christ our Lord.”

After speaking of the wages of sin, in the
case of the blessings, he has not kept to the
same order (rag, rank or relation): for he
does not say, the wages of good deeds, “ but
the .gift of God;” to show, that it was not of
themselves that they were freed, nor was it a
due they received, neither yet a return, nor
a recompense of labors, but by grace all these
things came about.* And so there was a
superiority for this cause also, in that He did
not free them only, or change their condition
for a better, but that He did it without any
labor or trouble upon their part: and that He
not only freed them, but also gave them much
more than before, and that through His Son.
And the whole of this he has interposed as
having discussed the subject of grace, and


* Verse 23 is a confirmation of what he had said in 21, 22
about death and life. They are the results of the two courses
spoken of. The servant of sin receives death as his wages. It
follows on the principle of desert. Not so, however, on the
other side. Respecting eternal life there can be no thought of
wages or deserts. There allis grace. And thus Paul closes
this refutation of objections by triumphantly maintaining the
praise of God’s grace in Christ, as he had closed the argument
constructed upon the parallel between Adam and Christ
(v. 21).—G. B. S.


418


THE WORKS OR*ST. “CHRYSOSierE


[HomiILy XII.


being on the point of overthrowing the Law
next. That these things then might not both
make them rather listless, he inserted the
part about strictness of life, using every oppor-
tunity of rousing the hearer to the practice of
virtue. For when he calls death the wages of
sin, he alarms them again, and secures them
against dangers to come. For the words he
uses to remind them of their former estate, he
also employs so as to make them thankful,
and more secure against any inroads of temp-
tations. Here then he brings the hortatory
part to a stop, and proceeds with the doctrines
again, speaking on this wise.

Chap. vii, ver. 1. “‘ Know ye not, brethren,
for I speak to them that know the Law.”

Since then he had said, we are “‘dead to
sin,” he here shows that not sin only, but also
the Law, hath no dominion over them. But
if the Law hath none, much less hath sin:
and to render his language palatable, he uses
a human example to make this plain by. And
he seems to be stating one point, but he sets
down at once two arguments for his proposi-
tion. One, that when a husband is dead, the
woman is no longer subject to her husband,
and there is nothing to prevent her becoming
the wife of another man: and the other, that
in the present case it is not the husband only
that is dead but the wife also. So that one
may enjoy liberty in two ways. Now if when
the husband is dead, she is freed from his
power, when the woman is shown to be dead
also, she is much more at liberty. For if the
one event frees her from his power, much
more does the concurrence of both. As he is
about to proceed then to a proof of these
points, he starts with an encomium of the
hearers, in these words, “Know ye not,
brethren, for I speak to them that know the
Law, that is, I am saying a: thing that is
quite agreed upon, and clear, and to men too
that know all these things accurately,

“ How that the Law hath dominion over a
man as long as he liveth ? ”

He does not say, husband or wife, but
“man,” which name is common to either
creature; ‘ For he that is dead,” he says, ‘is
freed (Gr. justified) from sin.” The Law then
is given for the living, but to the dead it
ceaseth to be ordained (or to give commands).
Do -you observe how he sets forth a twofold
freedom? Next, after hinting this at the
commencement, he carries on what he has to
say by way of proof, in the woman’s case, in
the following way.

Ver. 2, 3. “For the woman which hath an
husband is bound by the Law to her husband,
so long as he liveth: but if the husband be
dead, she is loosed from the Law of her


husband. So then, if while her husband
liveth, she be married to another man, she is
called an adulteress: but if her husband be
dead, she is free from that law; so that she is
no adulteress, though she be married to an-
other man.”

He keeps continually upon this point, and
that with great exactness, since he feels quite
sure of the proof grounded on it: and in the
husband’s place he puts the Law, but in the
woman’s, all believers. Then he adds the
conclusion in such way, that it does not tally
with the premiss ; for what the context would
require would be, ‘‘and so, my brethren, the
Law doth not rule over you, for it is dead.” *
But he does not say so, but only in the
premiss hinted it, and in the inference, after-
wards, to prevent what he says being distaste-
ful, he brings the woman in as dead by
saying,

‘‘Wherefore, my brethren, ye also are be-
come dead to the Law.”

As then the one or the other event gives
rise to the same freedom, what is there to
prevent his showing favor to the Law without
any harm being done to the cause? “ For
the woman which hath an husband is bound
by the Law to her husband as long as he
liveth.” What is become now (3 Mss. then)


* Chrys. rightly apprehends the incongruous logical form of
the argument in vii. 1-6. The Apostle starts out with a gen—
eral principle: ‘‘ The law rulesa man as long as he lives.”’ It
is a question of the man’s living or dying not of the laws.
Now (v. 2.) he introduces in confirmation of this a specific
example. He takes the case of a woman who is ‘‘ under the
law of her husband.”’ Here the ‘law of the husband must
correspond to © véuos of the general principle; the yuvy to
6 av@pwros (v- 1). That is, the ‘‘ husband”’ of the illustration
corresponds to the “‘law’’ of the general principle and the
‘“woman’’ ofthe illustration to the ‘*‘man” of the principle.
But inv. 1, it is a question of the man’s (not of the law’s) living
or dying, while in the illustration this order is reversed.
Here it is a question of the husband’s living or dying (who
corresponds to the ‘‘law’’) and not of the wife’s, (who corre-
sponds to the ‘‘man”’ of v. 1). Howcan this incongruity be
explained? We answer that if Paul will use the illustration
from the dissolution of the marriage relation at all, he can use
it only as he has done. In order to make the illustration har-
monize zz _form with the principle (v. 1)and with the applica-
tion (v. 4.) it would be necessary to suppose the wife as dying
and then marrying again after death—which is impossible ;—
so that in order in any way to carry out the idea of the wife’s
marrying another (as illustrating the Christian’s becoming
free, asit were, from one husband—-the law—and joining him-
self to another—Christ), he must suppose the husband as
dying and not the wife. Nor can the thought which the
apostle wishes to bring out (the freedom to espouse another
master) be brought out by adhering to the form of verse 1.
There it is the man who dies and so gets free from the law,
but with this figure it is impossible to take the next step
(which is necessary to the argument) and say: He being dead
tohis former master, is free to take up allegiance to another.
In order to carry out the idea the thought ef verse 1 must
change form and represent as dying, not the person under
authority, but the person exercising it. The essential point of
the argument is, that the relation of the Christian to the
Mosaic law is as fully terminated as the marriage bond is by
the death of one of the parties. There is in each case a termi-
nation dy death, this term being used of the relation of the
Christian to the law as a strong figure. (Cf. Rom. vi. 6, where
the ‘‘death”’ is predicated of the man, and Gal. vi. 14 where it
is applied to both terms in the relation of the Christian to the
world: ‘‘By whom the wor/d is crucified unto me and / unto
the world.’’) The key to the whole passage is the idea of death
figuratively applied to the termination of the Christian’s rela-
tion to the law, and its central thought is, that having died to
the law, we must live unto Christ.—G. B. S.


HomiLy XII.]


VHD “EPISTLE: TO ‘THE ROMANS.


419


of those that speak evil of the Law?! Let
them hear, how even when forced upon it, he
does not bereave it of its dignity, but speaks
great things of its power; if while it is alive
the Jew is bound, and they are to be called
adulterers who transgress it, and leave it
whiles it is alive. But if they let go of it
after it has died, this is not to be wondered
at. For in human affairs no one is found
fault with for doing this: “but if the husband
be dead, she is loosed from the law of her
husband.” You see how in the example he
points out the Law as dead, but in the infer-
ence he does not do so. So then if it be
while her husband liveth, the woman is called
an adulteress. See how he dwells upon the
accusations of those who transgress the Law,
while it is yet living. But since he had put
an end to it, he afterwards favors it with per-
fect security, without doing any harm hereby
to the faith. “For if while her husband
liveth, she be married to another man, she is
called an adulteress.” Thus it would have
been natural to say next, ye also, my brethren,
now the Law is dead, will not be judged
guilty of adultery, if ye become married to
another husband. Yet he does not use these
words, but what? ‘Ye are become dead to
the Law;” if ye have been made dead, ye
are no longer under the Law. For if, when
the husband is dead, the woman is no longer
liable to it, much more when herself is dead
also she is freed from the former. Do you
note the wisdom of Paul, how he points out
that the Law itself designs that we should be
divorced from it, and married to another?
For there is nothing, he means, against your
living with another husband, now the former
is dead ; for how should there be, since when
the husband was alive it allowed this to her
who had a writing of divorcement?? But this
he does not set down, as it was rather a
charge against the woman; for although this
had been granted, still it was not cleared of
blame. (Matt. xix. 7, 8.) For in cases where
he has gained the victory by requisite and
accredited proofs, he does not go into ques-
tions beyond the purpose; not being captious.
The marvel then is this, that it is the Law
itself that acquits us who are divorced from
it of any charge, and so the mind of it was
that we should become Christ’s. For it is
dead itself, and we are dead ; and the grounds
of its power over us are removed in a twofold
way. But he is not content with this alone,
but also adds the reason of it. For he has


not set down death without special purpose,
but brings the cross in again, which had
wrought these things, and in this way too he
puts us under an engagement. For ye have
not been freed merely, he means, but it was
through the Lord’s death. For he says,

“Ye are become dead to the Law by the
Body of Christ.”

Now it is not on this only he grounds his
exhortation, but also on the superiority of
this second husband. And so he proceeds:
“that ye should be married to another, even
to Him Who is raised from the dead.”

Then to prevent their saying, If we do not
choose to live with another husband, what
then? For the Law does not indeed make an


adulteress of the widow who lives in a second
marriage, but for all that it does not force her
to live in it. Now that they may not say this,
he shows that from benefits already conferred,
it is binding on us to choose it: and this he
lays down more clearly in other passages,
where he says, “ Ye are not your own;” and,
“Ye are bought with a price;” and, “ Be not
ye the servants of men” (1 Cor. vi. 19, 20; Vii.
23); and again, “One died for all, that they
which live should not henceforth live unto
themselves, but unto Him which died for
them.” (2 Cor. v. 15.) - This is then what he
here alludes to m the words, “ By the Body.”
And next he exhorts to better hopes, saying,
“That we should bring forth fruit unto God.”
For then, he means, ye brought forth fruit
unto death, but now unto God.

Ver. 5. “For when we were in the flesh,
the motions of sins, which were by the Law,
did work in our members to bring forth fruit
unto death.”

You see then the gain to be got from the
former husband! And he does not say when
we were in the Law, so in every passage
shrinking from giving a handle to heretics ;*
but “when we were in the flesh,” that is, in
evil deeds, in a carnal life. What he says
then is, not that they were in the flesh before,
but now they went about without any bodies ; *
but by saying what he does, he neither says
that the Law is the cause of sins, nor yet
frees it from odium. For it held the rank of
a bitter accuser, by making their sins bare:
since that, which enjoins more to him who is
not minded to obey at all, makes the offence
greater. And this is why he does not say,
the “motions of sins” which were produced
by the Law, but which “were through the
Law” (Rom. ii. 27), without adding any


being.
2 Deut. xxiv. and xxv.
8, to the then existing Church.


|
1 The Manichees, who said the Law was given by an evil


3 Cf. Origen in Rom. v. 8, p. 537.
4 Perhaps alluding to Menander (J. Mart. Af. i. 26: Iren. i.


It is applied by Is. 1. 1; and Jer. iii. |


21; Eus. fii. 26), who pretended that those who received his
| baptism became immortal.


420 DHE WORKS) OF


ST. CHR YSOS#OM: {HomiLy XII.


“produced,” but simply “ through the Law,”
that is to say, which through the Law were
made apparent, were made known. Next
that he might not accuse the flesh either; he
does not say which the members wrought, but
“which did work (or were wrought) in our
members,” to show that the origin of the mis-
chief was elsewhere, from the thoughts which
wrought in us, not from the members which
had them working in them. For the soul
ranks as a performer, and the fabric of the
flesh as a lyre, sounding as the performer
obliges it. So the discordant tune is to be
ascribed not to the latter, but to the former
sooner than to the latter.

Ver. 16,“ But now,) hevsays; “we are de-
livered from the Law.” (karypy7Gyuev, “ made of
no effect.’’)

See how he again in this place spares the
flesh and the Law. For he does not say that
the Law was made of no effect, or that the
flesh was made of no effect, but that we were
made of no effect (i. e., were delivered).
And how were we delivered? Why by the
old man, who was held down by sin, being
dead and buried. For this is what he sets
forth in the words, “being dead to that,
wherein we were held.” As if he had said,
the chain by which.we were held down was
deadened and broken through, so that that
which held down, namely sin, held down no
more. But do not fall back or grow listless.
For you have been freed with a view to being
servants again, though not in the same way,
but ‘in newness of spirit, and not in the old-
ness of the letter.” Now what does he mean
here? for it is necessary to disclose it here,
that when we come upon the passage, we may
not be perplexed with it. When then Adam
sinned (he means), and his body became
liable to death and sufferings, it received also
many physical losses, and the horse’ became
less active and less obedient. But Christ, when
He came, made it more nimble for us through
baptism, rousing it with the wing of the Spirit.
And for this reason the marks for the race,
which they of old time had to run, are not the
same as ours.” Since then the race was not so
easy as it is now. For this reason, He de-
sires them to be clear not from murder only,
as He did them of old time, but from anger
also; nor is it adulterv only that He bids
them keep clear of, but even the unchaste look ;
and to be exempt not from false swearing
only, but even from true. (Matt. v. 21, 27, 33.)
And with their friends He orders them to love


1 Alluding to Plato’s Phedrus again as in the word wing
too


2 So St. Aug. interprets
See Cat. Aur. ad loc.


3


shall be least in the kingdom.”


their enemies also. And in all other duties,
He gives us a longer ground to run over, and
if we do but obey, threatens us with hell, so
showing that the things in question are not
matters of free-will offering for the com-
batants, as celibacy and poverty are, but are
binding upon us absolutely to fulfil. For
they belong to necessary and urgent requisites,
and the man who does not do them is to be
punished to the utmost. This is why He said,
“Except your righteousness exceed the right-
eonsness of the Scribes and Pharisees, ye shall
in no case enter into the kingdom of heaven.”
(Matt. v. 20.) But he that does not see the
kingdom, shall certainly fall into hell. For
this cause Paul too says, “Sin shall not have
dominion over you, because ye are not under
the Law, but under grace.” And here again,
“that ye should serve in newness of spirit,
and not in the oldness of the letter.” For it
is not the letter that condemneth, that is the
old Law, but the Spirit that helpeth. And
for this reason among the ancients, if any
were found practising virginity, it was quite
astonishing. But now the thing is scattered
over every part of the world. And death
in those times some few men did _ with
difficulty despise, but now in villages and
cities there are hosts of martyrs without num-
ber, consisting not of men only, but even of
women.® And next having done with this, he
again meets an objection which is rising, and
as he meets it, gives confirmation to his own
object. And so he does not introduce the
solution of it as main argument, but by way of
opposing this; that by the exigency of meet-
ing it, he may get a plea for saying what he
wishes, and make his accusation not so unpal-
atable. Having then said, “in the newness of
the Spirit, and not in the oldness of the letter,”’
he proceeds.

Ver. 7. “What then? is the Law sin?
forbid.”

Even before this he had been saying, that
“the motions of sins, which were by the Law
did work in our members” (ver. 5): and, ‘sin
shall have no dominion over you, for ye are
not under the Law.” (vi. 14.) And thag
“where no law is, there is no transgression.”
(iv. 15.) And, “but the Law came in, that
the offence might abound” (v. 20); and,
“the Law worketh wrath.” (iv. 15.) Now
as all these things seem to bring the Law into
disrepute, in order to correct the suspicion
arising from them, he supposes also an objec-
tion, and _ says, “‘ What then, is the Law sin?
God forbid.” Before the proof he uses this
adjuration to conciliate the hearer, and by


God


3 See St. Athan. de. Zucarn. Cc. 27, t. 1. p. 70.


Homi ty XII.]


THE, EPISTLE TO THE’ ROMANS.


421


way of soothing any who was troubled at it.
For so, when he had heard this, and felt assured
of the speaker’s disposition, he would join
with him in investigating the seeming per-
plexity, and feel no suspicions of him. Where-
fore he has put the objection, associating the
other with him. Hence, he: does not say,
What am I to say? but “ What shall we say
then?” Asthough a deliberation and a judg-
ment were before them, and a general meet-
ing called together, and the objection came
forward not of himself, but in the course of
discussion, and from real circumstances of the
case. For that the letter killeth, he means,
no one will deny, or that the Spirit giveth life
(2 Cor. iii. 6); this is plain too, and nobody
will dispute it. If then these are confessedly
truths, what are we to say about the Law?
that “it is sin? God forbid.” Explain the
difficulty then. Do you see how he supposes
the opponent to be present, and having as-
sumed the dignity of the teacher, he comes to
the explaining of it. Now what is this? Sin,
he says, the Law is not. “Nay, I had not
known sin, but by the Law.” Notice the
reach of his wisdom! What the Law is not,
he has set down by way of objection, so that
by removing this, and thereby doing the Jew
a pleasure, he may persuade him to accept the
less alternative. And what is this? Why
that “I had not known sin, but by the Law.
For I had not known lust, except the Law had
said, Thou shalt not covet.”

Do you observe, how by degrees he shows
it to be not an accuser of sin only, but ina
measure its producer? Yet not from any
fault of its own, but from that of the froward
Jews, he proves it was, that this happened.
For he has taken good heed to stop the
mouths of the Manichees, that accuse the
Law; and so after saying, ‘“ Nay, I had not
known sin, but by the Law; ” and, “I had not
known lust, except the Law had said, Thou
shall not covet ;”’ he adds,

Ver. 8. “But sin, taking occasion by the
commandment, wrought in me all manner of
concupiscence.”

Do you see how he has cleared it of all
blame? For “sin,” he says, “taking occasion
by the commandment,” it was, and not the
Law, that increased the concupiscence, and
the reverse of the Law’s intent was brought
about. This came of weakness, and not of
any badness. For when we desire a thing,
and then are hindered of it, the flame of the
desire is but increased. Now this came not of
the Law; for it hindered us (3 Mss. en-


deavored) of itself to keep us off from it; but |
sin, that is, thy own listlessness and bad dis- |
position, used what was good for the reverse.


But this is no fault in the physician, but in the
patient who applies the medicine wrongly.
For the reason of the Law being given was,
not to inflame concupiscence, but to extinguish
it, though the reverse came of it. Yet the
blame attaches not to it, but to us. Since if
a person had a fever, and wanted to take cold
drink when it was not good for him, and one
were not to let him take his fill of it, and so
increase his lust after this ruinous pleasure,
one could not deservedly be found fault with.
For the physician’s business is simply pro-
hibiting it, but the restraining himself is the
patient’s. And what if sin did take occasion
from it? Surely there are many bad men
who by good precepts grow in their own
wickedness. For this was the way in which
the devil ruined Judas, by plunging him
into avarice, and making him steal what be-
longed to the poor. However it was not the
being entrusted with the bag that brought this
to pass, but the wickedness of his own spirit.
And Eve, by bringing Adam to eat from the
tree, threw him out of Paradise. But neither
in that case was the tree the cause, even if it
was through it that the’ occasion took place.
But if he treats the discussion about the Law
with somewhat of vehemence, do not feel sur-
prise. For Paul is making a stand against
the present exigency, and suffers not his
language to give a handle even to those that
suspected otherwise, but takes great pains to
make the present statement correct. Do not
then sift what he is now going on to say (4
Mss. “‘ here saying”’) by itself, but put beside it
the purpose by which he is led on to speak of
these things, and reckon for the madness of
the Jews, and their vigorous spirit of con-
tention, which as he desires earnestly to do
away with, he seems to bear violently (xoAic
mre) against the Law, not to find fault with
it, but to unnerve their vigor. For if it is any
reproach to the Law that sin taketh occasion
by it, this will be found to be the case in the
New Testament also. For in the New Testa-
ment there are thousands of laws, and about
many more (‘far more,” Field) important mat-
ters. And one may see the same come to
pass there also, not with regard to covetous-
ness (lust, as v. 7) only, but to all wickedness
generally. For He says, “if I had not come
and spoken unto them, they had not had sin,”
(John xv. 22.) Here then sin finds a footing
in this fact, and so the greater punishment.
And again when Paul discourseth about grace,
he says, “Of how much sorer punishment,
suppose ye, shall he be counted worthy, who
hath trodden under foot the Son of God.”


| 1 See the Analogy, 1. v. § 4, Pp. 132.


422


(Heb. x. 29.) Has not then the worse punish-
ment its origin from hence, from the greater
benefit? And the reason why he says the
Greeks were without excuse was, because
being honored with the gift of reason, and
having gotten a knowledge of the beauty of the
creation, and having been placed in a fair way
for being led by it to the Creator, they did not
so use the wisdom of God, as it was their
duty. Seest thou that to the wicked in all
cases occasions of greater punishment result
from good things? But we shall not in this
accuse the benefits of God, but rather upon
this even admire them the more: but we shall
throw the blame on the spirit of those who
abuse the blessings to contrary purpose.
Let this then be our line with regard to the
Law also. But this is easy and feasible—the
other is what is a difficulty. How is it that he
says “I had not known lust except the Law
had said, Thou shall not covet?” Now if
man had not known lust, before he received
the Law, what was the reason for the flood, or
the burning of Sodom? What does he mean
then? He means vehement lust: and this is
why he did not say, lust, but “all manner of
concupiscence,” intimating, in that, its vehe-
mency. And what, it will be said, is the good
of the Law, if it adds to the disorder? None;
but much mischief even. Yet the charge is
not against the Law, but the listlessness of
those who received it. For sin wrought it,
though by the Law. But this was not the pur-
pose of the Law, nay, the very opposite, Sin
then became stronger, he says, and violent.
But this again is no charge against the Law
but against their obstinacy. ‘For without
the Law sin is dead.” That is, was not so as-
certainable. For even those before the Law
knew that they had sinned, but they came to a
more exact knowledge of it after the giving of
the Law. And for this reason they were
liable to a greater accusation: since it was not
the same thing to have nature to accuse them,
and besides nature the Law, which told them
distinctly every charge.

Ver. 9. “For I was alive without the Law
once.”

When, pray, was that? Before Moses.
See how he sets himself to show that it, both
by the things it did, and the things it did not
do, weighed down human nature. For when
“IT was alive without the Law,” he means, I
was not so much condemned.

“But when the commandment came, sin
revived, and I died.”

This seems indeed to be an accusing of the
Law. But if any one will look closely at it, it
will be seen to be even an encomium of it.
For it did not give existence to sin that be-


THE “WORKS?! OF ST: CHEXSOST@rE


|HomiLy XII.


fore was not, but only pointed out what had
escaped notice. And this is even a praise of
the Law, if at least before it they had been
sinning without perceiving it. But when this
came, if they gained nothing besides from it,
at all events this they were distinctly made
acquainted with, the fact that they had been
sinning. And this is no small point, with a
view to getting free from wickedness. Now if
they did not get free, this has nothing to do
with the Law; which framed everything with a
view to this end, but the accusation lies wholly
against their spirit, which was perverse beyond
all supposition.’ For what took place was
not the natural thing,—their being injured by
things profitable. And this is why he says
‘And the commandment, which was ordained
to life, I found to be unto death.” He does
not say, “it was made,” or “it brought forth ”
death, but “was found,” so explaining the
novel and unusual kind of discrepancy, and
making the whole fall upon their own pate.
For if, he says, you would know the aim of it,
it led to life, and was given with this view.
But if death was the issue of this, the fault
is with them that received the commandment,
and not of this, which was leading them to
life. And this is a point on which he has
thrown fresh light by what follows.

Ver. 11. “For sin taking occasion by the
commandment deceived me, and by it slew
me?

You observe how he everywhere keeps to
sin, and entirely clears the Law of accusation.
And so he proceeds as follows.

Ver. 12. “Wherefore the law is holy, and
the commandment holy, and just, and good.”

But, if ye be so minded, we will bring be-
fore you the language of those who wrest
these declarations. For this will make our
own statements clearer. For there are some
that say, that he is not here saying what he
does of the Law of Moses, but some take it of
the law of nature; some, of the command-
ment given in Paradise. Yet surely Paul’s
object everywhere is to annul this Law, but
he has not any question with those. And
with much reason; for it was through a fear
and a horror of this that the Jews obstinately
opposed grace. But it does not appear that
he has ever called the commandment in Para-
dise “Law” at all; no, nor yet any other
writer. Now to make this plainer from what
he has really said, let us follow out his words,
retracing the argument a little.


1 This expression seems strange with respect to the acts of
God, but it may be referred to what man could have imagined
beforehand ; as indeed one use of the Law was to make men
sensible of their real state.
suggested by Is. v. 4; Matt. xxi. 19; Luke xii. 6.


Having then —
spoken to them about strictness of conversa- —


It may also be taken in the sense —


HomILy XII]


tion, he goes on to say, “Know ye _ not,
brethren, how that the Law hath dominion
over a man as long as he liveth? Wherefore
ye are become dead to the Law.” Therefore
if these things are said about the natural law,
we are found to be without the natural law.
And if this be true, we are more senseless
than the creatures which are without reason.
Yet this is not so, certainly. For with regard
to the law in Paradise, there is no need to be
contentious, lest we should be taking up a
superfluous trouble, by entering the lists
against things men have made up their minds
upon. In what sense then does he say, “I
should not have known sin but by the Law?”
He is speaking, not of absolute want of knowl-
edge, but of the more accurate knowledge.
For if this were said of the law of nature, how
would what follows suit? “ For I was alive,”
he says, “without the Law once.” . Now
neither Adam, nor any body else, can be
shown ever to have lived without the law of
nature. For as soon as God formed him, He
put into him that law of nature, making it to
dwell by him as a security to the whole kind
(Gr. Nature, see p. 365). And besides this, it
does not appear that he has anywhere called
the law of nature a commandment. but this
he calls as well a commandment, and that
“just and holy,” as a “spiritual law.” But the
law of nature was not given to us by the?’
Spirit. For barbarians, as well as Greeks
and other men, have this law. Hence it is
plain, that it is the Mosaic Law that he is
speaking of above, as well as afterwards, and
in all the passages. For this cause also he
calls it holy, saying, ‘“‘ Wherefore the Law is
holy, and the commandment holy, and just,
and good.” For even though the Jews have
been unclean since the Law, and unjust and
covetous, this does not destroy the virtue of
the Law, even as their unbelief doth not make
the faith of God of none effect. So from all
these things it is plain, that it is of the Law
of Moses that he here speaks.

Ver. 13. “‘Was then that which is good
made death unto me? God forbid. But sin,
that it might appear sin.” (4 Mss. om. 7.)

That is, that it might be shown what a
great evil sin is, namely, a listless will, an
inclinableness to the worse side, the actual
doing (3 Mss. om. this clause), and the per-
verted judgment. For this is the cause of all
the evils; but he amplifies it by pointing out
the exceeding grace of Christ, and teaching
them what an evil He freed the human race
from, which, by the medicines used to cure it,


_? Gen, vi. 3; and Psalm xciv. 10. do not contradict this,
since St. C. is using the word in its limited sense, as in St.
John vii. 39.


THE. EPISTLE. TO \THE ROMANS: 423


had become worse, and was increased by the
preventives. Wherefore he goes on to say:
“That sin, by the commandment, might
become exceeding sinful.’? Do you see how
these things are woven together everywhere?
By the very means he uses to accuse sin, he
again shows the excellency of the Law.
Neither is it a small point which he has gained
by showing what an evil sin is, and unfolding
the whole of its poison, and bringing it to
view. For this is what he shows, by saying,
“that sin by the commandment might become
exceeding sinful.” That is, that it may be
made clear what an evil sin is, what a ruinous
thing. And this is what was shown by the
commandment. Hereby he also shows the
preéminence of grace above the Law, the pre-
éminence above, not the conflict with, the
Law. For do not look to this fact, that those
who received it were the worse for it; but
consider the other, that the Law had not only
no design of drawing wickedness out to
greater lengths, but even seriously aimed at
hewing down what already existed. But if it
had no strength, give to it indeed a crown for
its intention, but adore more highly the power
of Christ, which abolished, cut away: and
plucked up the very roots an evil so manifold
and so hard to be overthrown. But when you
hear me speak of sin, do not think of it asa
substantial * power, but evil doing, as it comes
upon men and goes from them continually,
and which, before it takes place, has no being,
and when it has taken place, vanishes again.
This then was why the Law was given. Now
no law is ever given to put an end to things
natural, but in order to correct a way of act-
ing purposely wicked. And this the lawgivers
that are without too are aware of, and all
mankind in general. For it is the evils from
viciousness alone that they are for setting
right, and they do not undertake to extirpate
those allotted us along with our nature; since
this they cannot do. For things natural
remain unalterable (Arist. 47h. b. 2, c. 1), as
we have told you frequently in other dis-
courses also.

And so let us leave these contests, and
again practise ourselves in exhortation. Or
rather, this last part belongs to those contests.
For if we cast out wickedness, we should
bring virtue in also: and by these means we
shall clearly teach that wickedness is no nat-
ural evil, and shall be able easily to stop the
mouths of them that enquire for the origin of
evil, not by means of words only, but of
actions also, since we share the same nature


2 See Herbert’s Poems, 2d. on Sin. ‘*Oh that I could a sin
once see!’ etc. Also Mihler Syd. 1. i. c. 8. also St. Aug.
Conf. vii. § 12 (18) p. x22, O. T. and De Civ. Dez. xi. § g, xii. § 2.


424


with them, but are freed from their wicked-
ness. For let us not be looking at the labo-
riousness of virtue, but at the possibility of
succeeding init. But if we be in earnest, it
will be at once light and palatable to us. But
if you tell me of the pleasure of vice, tell out
its end too. For it issueth in death, even as
virtue leadeth us to life. Or if you think fit,
let us rather scrutinize them both even before
their end; for we shall see that vice has a
great deal of pain attached to it, and virtue
great pleasure. For what pray is so painful
as a bad conscience? or what more pleasing
than a good hope? For there is nothing,
assuredly there is nothing, which is used to
cut us so deep, and press so hard on us, as
the expectation of evil: nothing that so keeps
us up, and all but gives us wings, as a good
conscience. And this we may get a knowl-
edge of even by what takes place before our
eyes. For they that dwell in a prison, and
are in expectation of sentence against them,
let them have the enjoyment of luxury
repeated beyond count, live a more afflicting
life than those that go a begging by the by-
roads, yet with nothing upon their consciences
to trouble them. For the expectation of a
dreadful end will not let them perceive those
pleasures which they have in their hands.
And why doI speak of prisoners? Why, as
for those that are living out of prison, and
have a good fortune, yet have a bad con-
science about them, handicraftsmen that work
for their bread, and spend the whole day amid
their labor, are in a far better plight than
they. And for this reason too we say, How
miserable the gladiators are (though seeing
them as we do in taverns, drunken, luxurious,
gormandizing), and call them the most miser-
able of men, because the calamity of the end
which they must expect is too great to admit
of comparison with that pleasure. Now if to
them a life of this sort seems to be pleasing,
remember what I am continually telling you,
that it is no such marvel that a man who lives
in vice should not flee from the misery and
pain of vice. For see how a thing so detest-
able as that, yet seems to be delectable to
those who practice it. Yet we do not on this
account say, how happy they are, for this is
just the very reason why we think them
pitiable, because they have no notion of the
evils they are amongst. And what would you
say of adulterers, who for a little pleasure
undergo at once a disgraceful slavery, and a
loss of money, and a perpetual fear (Hor.
Sati IL. “vil 58-67); “and ane “fact the wery
life of a Cain, or rather one that is even
much worse than his, filled with fears for
the present, and trembling for the future,


THE’ WORKS: OFS? CHRVS0OS TOR


[HomiLy XII.


and suspecting alike friend and foe, and those
that know about it, and those that know
nothing? Neither when they go to sleep are
they quit of this struggle, their bad conscience
shaping out for them dreams that abound.
with sundry terrors, and in this way horrify-
ing them. Far otherwise is the chaste man,
seeing he passes the present life unshackled
and at full liberty. Weigh then against the
little pleasure, the sundry fluctuations of these
terrors, and with the short labor of con-
tinency, the calm of an entire life; and you
will find the latter hath more of pleasantness.
than the former. But as for the man that is.
set upon plundering and laying hands upon
other men’s goods, tell me if he has not to
undergo countless pains in the way of run-
ning about, fawning upon slaves, freemen,
doorkeepers; alarming and threatening, act-
ing shamelessly, watching, trembling, in
agony, suspecting everything. Far otherwise
is the man that holds riches in contempt, for
he too enjoys pleasure in abundance, and
lives with no fear, and in perfect security.
And if any one were to go through the other
instances of vice, he would find much trouble,
and many rocks. But what is of greater
importance is, that in the case of virtue the
difficulties come first, and the pleasant part
afterwards, so the trouble is even thus alle-
‘viated. But in the case of vice, the reverse.
After the pleasure, the pains and the punish-
ments, so that by these besides the pleasure
is done away. For as he who waits for the
crown, perceives nothing of present annoy-
ance, so he that has to expect the punish-
ments after the pleasures has no power of
gathering in a gladness that is unalloyed,
since the fear puts everything in confusion.
Or rather if any one were to scrutinize the
thing with care, even before the punishment
which follows upon these things, he would
find that even at the very moment when vice
is boldly entered upon, a great deal of pain is
felt. And, if you think fit, let us just exam-
ine this in the case of those who plunder
other men’s goods. Or those who in any way
get together money, and setting aside the
fears, and dangers, and trembling, and agony,.
and care, and all these things, let us suppose
the case of a man, who has got rich without
any annoyance, and feels sure about main-
taining his present fortune (which he has no
means of doing, still for all that let it be
assumed for argument’s sake). What sort of
pleasure then is he to gather-in from having
so much about him? On the contrary, it is
just this very thing that will not let him be
glad-hearted. For as long as ever he desires.
other things besides, he is still upon the rack.


Homity XIL.]


Because desire gives pleasure at the time it
has come to a stand. If thirsty, for instance,
we feel refreshed, when we have drunk as
much as we wish; but so long as we keep
thirsty, even if we were to have exhausted all
the fountains in the world, our torment were
but growing greater; even if we were to
drink up ten thousand rivers, our state of
punishment were more distressing. And
thou also, if thou wert to receive the goods of
the whole world, and still to covet, wouldest
make thy punishment the greater, the more
things thou hadst tasted of. Fancy not then,
that from having gathered a great sum
together thou shalt have aught of pleasure,
but rather by declining to be rich. But if
thou covetest to be rich thou wilt be always
under the scourge. For this is a kind of love
that does not reach its aim; and the longer
journey thou hast gone, the further off thou
keepest from the end. Is not this a paradox
then, a derangement, a madness in the ex-
treme? Let us then forsake this first of evils,
or rather let us not even touch this covetous-
ness at all. Yet, if we have touched it, let us
spring away from its first motions (xpoouiwv).
For this is the advice the writer of the
Proverbs gives us, when he speaks about the
harlot: “Spring away,” he says, “tarry not,
neither go thou near to the door of her
house” (Prov. v. 8): this same thing I would
say to you about the love of money. For if
by entering gradually you fall into this ocean
of madness, you will not be able to get up
out of it with ease, and asif you were in whirl-
pools,! struggle as often as ever you may, it
will not be easy for vou to get clear; so after
falling into this far worse abyss of covetous-
ness, you will destroy your own self, with all
that belongs to you. (Acts viii. 20.) And so
my advice is that we be on our watch against
the beginning, and avoid little evils, for the
great ones are gendered by these. For he
who gets into a way of saying at every sin,
This matters nothing! will by little and little
ruin himself entirely. At all events it is this
which has introduced vice, which has opened
the doors to the robber (5 Mss. devil), which
has thrown down the walls of cities, this say-
ing at each sin, “This matters nothing!”
Thus in the case of the body too, the greatest
of diseases grow up, when trifling ones are
-made light of. If Esau had not first been a
traitor to his birthright, he would not have
become unworthy of the blessings. If he had
not rendered himself unworthy of the bless-
ings, he would not have had the desire of
going on to fratricide. If Cain had not fallen


1 Such is apparently the sense, though Field with most Mss.
reads iAtyyots not tAcyée.


THE EPIStbE FO‘ THE: ROMARS:


425


in love with the first place, but had left that
to God, he would not have had the second
place. Again, when he had the second place,
if he had listened to the advice, he would not
have travailed with the murder. Again, if
after doing the murder he had come to
repentance, when God called him, and had
not answered in an irreverent way, he
would not have had to suffer the subsequent
evils. But if those before the Law did owing
to this listlessness come to the very bottom of
misery, only consider what is to become of us,
who are called to a greater contest, unless we
take strict heed unto ourselves, and make
speed to quench the sparks of evil deeds
before the whole pile is kindled. ‘Take an
instance of my meaning. Are you in the
habit of false swearing? do not stop at this
only, but away with all swearing, and you will
have no further need of trouble. For it is far
harder fora man that swears to keep from
false swearing, than to abstain from swearing
altogether.2, Are you an insulting and
abusive person? a striker too? Lay down as
a law for yourself not to be angry or brawl in
the least, and with the root the fruit also will
be gotten rid of. Are you lustful and dissi-
pated? Make it your rule again not even to
look at a woman (Job xxxi. 1), or to go up
into the theatre, or to trouble yourself with the
beauty of other people whom you see about.
For it is far easier not even to look at a
woman of good figure, than after looking and
taking in the lust, to thrust out the perturba-
tion that comes thereof, the struggle being
easier in the preliminaries (xpoomiow). Or
rather we have no need of a struggle at all if
we do not throw the gates open to the enemy,
or take in the seeds of mischief (kaxiac).
And this is why Christ chastised the man who
looks unchastely upon a woman (Matt. v. 28),
that He might free us from greater labor,
before the adversary became strong, bidding
us cast him out of the house while he may be
cast out even with ease. For what need to
have superfluous trouble, and to get entan-
gled with the enemies, when without entangle-
ment we may erect the trophy, and before the
wrestling seize upon the prize? For it is not
so great a trouble not to look upon beautiful
women, as it is while looking to restrain one’s


2 See St. Chrys. on Eph. i. 14, Hom. i7. Mor. (p. 119 O. T.)
also Hom. x. on the Statutes, p. 186 O. T. and index and St.
Gr. Naz. /amé. xx. (Ben. xxiv.) The practice of swearing
seems to have prevailed to such an extent, as to call for the
utmost exertions to put itdown. St. Jerome on Jer. iv. 2; Ez.
xvii. 19, seems however to allow oaths. St. Athanasius speaks
strongly against swearing generally, de Pass. et Cruc. § 4, 5, 6,
t. 2, p. 82-4, and seems to allow it on Ps. Ixii. 12 (Eng. Ixili. 11.)
t.1, 1107, b. In Afol. ad Imp. Const. Hist. Tracts, p. 161 O. T.
he wishes some one present, “‘that he might question him by
the very Truth” (em avrns THs adndetas) * for what we say as
in the presence of God, we Christians hold for an oath."’


426


self. Or rather the first would be no trouble
at all, but immense toil and labor comes on
after looking. Since then this trouble is less
(most Mss. add, “to the incontinent’’), or
rather there is no labor at all, nor trouble, but
the greater gain, why do we take pains to
plunge into an ocean of countless evils? And
farther, he who does not look upon a woman,
will overcome such lust not only with greater
ease, but with a higher purity, as he on the other
hand who does look, getteth free with more
trouble, and not without a kind of stain,! that
is, tf he does get free at all) Wor he: that
does not take a view of the beautiful figure, is
pure also from the lust that might result.
But he who lusteth to look, after first laying
his reason low, and polluting it in countless
ways, has then to cast out the stain that came
of the lust, that is, if he do cast it out. This
then is why Christ, to prevent our suffering in
this way, did not prohibit murder only, but
wrath; not adultery only, but an unchaste
look even: not perjury only, but all swearing
whatsoever. Nor does he make the measure
of virtue stop here, but after having given
these laws, He proceeds to a still greater
degree. For after keeping us far away from
murder, and bidding us to be clear of wrath,
He bids us be ready even to suffer ill, and
not to be prepared to suffer no more than
what he who attacks us pleases, but even to
go further, and to get the better of his utmost
madness by the overflowingness of our own
Christian spirit (rie OlKELaC @tyocodiac). For
what He says is not, ‘“‘ If a man smite thee on
thy right cheek, bear it nobly and hold thy
peace ;” but He adds to this the yielding to
him the other too. For He says, “Turn to
him the other also.” (Matt. v. 39.) This
then is the brilliant victory, to yield him even
more than what he wishes, and to go beyond
the bounds of his evil desire by the profuse-
ness of one’s own patient endurance. For in
this way you will put a stop to his madness,
and also receive from the second act again
the reward of the first, besides putting a stop
to wrath against him. See you, how in all
cases it is we that have it in our power not to
suffer ill, and not they that inflict it? Or
rather it is not the not suffering ill alone, but
even the having benefits (Sav. conj. rafeiv ed, So
2 Mss.) done us that we have in our own
power. And this is the truest wonder, that
we are so far from being injured, if we be
right-minded, that we are even benefited, and
that too by the very things that we suffer
unjustly at the hands of others. Reflect
then; has such an one done you an affront?


} “ There is some little sensuality in being tempted.” Bp.


Taylor on Repentance, c. 5. sect. 6. § 4. t. 8, p. 494.


THE» WORKS"@OF ST. (CHES SOSLGME


|Homity XII,


You have the power of making this affront
redound to your honor. For if you do an
affront in return, you only increase the dis-
grace. But if you bless him that did you the
affront, you will see that all men give you
victory, and proclaim your praise. Do you
see how by the things wherein we are
wronged, we get good done unto us if we be so
minded? This one may see happening in the
case of money matters, of blows, and the
same in everything else. For if we requite
them with the opposite, we are but twining a
double crown about us, one for the ills we
have suffered, as well as one for the good we
are doing. Whenever then a person comes
and tells you that “such an one has done you
an affront, and keeps continually speaking ill
of you to everybody,” praise the man to those
who tell you of him. For thus even if you
wish to avenge yourself, you will have the
power of inflicting punishment. For those
who hear you, be they ever so foolish, will
praise you, and hate him as fiercer than any
brute beast, because he, without being at all
wronged, caused you pain, but you, even
when suffering wrong, requited him with the
opposite. And so you wlll have it in your
power to prove that all that he said was to no
purpose. For he who feels the tooth of slan-
der, gives by his vexation a proof that he is
conscious of the truth of what is said. But
he who smiles at it, by this very thing acquits
himself of all suspicion with those who are
present. Consider then how many good
things you cull together from the affair.
First, you rid yourself of all vexation and
trouble. Secondly (rather this should come
first), even if you have sins, you put them off,2
as the Publican did by bearing the Pharisee’s
accusation meekly. Besides, you wiil by this
practice make your soul heroic (Gr. philo-
sophic), and will enjoy endless praises from
all men, and will divest yourself of any sus-
picion arising from what is said. But even if
you are desirous of taking revenge upon the
man, this too will follow in full measure, both
by God’s punishing him for what he has said,
and before that punishment by thy heroic
conduct standing to him in the place of a
mortal blow. For there is nothing that cuts
those who affront us so much to the heart, as
for us who are affronted to smile at the
affront. As then from behaving with Chris-
tian heroism so many honors will accrue to
us, so from being little-minded just the


2 An instance of the rhetorical arrangement he admires in
the Apostle. His object 1s of course to make men patient
under reproaches even when partly deserved, and he thus
takes them by surprise.

3 See on Rom. xii. 20, Hom 22, which illustrates the subsid-
iary use of inferior motives.


Homixy XIII.]


THE EPISTLE -TO. THE. BOGUANS,


427


opposite will befall us in everything. For we
disgrace ourselves, and also seem to those
present to be guilty of the things mentioned,
and fill our soul with perturbation, and give
our enemy pleasure, and provoke God, and
add to our former sins. Taking then all this
into consideration, let us flee from the abyss


of a little mind (yxpowvyiac), and take refuge
in the port of patient endurance (naxpobuuiac),
that here we may at once “find rest unto our
souls’ (Matt. xi. 29), as Christ also set forth,
and may attain to the good things to come,
by the grace and love toward man, etc.


PEO rey ei


ROM. VII.


“For we know that the Law is spiritual: but I am
carnal, sold under sin.”


AFTER having said that great evils had
taken place, and that sin, taking occasion by
the commandment, had grown stronger, and
the opposite of what the Law mainly aimed at
had been the result, and after having thrown
the hearer into a great deal of perplexity, he
goes on next to give the rationale of these
events, after first clearing the Law of any
ill suspicion. For lest—upon hearing that
it was through the commandment that sin
took that occasion, and that it was when
it came that sin revived, and through it
deceived and killed—any one should sup-
pose the Law to be the source of these
evils, he first sets forth its defence with
considerable advantage, not clearing it from
accusation only, but encircling it also with
the utmost praise. And this he lays down,
not as granting it for his own part, but
as declaring a universal judgment. “ For
we know,” he says, “that the Law is
spiritual.” As if he had said, This is an
allowed thing, and self-evident, that it “‘is
spiritual,” so far is it from being the cause
of sin, or to blame for the evils that have
happened. And observe, that he not only
clears it of accusation, but bestows exceed-
ing great praise upon it. For by calling
it spiritual, he shows it to be a_ teacher
of virtue and hostile to vice; for this is
what being spiritual means, leading off from
sin of every kind’ And this the Law did
do, by frightening, admonishing, chastening,
correcting, recommending every kind _ of
virtue. Whence then, was sin produced, if
the teacher was so admirable? It was from
the listlessness of its disciples. Wherefore
he went on to say, “but I am carnal;”
giving us a sketch now of man, as com-
porting himself in the Law, and before the


I4.


Law.* “Sold under sin.” Because with
death (he means) the throng of passions
also came in. For when the body had be-
come mortal, it was henceforth a necessary
thing for it to receive concupiscence, and
anger, and pain, and all the other passions,
which required a great deal of wisdom
(oA0codiac) to prevent their flooding us, and
sinking reason in the depth of sin. For
in themselves they were not sin,!_ but,
when their extravagancy was unbridled, it
wrought this effect. Thus (that I may take


f=) é
one of them and examine it as a specimen)


desire is not sin: but when it has run into
extravagance, being not minded to keep
within the laws of marriage,” but springing
even upon other men’s wives; then the
thing henceforward becomes adultery, yet


* Chrys. gives no hint of any controversy as to the interpre-
tation of the passage vil. 14-25. In modern times the question
has been greatly disputed: Whom does the apostle represent
by the ‘tI’’ who is waging such an unsuccessful combat with
sin? Passing by the views that he refers to himself person-
ally (Hofmann) and that he refers to the Jewish people under
the old dispensation (Grotius, Reiche), two opinions have pre-
vailed among interpreters (1) that he is representing the 7e-
generate man. (For the arguments by which this view is
supported see Hodge on Romans 7» éoco). (2) That he is here
personating the «7 egenerate man who, however, has become
awakened under the law to a sense of his sinful condition.
This view is preferred on the following grounds. (1) The con-
nection of 14-25 with the argument of 7-13 which shows the
power of the law to awaken the consciousness of sin and can
therefore apply only to the Jew aroused by the law. (2) The
relation of the passage to chap. viii. In vii. 25 the apostle
mounts to the Christian plane and in ch. viii. exults in the lib-
eration from the conflict just described which Christ brings to
the soul. (3) Much of the language of vii. 14-25 is inconsistent
with the consciousness of a regenerate man and especially
with Paul’s joyous and triumphant view of the Christian life,
(4) The language throughout is appropriate, not, indeed, to the
morally indifferent man, but to the unconverted Jew whom
the law has awakened to a knowledge of his sin and need, and
this is precisely the subject under consideration in the earlier
verses of the Chap. So Tholuck, De Wette, Alford, Olshausen.
Lange, Meyer, Weiss, Godet). Chrys. rather takes for granted,
than states the same view, in saying that it is “a sketch of
man as comporting himself in the law and before the law.’’—
GaRes:

1 The words of the Fathers on this subject become more
definite after the Pelagian Controversy. St. Aug. contr.
Julianum, i, 2, § 32. (Ben. t. 10), speak thus of concupiscence,
(not in act, but as an inherited habit). ‘“Itis not however
called sin in the sense of making one guilty, but in that it is
caused by the guilt of the first man, and in that it rebels, and
strives to draw us into guilt except grace aid us.”’

2 So Field from most Mss. Sav. lawful marriage.


428 THE WORKS OF


Si: "CHR YSOS TORE


[HomILy XIII.


not by reason of the desire, but by reason
of its exorbitancy. And observe the wis-
dom of Paul. For after praising the Law,
he hastens immediately to the earlier period,
that he may show the state of our race,
both then and at the time it received the
Law, and make it plain how necessary the
presence of grace was, a thing he labored
on every occasion to prove. For when he
says, “sold under sin,” he means it not
of those who were under the Law only,
but of those who had lived before the
Law also, and of men from the very first.
Next he mentions the way in which they
were sold and made over.

Ver. 15. ‘For that which I do, I know
not.”

What does the “I know not” mean ?—
I am ignorant. And when could this ever
happen? For nobody ever sinned in igno-
rance. Seest thou, that if we do not receive
his words with the proper caution, and
keep looking to the object of the Apostle,
countless incongruities will follow? For if
they sinned through ignorance, then they
did not deserve to be punished. As then
he said above, “for without the Law sin
is dead,’ not meaning that they did not
know they were sinning, but that they knew
indeed, but not so distinctly; wherefore
they were punished, but not so _ severely:
and again; “I should not have known
lust;” not meaning an entire ignorance of
it, but referring to the most distinct knowl-


edge of it; and said, that it also “ wrought |


in me all manner of concupiscence, not
meaning to say that the
made the concupiscence, but that sin through
the commandment introduces an_ intense
degree of concupiscence; so here it is not
absolute ignorance that he means by say-
ing, “For what I do, I know not;” since
how then would he have pleasure in the
law of God in his inner man? What then
is. ithis, ‘tl. know morn J” get dizzy.: he
means, I feel carried away,’ I find a vio-
lence done to me,I get tripped up without
knowing how. Just as we often say, Such
an one came and carried me away with
him, without my knowing how; when it is
not ignorance we mean as an excuse, but
to show a sort of deceit, and circumvention,
and plot. ‘“ For what I would, that I do
not: but ‘what I) hate, that 2h .dom How
then canst thou be said not to know what
thou art doing? For if thou willest the
good, and hatest the evil, this requires a
perfect knowledge. Whence it appears that


1 e€umodiapos Tats BovAngeot. Arist. Rhez. ii.


commandment |


he says, “that I would not,” not as deny-
ing free will, or as adducing any con-
Strained necessity. For if it was not
willingly, but by compulsion, that we sinned,
then the punishments that took place be-
fore would not be justifiable. But as in
saying “I know not,” it was not ignorance
he set before us, but what we have said;
so in adding the “ that I would not,” it is no
necessity he signifies, but the disapproval
he felt of what was done.? Since if this
was not his meaning in saying, “ That
which I would not, that I do:” he would
else have gone on, “But I do what I am
compelled and enforced to.” For this is
what is opposed to willing and power (é£ovsig)..
But now he does not say this, but in the place
of it he has put the word, “that I hate,”
that you might learn how when he says,
“that I would not,” he does not deny the
power. Now, what does the “that I would
not”? mean? It means, what I praise not,
what I do not approve, what I love not.


And in contradistinction to this, he adds
what follows; “But what I hate, that I
dor

Ver. 16. “If then I do that which I would
not, I consent unto the Taw, "that a as
good.”


You see here, that the understanding is not
yet perverted, but keeps up its own noble
character even during the action. For even
if it does pursue vice, still it hates it the
while, which would be great commendation,
whether of the natural or the written Law.
For that the Law is good, is (he says) plain,
from the fact of my accusing myself, when I
disobey the Law, and hate what has been
done. And yet if the Law was to blame for
the sin, how comes it that he felt a delight in
it, yet hated what it orders to be done? For,
““T consent,” he says, “ unto the Law, that it
is good.”

Ver 17, 18. “ Nowthen it is no more I that
do it, but sin that dwelleth in me. For I
know that in me, that is, in my flesh, dwelleth
no good thing.”

On this text, those who find fault with the
flesh, and contend it was no part of God’s
creation, attack us. What are we to say
then? Just what we did before, when discuss-
sing the Law: that as there he makes sin
answerable for everything so here also, For
he does not say, that the flesh worketh it,
but just the contrary, “it is not I that do
it, but sin that dwelleth in me.” But if
he does say that “there dwelleth no good
thing in it,” still this is no charge against the


2 This seems to have been Plato’s view of free-will. See
Tenneman, Plat. Pizlos. iv. Pp. 34, ovdels Exwy Tovnpos, etc.


Homity XIII]


LHE EPISTLE: TO: THESROMMANS:


429


flesh. For the fact that “no good thing dwell-
eth in it,” does not show that it is evil itself.
Now we admit, that the flesh is not so
great as the soul, and is inferior to it, yet
not contrary, or opposed to it, or evil; but
that it is beneath the soul, as a harp beneath
a harper, and as a ship under the pilot.
And these are not contrary to those who
guide and use them, but go with them entirely,
yet are not of.the same honor with the
artist. As then a person who says, that
the art resides not in the harp or the ship,
‘but in the pilot or harper, is not finding fault
with the instruments, but pointing out the
great difference between them* and_ the
artist; so Paul in saying, that “in my flesh
dwelleth no good thing,” is not finding fault
with the body, but pointing out the soul’s
superiority. For this it is that has the whole
duty or pilotage put into its hands, and that
of playing. And this Paul here points out,
giving the governing power to the soul,
and after dividing man into these two things,
the soul and the body, he says, that the flesh
has less of reason, and is destitute of discre-
tion, and ranks among things to be led,
not among things that lead. But the soul
has more wisdom, and can see what is to be
done and what not, yet is not equal to pulling
in the horse as it wishes. And this would
be a charge not against the flesh only,
but against the soul also, which knows
indeed what it ought to do, but still does
not carry out in practice what seems best to
it. ‘‘For to will,” he says, “is present with
me; but how to perform that which is good,
I find not.” Here again in the words, “I
find not,’’ he does not speak of any ignorance
or perplexity, but a kind of thwarting and
crafty assault made by sin, which he there-
fore points more clearly out in the next
words,

Ver. 19, 20. “ For the good that I would
I do not: but the evil which I would not
that I do. Now if I dothat I would not,
it is no more I that do it but sin that
dwelleth in me.”

Do you see, how he acquits the essence of
the soul, as well as the essence of the flesh,
from accusation, and removes it entirely to
sinful actions? For if the soul willeth not
the evil, it is cleared: and if he does not
work it himself, the body too is set free, and
the whole may be charged upon the evil
moral choice. Now the essence of the soul
and body and of that choice are not the
same, for the two first


1 So the Mss. Sav. has trys téxvns, Which seems to have been
put in to show that it was not the maker, but the user of the
instrument, that was meant.


are God’s works, |


and the other is a motion from ourselves
towards whatever we please to direct it.
For willing is indeed natural (éugurov), and is
from God: but willing on this wise is our
own, and from our own mind.

Wer. 21. “I find then a law, that when


I Would do good, evil is present with
me.7
What he says is not very clear. What


then is it that is said? I praise the law, he
says, in my conscience, and I find it pleads
on my side so far as I am desirous of doing
what is right, and that it invigorates this wish.
For as I feel a pleasure in it, so does it yield
praise to my decision. Do you see how he
shows, that the knowledge of what is good
and what is not such is an original and
fundamental part of our nature, and that
the Law of Moses praises it, and getteth
praise from it? For above he did not say
so much as I get taught by the Law, but
““T consent to the Law;” nor further on
that I get instructed by it, but “I delight in ”’
it. Now what is “I delight?” It is, I agree
with it as right, as it does with me when
wishing to do what is good. And so the
willing what is good and the not willing
what is evil was made a fundamental part of
us from the first. But the Law, when it
came, was made at once a stronger accuser in
what was bad, and a greater praiser in what
was good. Do you observe that in every
place he bears witness to its having a kind
of intensitiveness and additional advantage,
yet nothing further? For though it praises
and I delight in it, and wish what is good
the “evil is” still “present with me,” and
the agency of it has not been abolished.
And thus the Law, with a man who deter-
mines upon doing anything good, only acts
so far as auxiliary to him, as that it has the
same wish as himself. Then since he had
stated it indistinctly, as he goes on he gives
a yet more distinct interpretation, by showing
how the evil is present, how too the Law
is a law to such a person only who has a
mind to do what is good.

Ver, .22, “For Iudeheht.’ -be* says am
the law of God after the inward man.”

He means, for I knew even before this
what was good, but when I find it set down in
writing, I praise it.

Ver. 23. “ But I see another law warring
against the law of my mind.”

Here again he calls sin a law warring
against the other, not in respect of good
order, but from the strict obedience yielded
to it by those who comply with it. As then
|it gives the name of master (xépwv Matt. vi.


leave Luke xvi. 13) to Mammon, and of god


430 THE WORKS OF


(Phil. iii. 19) to the belly, not because of
their intrinsically deserving it, but because of
the extreme obsequiousness of their subjects ;
so here he calls sin a law, owing to those
who are so obsequious to it, and are afraid
to leave it, just as those who have received
the Law dread leaving the Law. This
then, he means, is opposed to the law of
nature; for this is what is meant by “the
law of my mind.” And he next represents
an array and battle, and refers* the whole
struggle to the law of nature. For that of
Moses was subsequently added over and
above: yet still both the one and the other,
the one as teaching, the other as praising
what was right, wrought no great effects
in this battle; so great was the thraldom of
sin, overcoming and getting the upper hand
as it did. And this Paul setting forth, and
showing the decided (kara xpdroc) victory it
had, says, “‘ I see another law warring against
the law of my mind, and bringing me into
captivity.” He does not use the word
conquering only, but “bringing me into
captivity to the law of sin.” He does not
say the bent of the flesh, or the nature of
the flesh, but “the law of sin.” That is, the
thrall, the power. In what sense then does
he say, “ Which is in my members?” Now
what is this? Surely it does not make the
members to be sin, but makes them as
distinct from sin as possible. For that which
is in a thing is diverse from that wherein
it is. As then the commandment also is
not evil, because by it sin took occasion,
so neither is the nature of the flesh, even if
sin subdues us by means of it. For in this
way the soul will be evil, and much more so
too, since it has authority in matters of action.
But these things are not so, certainly they
are not. Since neither if a tyrant and a robber
were to take possession of a splendid mansion
and a king’s court, would the circumstance be
any discredit to the house, inasmuch as the
entire blame would come on those who
contrived such an act. But the enemies
of the truth, along with their impiety, fall
unawares also into great unreasonableness.
For they do not accuse the flesh only, but
they also disparage the Law. And yet
if the flesh were evil, the Law would be
good. For it wars against the Law, and
opposes it. If, however, the Law be _ not
good, then the flesh is good.* For it wars


1 Ver. and Sav. Marg. évti@nov, which makes much the same
sense; his conj. and 2 Mss. avturi@nar, ‘‘ sets in opposition.”’

* It is peculiarly interesting to see how vigorously Chrys.
combats the idea that the flesh is essentially evil, as if it were
acurrent notion of his time. This view—derived from hea-
then sources—exerted a powerful influence in the Church from
early Hs and became the fruitful source of ascetic rigors.—
G. B.


ST. CHRYSOSTOM: [Homiry XIIf.


and fights against it even by their own
account. How come they then to assert
that both belong to the devil, putting things
opposed to each other before us? Do you
see, along with their impiety, how great
is their unreasonableness also? But such
doctrines as these are not the Church’s, for
it is the sin only that she condemns ; and both
the Laws which God has given, both that
of nature and that of Moses, she says are
hostile to this, and not to the flesh; for the
flesh she denies to be sin, for it is a work
of God’s, and one very useful too in order to
virtue, if we live soberly.

Ver. 24. ‘‘O wretched man that I am! who
shall deliver me from the body of this death ?”

Do you notice what a great thraldom
that of vice is, in that it overcomes even a
mind that delighted in the Law? For no one
can rejoin, he means, that I hate the Law and
abhor it, and so sin overcomes me. For “I
delight in it, and consent to it,” and flee for
refuge to it, yet still it had not the power of


saving one who had fied to it. But Christ
saved even one that fled from Him. See
what a vast advantage grace has! Yet the


Apostle has not stated it thus; but with a
sigh only, and a great lamentation, as if
devoid of any to help him, he points out by
his perplexity the might of Christ, and says,
‘“OQ wretched man that I am! who shall de-
liver me from the body of this death?” The
Law has not been able: conscience has
proved unequal to it, though it praised what
was good, and did not praise it only, but even
fought against the contrary of it. For by the
very words “warreth against ” he shows that
he was marshalled against it for his part.
From what quarter then is one to hope for
salvation ?

Ver. 25. “I thank God through Jesus
Christ our Lord.”

Observe how he shows the necessity of hav-
ing grace present with us, and that the well-
doings herein belong alike to the Father and
the Son. For if it is the Father Whom he
thanketh, still the Son is the cause of this
thanksgiving. But when you hear him say,
‘““Who shall deliver me from the body of this
death?” do not suppose him to be accusing
the flesh. For he does not say “ body of sin,”
but “body of death:” that is, the mortal
body—that which hath been overcome by
death, not that which gendered death. And
this is no proof of the evil of the flesh, but of
the marring (éxypeiac, thwarting) it has under-
gone. As if any one who was take captive by
the savages were to be said to belong to the
savages, not as being a savage, but as being
detained by them: so the body is said to be


HomiLy XIII.]


of death, as being held down thereby, not
as producing it. Wherefore also it is not the
body that he himself wishes to be delivered
from, but the mortal body, hinting, as I have
often said, that from its becoming subject to
suffering, it also became an easy prey to sin.
Why then, it may be said, the thraldom of sin
being so great before the times of grace, were
men punished for sinning? Because they
had such commands given them as might even
under sin’s dominion be accomplished. For
he did not draw them to the highest kind of
conversation, but allowed them to enjoy
wealth, and did not forbid having several
wives, and to gratify anger in a just cause,
and to make use of luxury within bounds.’
(Matt. v. 38.) And so great was this conde-
scension, that the written Law even required
less than the law of nature. For the law of
nature ordered one man to associate with one
woman throughout. And this Christ shows in
the words, ‘“‘ He which made them at the be-
ginning, made them male and female.” (ib.
xix. 4.) But the Law of Moses neither forbade
the putting away of one and the taking in of
another, nor prohibited the having of two® at
once!) (Gb. vy. 31:)' And ‘besides’ this: there
are also many other ordinances of the Law,
that one might see those who were before its
day fully performing, being instructed by the
law of nature. They therefore who lived
under the old dispensation had no hardship
done them by so moderate a system of laws
being imposed upon them. But if they were
not, on these terms, able to get the upper
hand, the charge is against their own listless-
ness. Wherefore Paul gives thanks, because
Christ, without any rigorousness about these
things, not only demanded no account of this
moderate amount,‘ but even made us able to
have a greater race set before us. And there-
fore he says, “‘I thank my God through Jesus
Christ.” And letting the salvation which all
agreed about pass, he goes from the points he
had already made good, to another further
point, in which he states that it was not our
former sins only that we were freed from, but
we were also made invincible for the future.
For “ there is,” he says, “‘now no condemna-
tion to them which are in Christ Jesus, who
walk not after the flesh.” Yet he did not say
it before he had first recalled to mind our for-
mer condition again in the words, “ So then


1 ra@yrov, which may also mean liable to passions.

2 He is speaking of the actual precepts. Men under the
Law were encouraged to higher aims, but it was in looking
bey ond the letter.

3 The typical fitness of this permission is illustrated by the
case of Sarah and Hagar; the coincidence of typical with
moral fitness is in many cases above our understanding.

4 So Field from xr Ms.: others “past sins:’’ Vulg. ‘‘ our
doings.”’


TEE “EPISTLE! TOY THEsROMANS


431


with the mind I myself serve the law of God,
but with the flesh the law of sin.”

Chap. viii. ver. 1. “There is therefore no
condemnation to them which are in Christ
Jesus.”

Then as the fact that many fall into sin
even after baptism presented a difficulty (davzé-
mimtev), he consequently hastened to meet it,
and says not merely “to them that are in
Christ Jesus,” but adds, “who walk not after
the flesh;” so showing that all afterward
comes of our listlessness. For now we have
the power of walking not after the flesh, but
then it was a difficult task. Then he gives
another proof of it by the sequel, in the
words,

Ver “For the law of the Spirit of life
hath made me free.”

It is the Spirit he is here calling the law of
the Spirit. For as he calls sin the law of sin,
so he here calls the Spirit the law of the
Spirit. And yet he named that of Moses as
such, where he says, ‘ For we know that the
Law is spiritual.” What then is the differ-
ence? A great and unbounded one. For
that was spiritual, but this is a law of the
Spirit. Now what is the distinction between
this and that? The other was merely given
by the Spirit, but, this even furnisheth those
that receive it with the Spirit in large measure.
Wherefore also he called it the law of life®
contradistinction to that of sin, not that of
Moses. For when he says, It freed me® from
the law of sin and death, it is not the law of
Moses that he is here speaking of, since in no
case does he style it the law of sin: for how
could he one that he had called “just and
holy” so often, and destructive of sin too?
but it is that which warreth against the law of
the mind. For this grievous war did the
grace of the Spirit put a stop to, by slaying
sin, and making the contest light to us and
crowning us at the outstart, and then drawing
us to the struggle with abundant help. Next
as it is ever his wont to turn from the Spirit
to the Son and the Father, and to reckon al)
our estate to lean upon the Trinity,’ so doth
he here also. For after saying, ‘‘ Who shall
deliver me from the body of this death,” he
pointed at the Father as doing this by the
Son, then again at the Holy Spirit along with
the Son. ‘“ For the law of the Spirit of Life
in Christ Jesus hath made me free, he says.
Then again, at the Father and the Son;

Ver. 3. “For what the Law could not do,”


5 It may be right to consider tis ¢wys as forming part of the
attribute of véuno0s in conformity with the Hebr. idiom; see
€€'S G rant. Art. 224, 8.
*Thee” most Mss., and Edd. before Field.
7 7 Tpradte TavtTa Ta Tap nuwY AoyiGomevos, or
all things (done) by us to the Trinity.’


“imputing


432


THE WORKS) OF 'ST. CHRYSOSH@RMe


[Homiry XII


he saith, ‘‘in that it was weak through the flesh,
God sending His own Son in the likeness of
sinful flesh, and for sin, condemned sin in the
flesh.”

Again, he seems indeed to be disparaging
the Law, But if any one attends strictly, he
“even highly praises it, by showing that it har-
monizes with Christ, and gives preference to
the same things. For he does not speak of
the badness of the Law, but of “‘ what it could
not do;” and so again, “in that it was weak,”
not, “in that it was mischievous, or design-
ing.” And even weakness he does not as-
cribe to it, but to the flesh, as he says, “in
that it was weak through the flesh,” using the
word ‘flesh’ here again not for the essence
and subsistency itself, but giving its name to
the more carnal sort of mind. In which way
he acquits both the body and the Law of any
accusation. Yet not in this way only, but by
what comes next also. For supposing the
Law to be of the contrary part, how was it
Christ came to its assistance, and fulfilled its
requisitions, and lent it a helping hand by
condemning sin in the flesh? For this was
what was lacking, since in the soul the Lord
had condemned it long ago. What then? is
it the greater thing that the Law accom-
plished, but the less that, the Only-Begotten
did? Surely not. For it was God that was
the principal doer of that also, in that He
gave us the law of nature, and added the
written one to it. Again, there were no use
of the greater, if the lesser had not been sup-
plied. For what good is it to know what
things ought to be done, if a man does not
follow it out? None, for it were but a greater
condemnation. And so He that hath saved
the soul it is, Who hath made the flesh also
easy to bridle. For to teach is easy, but to
show besides a way in which these things
were easily done, this is the marvel. Now it
was for this that the Only-Begotten came, and
did not depart before He had set us free from
this difficulty. But what is greater, is the
method of the victory; for He took none
other flesh, but this very one which was beset
with troubles. So it is as if any one were to
see in the street a vile woman of the baser
sort being beaten, and were to say he was her
son, when he was the king’s, and so to get
her free from those who ill treated her. And
this He really did, in that He confessed that
He was the Son of Man, and stood by it
(i. e. the flesh), and condemned the sin.
However, He did not endure to smite it be-
sides: or rather, He smote it with the blow of
His death, but in this very act it was not the
smitten flesh which was condemned and per-
ished, but the sin which had been smiting.


And this is the greatest possible marvel. For
if it were not in the flesh that the victory took
place, it would not be so astonishing, since
this the Law also wrought. But the wonder
is, that it was with the flesh (uera capkoc) that
His trophy was raised, and that what had
been overthrown numberless times by sin, did
itself get a glorious victory over it. For be-
hold what strange things there were that took
place! One was, that sin did not conquer
the flesh; another, that sin was conquered,
and conquered by it too. For it is not the
same thing not to get conquered, and to con-
quer that which was continually overthrowing
us. A third is, that it not only conquered it,
but even chastised it. For by not sinning it
kept from being conquered, but by dying
also, He overcame and condemned it, having
made the flesh, that before was so readily
made a mock of by it, a plain object of fear
to it. In this way then, He at once unnerved
its power, and abolished the death by it intro-
duced. For so long as it took hold of sin-
ners, it with justice kept pressing to its end.
But after finding a sinless body, when it had
given it up to death, it was condemned as
having acted unjustly. Do you observe, how
many proofs of victory there are? The flesh
not being conquered by sin, Its even conquer-
ing and condemning it, Its not condemning it
barely, but condemning it as having sinned.
For after having convicted it of injustice, he
proceeds to condemn it, and that not by
power and might barely, but even by the rules
of justice. For this is what he means by say-
ing, “for sin condemned sin in the flesh.”
As if he had said that he had convicted it of
great sin, and then condemned it. So you
see it is sin that getteth condemned every-
where, and not the flesh, for this is even
crowned with honor, and _ has to give sentence
against the other. But if he does say that it
was “in the likeness” of flesh that he sent
the Son, do not therefore suppose that His
flesh was of a different kind. For as he called
it “sinful,” this was why he put the word
‘“likeness.”? For sinful flesh it was not that
Christ had, but like indeed to our sinful flesh,


1 The Fathers lay great stress upon this phrase of the
Apostles. August. contr. Faust. xiv. 5, argues, that this like-
ness consisted in our Lord’s flesh being mortal; death being
the penalty of sin: vid. also de Nuptiis et Concupisc. i. 12.
vid. also Basil, Ep. 261, where writing against the Apol-
linarians, he interprets this text to mean, that whereas
Christ had all affections of human nature, which implied
the reality of His assumption of it, He had not those which
infringe our nature, i. e. which arise from sin. Athana-
sius, writing against the same heretics, observes, that Christ’s
sinlessness was like Adam’s before the fall (In Apoll. ii. 6): or
as St. Cyril observes, greater than before the fall, because He
has a physical inability to sin, arising from His personality be-
ing Divine, vid. Cyr. Alex. 7 Esaz. 7.7. Orat. 4, fin. At the
same time He took the flesh, not of Adam unfallen, but fallen,
such as ours. Vid. Leont. contra Nest. et Eutych. lib. 2 apud
Canis. vol. i. p. 568. Gall. xii. 681. Fulgent. Zf. ad. Regin.
Tertull. de Carn. Christt. xvi.


Homity XIII]


THE EPISTLE. TO' THE; ROMANS.


433


yet sinless, and in nature the same with us.
And so even from this it is plain that by
nature the flesh was not evil. For it was not


by taking a different one instead of the for-|


mer, nor by changing this same one in sub-
stance, that Christ caused it to regain the vic-
tory: but He let it abide in its own nature,
and yet made it bind on the crown of victory
over sin, and then after the victory raised it
up, and made it immortal. What then, it may
be said, is this to me, whether it was this flesh
that these things happened in? Nay, it con-
cerns thee very much. Wherefore also he
proceeds :

Ver. 4. “That the righteousness! of the
Law might be fulfilled in us, who walk not
after the flesh.”

What meaneth this word, righteousness?
Why, the end, the scope, the well-doing. For
what was its design, and what did it enjoin?
To be without sin. This then is made good
to us (karépPora juiv) now through Christ.
And the making a stand against it, and the
getting the better of it, came from Him.
But it is for us to enjoy the victory. Then
shall we never sin henceforth? We never
shall unless we have become exceedingly re-
laxed and supine. And this is why he added,
“to them that walk not after the flesh. For
lest, after hearing that Christ hath delivered
thee from the war of sin, and that tne requisi-
tion (dixaiwua) of the Law is fulfilled in thee,
by sin having been ‘“‘ condemned in the flesh,”
thou shouldest break up all thy defences ;
therefore, in that place also, after saying,
“there is therefore no condemnation,” he
added, “to them that walk not after the
flesh;’’ and here also, “ that the requisition
of the Law might be fulfilled in us,” he
proceeds with the very same thing; or rather,
not with it only, but even with a much
stronger thing.? For after saying, “that the
righteousness of the Law might be fulfilled in
us that walk not after the flesh,” he proceeds,
“Dut after the Spirit.”

So showing, that it is not only binding upon
us to keep ourselves from evil deeds, but also
to be adorned (xouav) with good. For to give
thee the crown is His; but it is thine to hold
it fast when given. For the righteousness of
the Law, that one should not become liable
to its curse, Christ has accomplished for thee.
Be not a traitor then to so great a gift, but
keep guarding this goodly treasure. For in


1 Aristotle defines dcxaiwua to be 70 Sixatov orav mpaxOy: but
rather in the sense of correcting wrong than in the more gen-
eral meaning: Z7¢h. b. v. c. 7, § 7. It may mean here what
the Law claims of right.

2 St. Chr. evidently used a text which read in v. 1 uy xara
oapxa mepir., but omitted aAAa xara Ilvedua. Most Mss. of the
N. T. and all recent critical editions, omit both clauses there:
here there is no doubt of either.


28


this passage he shows that the Font will not
suffice to save us, unless, after coming from it,
we display a life worthy of the Gift. And so
he again advocates the Law in saying what he
does. For when we have once become obe-
dient to Christ, we must use all ways and
plans so that its righteousness, which Christ
fulfilled, may abide in us, and not come to
naught.

Ver. 5. “ For they that are after the flesh
do mind the things of the flesh.”

Yet even this is no disparaging of the flesh.
For so long as it keeps its own place, nothing
amiss cometh to pass. But when we let it
have its own will in everything, and it passes
over its proper bounds, and rises up against
the soul, then it destroys and corrupts every-
thing, yet not owing to its own nature, but to
its being out of proportion, and the dis-
order thereupon ensuing. ‘“‘ But they that are
after the Spirit do mind the things of the
Spirit.”

Ver. 6. “For to be carnally minded is
death.” He does not speak of the nature of
the flesh, or the essence of the body, but of
being carnally “ minded,” which may be set
right again, and abolished. And in saying
thus, he does not ascribe to the flesh any
reasoning power of its own. Far from it.
But to set forth the grosser motion of the
mind, and giving this a name from the inferior
part, and in the same way as he often is in
the habit of calling man in his entireness,
and viewed as possessed of a soul, flesh.
“But to be spiritually minded.” Here again
he speaks of the spiritual mind, in the same
way as he says further on, “But He that
searcheth the hearts knoweth what is the
mind of the spirit ” (ver. 27); and he points
out many blessings resulting from this, both
in the present life, and in that which is to
come. For as the evils which being carnally
minded introduces, are far outnumbered by
those blessings which a spiritual mind affords.
And this he points out in the words “ life and
peace.”” The one is in contraposition to the
first—for death is what he says to be carnally
minded is. And the other in contraposition
to the following. For after mentioning peace,
he goes on,

Ver. 7. “Because the carnal mind is
enmity against God:” and this is worse than
death. Then to show how it is at once death
and enmity; “for it is not subject to the
Law of God,” he says, ‘neither indeed can
be.” But be not troubled at hearing the
“neither indeed can be.” For this difficulty
admits of an easy solution. For what he here
names ‘carnal mindedness” is the reason-
ing (or “way of thinking,” Aoyuov) that is


’


434


THE (WORKS @FesT. (CHEVY SOS Heme


[HomILy XIII.


earthly, gross, and eager-hearted after the
things of this life and its wicked doings. It
is of this he says “neither yet can” it “be
subject” to God. And what hope of salva-
tion is there left, if it be impossible for one
who is bad to become good? This is not
what he says. Else how would Paul have
become such as he was? how would the
(penitent) thief, or Manasses, or the Ninevites,
or how would David after falling have recov-
ered himself? How would Peter after the
denial have raised himself up? (1 Cor. v. 5.)
How could he that had lived in fornication
have been enlisted among Christ’s fold?
(2 Cor. ii. 6-11.) How could the Galatians
who had “ fallen from grace ” (Gal. v. 4), have
attained their former dignity again? What
he says then is not that it is impossible for a
man that is wicked to become good, but that
it is impossible for one who continues wicked
to be subject to God. Yet for a man to be
changed, and so become good, and subject to
Him, is easy. For he does not say that man
cannot be subject to God, but, wicked doing
cannot be good. Asif he had said, fornica-
tion cannot be chastity, nor vice virtue. And
this it says in the Gospel also, “ A corrupt
tree cannot bring forth good fruit”? (Matt.
vil. 18), not to bar the change from virtue to
vice, but to say how incapable continuance
in vice is of bringing forth good fruits. For He
does not say that an evil tree cannot become
a good one, but that bring forth good fruit it
cannot, while it continuesevil. For that it can
be changed, He shows from this passage, and
from another parable, when He _ introduces
the tares as becoming wheat, on which score
also He forbids their being rooted up;
“Lest,” He says, “ye root up also the wheat
with them (ib. xiii. 29); that is, that which
will spring (yiveofa, 4 Mss. rixreo#a:) from them.
It is vice then he means by carnal minded-
ness, and by spiritual mindedness the grace
given, and the working of it discernible in the
right determination of mind, not discussing
in any part of this passage, a substance and
an entity, but virtue and vice. For that which
thou hadst no power to do under the Law,
now, he means, thou wilt be able to do, to go
on uprightly, and with no intervening fall, if
thou layest hold of the Spirit’s aid. For it is
not enough not to walk after the flesh, but we
must also go after the Spirit, since turning
away from what is evil will not secure our
salvation, but we must also do what is good.
And this will come about, if we give our souls
up to the Spirit, and persuade our flesh to get
acquainted with its proper position, for in
this way we shall make it also spiritual; as
also if we be listless we shall make our soul


carnal. For since it was no natural necessity
which put the gift into us, but the freedom?
of choice placed it in our hands, it rests with
thee henceforward whether this shall be or
the other. For He, on His part, has per-
formed everything. For sin no longer war-
reth against the law of our mind, neither
doth it lead us away captive as_ heretofore,
for all that state has been ended and broken
up, and the affections cower in fear and
trembling at the grace of the Spirit. But if
thou wilt quench the light, and cast out the
holder of the reins, and chase the helmsman
away, then charge the tossing thenceforth
upon thyself. For since virtue hath been now
made an easier thing (for which cause also
we are under far stricter obligations of relig-
ious living), consider how men’s condition
lay when the Law _ prevailed, and how at
present, since grace hath shone forth. The
things which aforetime seemed not possible
to any one, virginity, and contempt of death,
and of other stronger sufferings, are now in
full vigor through every part of the world, and
it is not with us alone, but with the Scythians,
and Thracians, and Indians, and Persians,
and several other barbarous nations, that-
there are companies of virgins, and clans of
martyrs, and congregations of monks, and
these now grown even more numerous than
the married, and strictness of fasting, and the
utmost renunciation of property. Now these
are things which, with one or two exceptions,
persons who lived under the Law never con-
ceived even in a dream. Since thou seest
then the real state of things voiced with a
shriller note than any trumpet, let not thyself
grow soft and treacherous to so great a grace.
Since not even after the faith is it possible for
a listless man to be saved! For the wrest-
lings are made easy that thou mayest strive
and conquer, not that thou shouldest sleep, or
abuse the greatness of the grace by making
it a reason for listlessness, so wallowing again
in the former mire.
say,

Ver. 8. “So then they that are in the flesh
cannot please God.”

What then? Are we, it will be said, to cut
our bodies in pieces to please God, and to
make our escape from the flesh? and would
you have us be homicides, and so lead us to
virtue? You see what inconsistencies are
gendered by taking the words literally. For
by “‘the flesh” in this passage, he does not
mean the body, or the essence of the body,


1 i, e. as exercised in coming to the font. Field proposes to
soften the strong expression by reading, ‘“‘it was by no natural
necessity that He put, etc., but by freedom of choice He placed
ites:


And so he goes on to ©


Homity XIII.]


but that life which is fleshly and worldly, and
uses self-indulgence and extravagance to the
full, so making the entire man flesh. For as
they that have the wings of the Spirit, make
the body also spiritual, so do they who bound
off from this, and are the slaves of the belly,
and of pleasure, make the soul also flesh, not
that they change the essence of it, but that
they mar its noble birth. And this mode of
speaking is to be met with in many parts of
the Old Testament also, to signify by flesh the
gross and earthly life, which is entangled in
pleasures that are not convenient. For to
Noah He says, “ My Spirit shall not always
make its abode in these men, because they
are flesh.” (Gen. vi. 3 as the LXX. give it.)


And yet Noah was himself also compassed |


about with flesh. But this is not the com-
plaint, the being compassed about with the
flesh, for this is so by nature, but the having
chosen a carnal life. Wherefore also Paul
saith, “‘ But they that are in the flesh cannot
please God.” Then he proceeds:

Ver. g. “ But ye are not in the flesh, but in
the Spirit.”

Here again, he does not mean flesh abso-
lutely, but such sort-of flesh, that which was
in a whirl and thraldom of passions. Why
then, it may be said, does he not say so, nor
state any difference? It is to rouse the
hearer, and to show that he that liveth aright
is not even in the body. For inasmuch as it
was in a manner clear to every one that the
spiritual man was not in sin, he states the
greater truth that it was not in sin alone, that
the spiritual man was not, but not even in the
flesh was he henceforward, having become
from that very moment an Angel, and as-
cended into heaven, and henceforward barely
carrying the body about. Now if this be thy
reason for disparaging the flesh, because it is
by its name that he calls the fleshly life, at
this rate you are also for disparaging the
world, because wickedness is often called after
it, as Christ also said to His disciples, “ Ye
are not of this world;” and again to His
brethren, He says, “ The world cannot hate
you, but me it hateth.” (John xv: 19. ib.
vii. 7.) And the soul too Paul must after-
wards be calling estranged from God, since to
those that live in error, he gives the name of
men of the soul (1 Cor. ii. 14, wuyixdc A. V. nat-
ural). But this is not so, indeed it is not so.
For we are not to look to the bare words, but
always to the sentiment of the speaker, and so
come toa perfectly distinct knowledge of what
is said. For some things are good, some bad,
and some indifferent. ‘Thus the soul and the
flesh belong to things indifferent, since each


THE 'EPist le TO" THE: ROMANS.


435
may become either the one or the other. But
the spirit belongs to things good, and at no time
becometh any other thing. Again, the mind
of the flesh, that is, ill-doing, belongs to things
always bad. “ For it is not subject to the law
of God.” If then thou yieldest thy soul and
body to the better, thou wilt have become of
its part. If on the other hand thou yield to
the worse, then art thou made a partaker of
the ruin therein, not owing to the nature of
the soul and the flesh, but owing to that judg-
ment which has the power of choosing either.
And to show that these things are so, and that
the words do not disparage the flesh, let us
take up the phrase itself again, and sift it
more thoroughly. ‘‘ But ye are not in the flesh
but in the Spirit,” he says. What then ? were
they not in the flesh, and did they go about
without any bodies? What sense would this
be? You see that it is the carnal life that he
intimates. And why did he not say, But ye
are not in sin? It is that you may come to
know that Christ hath not extinguished the
tyranny of sin only, but hath even made the
flesh to weigh us down less, and to be more
spiritual, not by changing its nature, but rather
by giving it wimgs. For as when fire cometh
in company with iron, the iron also becomes
fire, though abiding in its own nature still;
thus with them that believe, and have the
Spirit, the flesh henceforth goeth over into
that manner of working, and becometh wholly
spiritual, crucified in all parts, and flying with
the same wings as the soul, such as was the
body of him who here speaks. Wherefore all
self-indulgence and pleasure he made scorn of,
and found his self-indulgence in hunger, and
stripes, and prisons, and did not even feel pain
in undergoing them. (2 Cor. xi.) And it was
to show this that he said, “ For our light afflic-
tion, which is but for a moment,” etc. (ib.
iv. 17.) Sowell had he tutored even the flesh
to be in harmony with the spirit. “If so be
that the Spirit of God dwell in you” (cizep.)
He often uses this “if so be,” not to express
any doubt, but even when he is quite per-
suaded of the thing, and instead of “ since,” as
when he says, “If it is a righteous thing,” for
“seeing it is a righteous thing with God to
recompense tribulation to them that trouble
you.” (2 Thess. i. 6.) Again, “ Have ye
suffered so many things in vain, if it be yet in
vain?” (Gal. iii. 4.)

“Now if any man have not the Spirit of
Christ.” He does not say, if ye have not, but
he brings forward the distressing word, as ap-
plied to other persons. ‘“ He is none of His.”
he says.


Ver. 10. “ And if Christ be in you,”


436


Again, what is good he applies to them,’ and
the distressing part was short and parenthetic.
And that which is an object of desire, is on
either side of it, and put at length too, so as
to throw the other into shade. Now this he
says, not as affirming that the Spirit is Christ,
far from it, but to show that he who hath the
Spirit not only is called Christ’s, but even
hath Christ Himself. For it cannot but be
that where the Spirit is, there Christ is also.
For wheresoever one Person of the Trinity is,
there the whole Trinity is present. For It is
undivided in Itself, and hath a most entire
Oneness. What then, it may be said, will
happen, if Christ be in us? “The body is
dead because of sin; but the Spirit is life
because of righteousness.’”’ You see the great
evils that come of not having the Holy Spirit ;
death, enmity against God, inability to satisfy
His laws, not being Christ’s as we should be,
the want of His indwelling. Consider now
also what great blessings come of having the
Spirit. Being Christ’s, having Christ him-
self, vying with the Angels (for this is what
mortifying the flesh is), and living an immor-
tal life, holding henceforward the earnests of
the Resurrection, running with ease the race
of virtue. For he does not say so little as
that the body is henceforward inactive for sin,
but that ft is even dead, so magnifying the
ease of the race. For such an one without
troubles and labors gains the crown. Then
afterward for this reason he adds also, “to
sin,” that you may see that it is the vicious-
ness, not the essence of the body, that He
hath abolished at once. For if the latter had
been done, many things even of a kind to be
beneficial to the soul would have been abol-
ished also. ‘This however is not what he says,
but while it is yet alive and abiding, he con-
tends, it is dead. For this is the sign of our
having the Son, of the Spirit being in us, that
our bodies should be in no respect different
from those that lie on the bier with respect to
the working of sin (sothe Mss. Sav. “of the
body.” The preceding words are slightly cor-
rupt.) But be not affrighted at hearing of
mortifying. For in it you have what is really
life, with no death to succeed it: and such is
that of the Spirit. It yieldeth not to death
any more, but weareth out death and consum-
eth it, and that which it receiveth, it keepeth
it immortal. And this is why after saying
“the body is dead,” he does not say, “ but the
Spirit ‘liveth, ” but, “is life,” to point out
that He (the Spirit) had the power of giving
this to others also. Then again to brace up
his hearer, he tells him the cause of the Life,


1 +> ypnorov for Tov Xprorov Field, with the Catena and the
Version of Musculus.


THE WORKS (OP ST. CHRYSOS Fant


[Homity XIII.


and the proof of it. Now this is righteous-
ness; for where there is no sin, death is not
to be seen either; but where death is not to
be seen, life is indissoluble.

Ver. 11. “But ‘if the “Spinit "of? Mim that
raised up Jesus from the dead dwell in you,
He that raised up our Lord shall also quicken
your mortal bodies by His Spirit that dwelleth
In you.”

Again, he touches the point of the Resur-
rection, since this was the most encouraging”
hope to the hearer, and gave him a security
from what had happened unto Christ. Now
be not thou afraid because thou art compassed
about with a dead body, Let it have the
Spirit, and it shall assuredly rise again.
What then, shall the bodies which have not
the Spirit not rise? How then must “all
stand before the judgment-seat of Christ?”
(Rom, xiv. 10) or how will the account of hell
be trustworthy? For if they that have not
the Spirit rise not, there will not be a hell at
all. What then is it which is said? All
shall rise, yet not all to life, but some to pun-
ishment and some to life. (John v. 29.)
This is why he did not say, shall raise up, but
shall quicken. (Dan. xii. 2.) And this isa
greater thing than resurrection, and is given to
the just only. And the cause of this honor he
adds in the words, ‘‘ By His Spirit that dwell-
eth in you.” And so if while here thou drive
away the grace of the Spirit, and do not de-
part with it still safe, thou wilt assuredly
perish, though thou dost rise again, For as
He will not endure then, if he see His Spirit
shining in thee, to give thee up to punish-
ment, so neither will He allow them, if He see
It quenched, to bring thee into the Bride-
chamber, even as He admitted not those
virgins. (Matt. xxv. 12.)

Suffer not thy body then to live in this
world, that it may live then! Make it die,
that it die not. For if it keep living, it will
not live: but if it die, then shall it hive. And
this is the case with resurrection in gen-
eral. For it must die first and be buried, and
then become immortal. But this has been
done in the Font. It has therefore had first
its crucifixion and burial, and then been
raised. This has also happened with the
Lord’s Body. For that also was crucified and
buried (7 Mss. died) and rose again. This
then let us too be doing: let us keep continu-
ally mortifying it in its works. I do not mean
in its substance—far be it from me—but in its
inclinations towards evil doings.
a life too, or rather this only is life, undergo-


ing nothing that is common to man, nor being ~


2 jAecHer, V. p. 170, nN. Sav. etAndev.


For this is @


—


HoMILy XIII.]


a slave to pleasures. For he who has set
himself under the rule of these, has no power
even to live through the low spirits, the fears,
and the dangers, and the countless throng of
ills, that rise from them. For if death must be
expected, he hath died, before death, of fear.
And if it be disease he dreads, or affront, or
poverty, or any of the other ills one cannot
anticipate, he is ruined and hath perished.
What then can be more miserable than a life
of this sort? But far otherwise is he that liv-
eth to the Spirit, for he stands at once above
fears and grief and dangers and every kind of
change: and that not by undergoing no such
thing, but, what is much greater, by thinking
scorn of them when they assail him. And
how is this to be? It will be if the Spirit
dwell in us continually. For he does not
speak of any short stay made thereby, but of
a continual indwelling. Hence he does not
say “the Spirit which” dwelt, but “ which
dwelleth in us,” so pointing to a continual
abiding. He then is most truly alive, who is
dead to this life. Hence he says, “ The Spirit
is life because of righteousness.” And _ to
make the thing clearer, let me bring! before
you two men, one who is given up to extrava-
gances and pleasures, and the deceitfulness
of this life; and the other made dead to all
these ; and let us see which is more really the
living one. For let one of these two be very
rich and much looked up to, keeping parasites
and flatterers,? and let us suppose him to spend
the whole day upon this, in revelling and
drunkenness: and let the other live in pov-
erty, and fasting, and hard fare, and _ strict
rules (¢:Aocogia), and at evening partake of nec-
essary food only; or if you will let: him even
pass two or three days without food.2 Which
then of these two think we (3 Mss. you) is
most really alive? Men in general will, I
know, reckon the former so, the man that
takes his pleasure (Sav. cxpravra, Mss. rpvdavra)
and squanders his goods. But we reckon the
man that enjoys the moderate fare. Now
then since it is still a subject of contest and
opposition let us go into the houses of them
both, and just at the very time too when in
your judgment the rich man is living in truest
sense, in the very season of self-indulgence,
and when we have got in, let us look and see
the real condition of each of these men. For
it is from the actions that it appears which is
alive and which dead. Shall we not find the
one among his books, or in prayer and fast-
ing, or some other necessary duty, awake and
sober, and conversing with God? but the


1 See Ernesti in v. tapaywy7.
2 The Plutus evidently in his mind.


8 This was not uncommon in warmer climates, Euseb. ii. 17, |


GEE EVI LE |TO. THE, ROMANS: 437


other we shall see stupid in drunkenness, and
in no better condition than a dead man. And
if we wait till the evening, we shall see this
death coming upon him more and more, and
then sleep again succeeding to that: but the
other we shall see even in the night keeping
from wine and sleep. Which then shall we —
pronounce to be most alive, the man that lies
in a state of insensibility, and is an open
laughing-stock to everybody? or the man
that is active, and conversing with God? For
if you go up to the one, and tell him some-
thing he ought to know, you will not hear him
say a word, any more than a dead man. But
the latter, whether you choose to be in his
company at night or by day, you will see to
be an angel rather than a man, and will hear
him speak wisdom about things in Heaven.
Do you see how one of them is alive above all
men living, and the other in a more pitiable
plight even than the dead? And even if he
have a mind to stir he sees one thing instead
of another,,and is like people that are mad,
or rather is in a worse plight even than they.
For if any one were to do them any harm, we
should at once feel pity for the sufferer, and
rebuke the doer of the wrong. But this man,
if we were to see a person trample on him, we
should not only be disinclined to pity, but
should even give judgment against him, now
that he was fallen. And will you tell me this
is life, and not a harder lot than deaths un-
numbered? So you see the self-indulgent
man is not only dead, but worse than dead,
and more miserable than a man _ possessed.
For the one is the object of pity, the other of
hatred. And the one has allowance made
him, the other suffers punishment for his mad-
ness. But if externally he is so ridiculous, as
having his saliva tainted, and his breath stink-
ing of wine, just consider what case his
wretched soul, inhumed as it were in a grave,
in such a body as this, is probably in. For
one may look upon this as much the same as
if one were to permit a damsel, comely,
chaste, free-born, of good family, and hand-
some, to be trampled on, and every way in-
sulted by a serving woman, that was savage,
and disgustful, and impure; drunkenness
being something of this sort. And who, being
in his senses, would not choose to die a thou-
sand deaths, rather than live a single day in
this way? For even if at daylight he were to
get up, and seem to be sober from that rev-
elling (or absurd show, xauwdiac, 1 Ms. xiuov) of
his, still even then it is not the clear bright-
ness of temperance which he enjoys, since the
cloud from the storm of drunkenness still is
hanging before his eyes. And even if we
were to grant him the clearness of sobriety,


438 THE WORKS 408


what were he the better? For this soberness
would be of no service to him, except to let
him see his accusers. For when he is in the
midst of his unseemly deeds, he is. so far a
gainer in not perceiving those that laugh at
him. But when it is day he loses this comfort
even, and while his servants are murmuring,
and his wife is ashamed, and his friends ac-
cuse him, and his enemies make sport of him,
he knows it too. Whatcan be more miserable
than a life like this, to be laughed at all day
by everybody, and when it is evening to do
the same unseemly things afresh. But what
if you would let me put the covetous before
you? For this is another, and even a worse
intoxication. But if it be an _ intoxication,
then it must be a worse death by far than the
former, since the intoxication is more griev-
ous. And indeed it is not so sad to be drunk
with wine as with covetousness. For in the
former case, the penalty ends with the suffer-
ings (several Ms. “ sufferer,’?) and results in
insensibility, and the drunkard’s own ruin.
But in this case the mischief passes on to
thousands of souls, and kindles wars of sun-
dry kinds upon all sides. Come then and let
us put this beside the other, and let us see
what are the points they have in common, and
in what again this is worse than it, and let us
make a comparison of drunkards to-day. For
with that blissful man, who liveth to the
Spirit, let them not be put at all in compari-
son, but only tried by one another. And
again, let us bring the money-table before you,
laden as it is with blood. What then have
they in common, and in what are they like
each other? It is in the very nature of the
disease. For the species of drunkenness is
different, as one comes of wine, the other of
money, but its way of affecting them is sim-
ilar, both being alike possessed with an ex-
orbitant desire. For he who is drunken with
wine, the more glasses he has drunk off, the
more he longs for; and he that is in love with
money, the more he compasses, the more he
kindles the flame of desire, and the more im-
portunate he renders his thirst. In this point
then they resemble each other. But in an-
other the covetous man has the advantage
(in a bad sense). Now what is this? Why
that the other’s affection is a natural one.
For the wine is hot, and adds to one’s natural
drought, and so makes drunkards thirsty.
But what is there to make the other man
always keep desiring more? how comes it
that when he is increased in riches, then he is
in the veriest poverty? This complaint then
is a perplexing one, and has more of paradox
about it. But if you please, we will take a
view of them after the drunkenness also. Or


ST.-CHRYSOSTOR


[HomiLy XIII.


rather, there is no such thing as ever seeing
the covetous man after his drunkenness, so
continual a state of intoxication is he in!
Let us then view them both in the state of
drunkenness, and let us get a distinct notion
which is the most ridiculous, and let us again
figure to ourselves a correct sketch of them.
We shall see then the man who dotes with his
wine at eventide with his eves open, seeing no
one, but moving about at mere hap-hazard,
and stumbling against such as fall in his way,
and spewing, and convulsed, and exposing his
nakedness in an unseemly manner. (See
Habak. ii. 16.) And if his wife be there, or
his daughter, or his maid-servant, or anybody
else, they! will laugh at him heartily. And
now let us bring before you the covetous man.
Here what happens is not deserving of
laughter only, but even of a curse, and exceed-
ing wrath, and thunderbolts without number.
At present however let us look at the ridicu-
lous part, for this man as well as the other
has an ignorance of all, whether friend or foe.
And like him too, though his eyes are open, he
is blinded. And as the former takes all he sees
for wine, so does this man take all for money.
And his spewing is even more disgusting.
For it is not food that he vomits, but words of
abuse, of insolence, of war, of death, that-
draws upon his own head lightnings without
number from above. And as the body of the
drunkard is livid and dissolving, so aiso is the
other’s soul. Or rather, even his body is not
free from this disorder, but it is taken even
worse, Care eating it away worse than wine
does (as do anger too and want of sleep), and
by degrees exhausting it entirely. And he
that is seized with illness from wine, after the
night is over may get sober. But this person
is always drunken day and night, watching or
sleeping, so paying a severer penalty for it
than any prisoner, or person at work in the
mines, or suffering any punishment more
grievous than this, if such there be. Is it
then life pray, and not death? or rather, is it
not a fate more wretched than any death?
For death gives the body rest, and sets it free
from ridicule, as well as disgrace and sins:
but these drunken fits plunge it into all these,
stopping up the ears, dulling the eyesight,
keeping down the understanding in great
darkness. For it will not bear the mention of
anything but interest, and interest upon inter-
est, and shameful gains, and odious traffick-
ings, and ungentlemanly and slavelike trans-


1 €yyeAacetat Mss., ‘he will be laughed at”’ or rather ‘‘ she
(the supposed spectator) will laugh at him.’’ Field reads
eyeAagate with one or two Mss., and alters the punctuation ;
so that the passage will run ‘‘ exposing, etc., even if his wife
be there .... or anybody else. Do you laugh heartily ?
Then let us bring before you,”’ etc.


Hamiy XIV.]


DHE EPISTLE “LO "THES ROMANS:


439


actions, barking like a dog at everybody, and
hating everybody, averse to everybody, at
war with everybody, without any reason for
it, rising up against the poor, grudging at the
rich, and civil to nobody. And if he have a
wife, or children, or friends, if he may not use
them all towards getting gain, these are to
him more his enemies than natural enemies.
What then can be worse than madness of this
sort, and what more wretched? when a man
is preparing rocks for his own self on every
side, and shoals, and precipices, and gulfs,
and pits without number, while he has but one
body, and is the slave of one belly. And if
any thrust thee into a state office, thou wilt be
a runaway, through fear of expense. Yet to
thyself thou art laying up countless charges
far more distressing than those, enlisting thy-
self for services not only more expensive, but
also more dangerous, to be done for mammon,
and not paying this tyrant a money contribu-
tion only, nor of bodily labor, torture to the
soul, and grief, but even of thy blood itself,
that thou mayest have some addition to thy
property (miserable and sorrow-stricken man !)
out of this barbarous slavery. Do you not
see those who are taken day by day to the
grave, how they are carried to tombs naked
and destitute of all things, unable to take with
them aught that is in the house, but bearing
what clothes they have about them to the
worm? Consider these day by day, and per-
chance the malady will abate, unless you mean
even by such an occasion to be still more mad
at the expensiveness of the funeral rites—for
the malady is importunate, the disease ter-
rible! This then is why we address you upon
this subject at every meeting, and constantly
foment your hearing, that at all events by
your growing accustomed to such thoughts,
some good many come. But be not conten-


tious, for it is not only at the Day to come,
but even before it, that this manifold malady
brings with it sundry punishments. For if |
were to tell you of those who pass their days
in chains, or of one nailed to a lingering dis-
ease, or of one struggling with famine, or of
any other thing whatsoever, I could point out
no one who suffers so much as they do who
love money. For what severer evil can befall
one, than being hated by all men, than hating
all men, than not having kindly feeling
towards any, than being never satisfied, than
being in a continual thirst, than struggling
with a perpetual hunger, and that a more dis-
tressing one than what all men esteem such?
than having pains day by day, than being
never sober, than being continually in worries
and harasses? For all these things, and more
than these, are what the covetous set their
shoulder to; in the midst of their gaining
having no perception of pleasure, though
scraping to themselves from all men, because
of their desiring more. But in the case of
their incurring a loss, if it be but of a far-
thing, they think they have suffered most griev-
ously, and have been cast out of life itself.
What language then can put these evils before
you? And if their fate here be such, consider
also what comes after this life, the being cast
out of the kingdom, the pain that comes from
hell, the perpetual chains, the outer darkness,
the venomous worm, the gnashing of teeth,
the affliction, the sore straitening, the rivers
of fire, the furnaces that never get quenched.
And gathering all these together, and weigh-
ing them against the pleasure of money, tear
up now this disease root and branch, that so
receiving the true riches, and being set free
from this grievous poverty, thou mayest ob-
tain the present blessings, and those to come,
by the grace and love toward man, etc.


HOMILY, XIV.


ROM. VIII. 12, 13.


“ Therefore, brethren, we are debtors, not to the flesh,
to live after the flesh. For if ye live after the
flesh, ye shall die; but if ye through the Spirit
do mortify the deeds of the body, ye shall live.”


AFTER showing how great the reward of a
Spiritual life is, and that it maketh Christ to
dwell in us, and that it quickeneth our mortal
bodies, and wingeth them to heaven, and
rendereth the way of virtue easier, he next
fitly introduces an exhortation to this pur-


pose. ‘Therefore’ we ought “not to live
after the flesh.” But this is not what he says,
for he words it in a much more striking and
powerful way, thus, “we are debtors to the
Spirit.” For saying, “we are debtors not to
the flesh,” indicates this. And this is a point
he is everywhere giving proof of, that what
God hath done for us is not matter of debt,
but of mere grace. But after this, what we
do is no longer matter of free-will offering, but


440


of debt. For when he saith, “‘ Ye are bought
with a price, be not ye the servants of men”
(1 Cor. vii. 23) ; and when he writes, “ Ye are
not your own” (ib. vi. 19); and again in
another passage he calls these selfsame things
to their mind, in these words, ‘ If (most Mss.
om. “ if’) One died for all, then all died * that
they should not henceforth live unto them-
selves.” (2 Cor. v. 15.) Andit is to establish this
that he says here also, ‘“ We are debtors ; ” then
since he said we are “not” debtors “ to the
flesh,” lest you should again take him to be
speaking against the nature of the flesh, he does
not leave speaking, but proceeds, ‘‘ to live after
the flesh.” For there are many things which
we do, owe it, as giving it food, warmth, and
rest, medicine when out of health, clothing,
and a thousand other attentions.. To prevent
your supposing then that it is this ministration
he is for abrogating when he says, ‘We are
not debtors to the flesh,” he explains it by
saying, ‘‘to live after the flesh.” For the care
that I am for abrogating is, he means, that
which leadeth to sin, as I should be for its
having what is healing to it. And this he
shows further on. For when he says, ‘ Make
not provision for the flesh,” he does not pause
at this, but adds, “to fulfil the lusts thereof.”
(Rom. xiii. 14.) And this instruction he gives
us here also, meaning, Let it have attention
shown it indeed, for we do owe it this, yet let
us not live according to the flesh, that is, let
us not make it the mistress of our life. For it
must be the follower, not the leader, and it is
not it that must regulate our life, but the laws
of the Spirit must it receive. Having then
defined this point, and having proved that we
are debtors to the Spirit, to show next for what
benefits it is that we are debtors, he does not
speak of those past (a thing which serves as
a most striking proof of his judgment), but
those which were to come; although even the
former were enough for the purpose. Yet stil!


he does not set them down in the present case, |


or mention even those unspeakable blessings,
but the things to come. For a benefit once
for all conferred does not, for the most part,
draw men on so much as one which is ex-
pected, and is to come. After adding this
then, he first uses the pains and ills that
come of living after the flesh, to put them in
fear, in the following words; “ For if ye live
after the flesh ye shall die,” so intimating to
us that deathless death, punishment, and ven-
geance in hell. Or rather if one were to look
accurately into this, such an one is, even in
this present life, dead. And this we have


1 So St. Chrysostom reads, as appears from his Commentary
on this passage.


THE WORKS’ OF ‘ST. CHRYSOSTO7E


[Homity XIV.


made clear to you in the last discourse. ‘But
if ye through the Spirit, do mortify the deeds
of the body, ye shall live.” You see that it is
not the essence of the body whereof we are
discoursing, but the deeds of the flesh. For
he does not say, “if ye through the Spirit do.
mortify ” the essence “ of the body,” but “ the
deeds of ”’ it, and these not all deeds, but such
as areevil. And this is plain in what follows :
for if ye do this, “ye shall live,” he says..
And how is it in the nature of things for this
to be, if it was all deeds that his language
applied to? for seeing and hearing and speak-
ing and walking are deeds of the body; and
if we mortify these, we shall be so far from
living, that we shall have to suffer the punish-
ment of a manslayer. What sort of deeds
then does he mean us to mortify? Those
which tend toward wickedness, those which go
after vice, which there is no other way of mor-
tifying save through the Spirit. For by kill-
ing yourself you may put an end to the others.”
And this you have no right to do. But to
these (you can put an end) by the Spirit only.
For if This be present, all the billows are laid
low, and the passions cower under It, and
nothing can exalt itself against us.3 So you
see how it is on things to come, as I said be-
fore, that he grounds his exhortations to us,
and shows that we are debtors not owing to
what has been already done only. For the
advantage of the Spirit is not this only, that
He hath set us free from our former sins, but
that He rendereth us impregnable against
future ones, and counts us worthy of the
immortal life. Then, to state another reward
also, he proceeds:

Ver. 14. “ For as many as are led by the
Spirit of God, they are the sons of God.”

Now this is again a much greater honor than
the first. And this is why he does not say
merely, As many as live? by the Spirit of God,
but, “as many as are led by the Spirit of
God,” to show that he would have Him use
such power over our life as a pilot doth over
a ship, or a charioteer over a pair of horses.
And it is not the body only, but the soul itself
too, that he is for setting under reins of this
sort. For he would not have even that inde-
pendent, but place its authority® also under
the power of the Spirit. For lest through a
confidence in the Gift of the Font they should
turn negligent of their conversation after it,
he would say, that even supposing you receive


2 Sav. tas wéev yap aAAas amoxteivavTa, geavToVv avedrEty EoTiV;
to give this sense we should punctuate tas pev yap GAdas,.
QMTOKT. €avTOV, avedety EaTLY,

3 xategaviotatat. The word used in the last Homily for the
conduct of the covetous towards the poor. See p. 439.

4 See Gal. v. 25, where ‘‘live’’ means ‘‘ have life,
distinguished from ‘t walk.”’

5 Or the command of it, é&ovgiav.


”


andis: §


HoMILY XIV.] |


THE ABbiol LE. LO PRE gROnANs:


441


baptism, yet if you are not minded to be “led
by the Spirit ” afterwards, you lose the dignity
bestowed upon you, and the pre-eminence of
your adoption. This is why he does not say,
As many as have received the Spirit, but, “as
many as are led by the Spirit,” that is, as
many as live up to this all their life long,
“they are the sons of God.” Then since this
dignity was given to the Jews also, for it says,
“‘T said ye are Gods, and all of you children
of the Most High” (Ps. Ixxxii. 6); and again,
“*T have nourished and brought up children ”
(Is. i. 2); and so, “Israel is My first-born ”
(Ex. iv. 22); and Paul too says, ‘‘ Whose is
the adoption” (Rom. ix, 4)—he next asserts
the great difference between the latter and
the former honor. For though the names are
the same, he means, still, the things are not
the same. And of these points he gives a
clear demonstration, by introducing a com-
parison drawn both from the persons so ad-
vanced (karopfoivrev) and from what was given
them, and from what was to come. And
first he shows what they of ald had given
them. What then was this? “A spirit of
bondage :” and so he thus proceeds,

Ver. 15. “For ye have not received the
spirit of bondage again to fear.”

Then not staying to mention that which
stands in contradistinction to bondage, that
is, the spirit of freedom, he has named what
is far greater, that of adoption, through which
he at the same time brings in the other, say-
ing, ‘“‘ But ye have received the Spirit of adop-
tion.”

But this is plain. But what the spirit of
bondage may be, is not so plain, and there is
need of making it clearer. Now what he says
is so far from being clear, that it is in fact
very perplexing. For the people of the Jews
did not receive the Spirit. What then is his
-meaning here? It is the letter he giveth this
name to, for spiritual it was, and so he called
the Law spiritual also, and the water from the
Rock, and the Manna. “For they did eat,”
he says, “‘of the same spiritual meat, and all
drank of the same spiritual drink.” (1 Cor. x.
3, 4.) And tothe Rock he gives this name,
when he says, “ For they drank of that spirit-
ual Rock which followed them.” Now it is
because all the rites then wrought were above
nature that he calls them spiritual, and not
because those who then partook of them re-
ceived the Spirit. And in what sense were
those letters, letters of bondage? Set before
yourself the whole dispensation, and then you
will have a clear view of this also. For rec-
ompenses were with them close at hand, and
the reward followed forthwith, being at once


given to domestic servants, and terrors in
abundance came to their height before their
eyes; and their purifications concerned their
bodies, and their continency extended but to
their actions. But with us it is not so, since
the imagination even and the conscience get-
teth purged out. For He does not say,
“Thou shalt do no murder,” only, but even
thou shalt not be angry: so too, it is not,
“Thou shalt not commit adultery,” but thou
shalt not look unchastely. So that it is not to
be from fear of present punishment, but out
of desire towards Himself, that both our
being habitually virtuous, and all our single
good deeds are to come. Neither doth he
promise a land flowing with milk and honey,
but maketh us joint-heir with the Only-Begot-
ten, so making us by every means stand aloof
from things present, and promising to give
such things especially as are worth the accept-
ance of men made sons of God, nothing, that
is, of a sensible kind or corporeal, but spirit-
ual all of them. And so they, even if they
had the name of sons, were but as slaves;
but we as having been made free, have
received the adoption, and are waiting for
Heaven. And with them He discoursed
through the intervention of others, with us by
Himself. And all that they did was through
the impulse of fear, but the spiritual act
through a coveting and a vehement desire.
And this they show by the fact of their over-
stepping the commandments. ‘They, as hire-
lings and obstinate persons, so never left
murmuring: but these do all for the pleasing
of the Father. So too they blasphemed when
they had benefits done them: but we are
thankful at being jeoparded. And if there be
need of punishing both of us upon our sin-
ning, even in this case the difference is great,
For it is not on being stoned and branded
and maimed by the priests, as they were, that
we are brought round. But it is enough for
us to be cast out from our Father’s table, and
to be out of sight for certain days. And with
the Jews the honor of adoption was one of
name only, but here the reality followed also,
the cleansing of Baptism, the giving of the
Spirit, the furnishing of the other blessings.
And there are several other points besides,
which go to show our high birth and their low
condition. After intimating all these then by
speaking of the Spirit, and fear, and the adop-
tion, he gives a fresh proof again of having
the Spirit of adoption. Now what is this?
That ‘we cry, Abba, Father.” And how


1 YmrepBaivery means to go beyond as well as to go against,
He refers to such things as St. Paul’s refusing sustenance
from the Achzeans. 1 Cor, ix. 4, etc. The tenses prove this to


proportionate, and like a kind of daily ration | be St. Chrysostom’s meaning.


442


great this is, the initiated know (St. Cyr. Jer.
Cat. 23, § 11, p. 276, O. T.), being with good
reason bidden to use this word first in the
Prayer of the initiated. What then, it may
be said, did not they also call God Father?
Dost thou not hear Moses, when he says,
“Thou desertedst the God that begot thee ?”
(Deut. xxxii. 15. LXX.) Dost thou not hear
Malachi reproaching them, and saying, that
*©one God formed you,” and there is “one
Father of you all?” (Mal. ii. 10. LXX.)
Still, if these words and others besides are
used, we do not find them anywhere calling
God by the name, or praying in this language.
But we all, priests and laymen, rulers and
ruled, are ordered to pray herein. And this
is the first language we give utterance to,
after those marvellous throes, and that strange
and unusual mode of labor. If in any other
instances they so called Him, that was only
of their own mind. But those in the state of
grace do it through being moved by the in-
working of the Spirit. For as there is a Spirit
of Wisdom, after which they that were unwise
became wise, and this discloses itself in their
teaching: and a Spirit of Power there is,
whereby the feeble raised up the dead, and
drove out devils; a Spirit alsoof the gift of
healing, and a Spirit of prophecy, and a Spirit
of tongues, so also a Spirit of adoption. And
as we know the Spirit of prophecy, in that he
who hath it foretelleth things to come, not
speaking of his own mind, but moved by the
Grace; so too is the Spirit of adoption,
whereby he that is gifted with it calleth God,
Father, as moved by the Spirit. Wishing to
express this as a most true descent, he used
also the Hebrew! tongue, for he does not say
only, “Father,” but ‘ Abba, Father,’’ which
name is a special sign of true-born children to
their fathers. After mentioning then the
diversity resulting from their conversation,
that resulting from the grace which had been
given, and that from their freedom, he brings
forward another demonstration of the superi-
ority which goes with this adoption. Now of
what kind is this ?

Ver. 16. “The Spirit Itself beareth witness
with our spirit, that we are the children of
God.”

For it is not from the language merely, he
says, that I make my assertion, but from the
cause out of which the language has its birth ;
since it is from the Spirit suggesting it that
we so speak. And this in another passage he
has put into plainer words, thus: ‘God hath
sent forth the Spirit of his Son into our


1 i. e. the Syriac, which the Hebrew means in the N. T.
pecbably in all cases—it being then the language of the He-
rews.


THE WORKS OF ST. ‘CHEYSOSTORM


[HomiLy XIV.


hearts, crying, Abba Father.’’ (Gal. iv. 6.)
And what is that, ‘“‘ Spirit beareth witness
with spirit?’ The Comforter, he means, with
that Gift, which is given unto us. For it is
not of the Gift alone that it is the voice, but
of the Comforter also who gave the Gift,
He Himself having taught us through the
Gift so to speak. But when the “ Spirit
beareth witness,” what farther place for
doubtfulness? For if it were a man, or
angel, or archangel, or any other such power
that promised this, then there might be rea-
son in some doubting. But when it is the
Highest Essence that bestoweth this Gift,
and “beareth witness”’ by the very words
He bade us use in prayer, who would doubt
any more of our dignity? For not even when
the Emperor elects any one, and proclaims
in all men’s hearing the honor done him, does
anybody venture to gainsay.

Ver, 17.“ And if children, then heirs.

Observe how he enhances the Gift by little
and little. For since it is a possible case
to be children, and yet not become heirs
(for it is not by any means all children that
are heirs), he adds this besides—that we are
heirs. But the Jews, besides their not hav-
ing the same adoption as we, were also cast
out from ‘ithe: inheritance? 9 Hone “hlewae
miserably destroy those wicked men, and will
let out the vineyard to other husbandmen” ~
(Matt. xxi. 41): and before this, He said
that “‘many shall come from the East and
from the West, and shall sit down with
Abraham, but the children of the Kingdom
shall be cast out.” (ib. vill, -21,)a2.)9 eu
even here he does not pause, but sets down
something even greater than this. What may
this be then? ‘That we are heirs of God;
and so he adds, ‘heirs of God.’ And what
is more still, that we are not simply heirs,
but also “joints heirs with Christ.” Observe
how ambitious he is of bringing us near to
the Master. For since it is not all children
that are heirs, he shows that we are both
children and heirs; next, as it is not all
heirs that are heirs to any great amount, he
shows that we have this point with us too,
as we are heirs of God. Again, since it were
possible to be God’s heir, but in no sense
“joint heir with” the Only-Begotten, he
shows that we have this also. And consider
his wisdom. For after throwing the dis-
tasteful part into a short compass, when he
was saying what was to become of such as
“live after the flesh,” for instance, that they
“shall die,” when -he comes to the /more
soothing part, he leadeth forth his discourse
into a large room, and so expands it on the
recompense of rewards, and in pointing out


Iiomiiy XIV.]


PH. EPISZEE POcTIHE CROsANS.


5


443


!
that the gifts too are manifold and great.
For if even the being a child were a grace
unspeakable, just think how great a thing
it is to be heir! But if this be great,
much more is it to be “joint heir.” Then
to show that the Gift is not of grace only,
and to give at the same time a credibility
to what he says, he proceeds, “‘ If so be that
we suffer with Him, that we may be also
glorified together.” If, he would say, we be
sharers with Him in what is painful, much
more shall it be so in what is good. For He
who bestowed such blessings upon those
who had wrought no good, how, when He
seeth them laboring and suffering so much,
shall he do else than give them greater
requital ? Having then shown that the thing
was a matter of return, to make men give
credit to what was said, and prevent any
from doubting, he shows further that it has
the virtue of a gift. The one he showed,
that what was said might gain credit even
with those that doubted, and that the receivers
of it might not feel ashamed as being ever-
more receiving salvation for nought; and the
other, that you might see that God outdoeth
the toils by His recompenses. And the one
he has shown in the words, “If so be that
we suffer with Him, that we may be also
glorified together.” But the other in pro-
ceeding to add;

Ver. 18. “The sufferings of the present
time are not worthy to be compared with the
glory which shall be revealed in (Gr. eic) us.”

In what went before, he requires of the
spiritual man the correcting of his habits
(Mar. and 6 Mss. passions), where he says,
“Ve are not debtors to live after the flesh,”
that such an one, for instance, should be
above lust, anger, money, vainglory, grudging.
But here having reminded them of the whole
gift, both as given and as to come, and raised
him up aloft with hopes, and placed him near
to Christ, and showed him to be a joint-heir
of the Only-Begotten; he now leads him
forth with confidence even to dangers. For
to get the better of the evil affections in us,
is not the same thing with bearing up under
those trials, scourges, famine, plunderings,
bonds, chains, executions. For these last
required much more of a noble and vigorous
spirit. And observe how he at once allays
and rouses the spirit of the combatants. For
after he had shown that the rewards were
greater than the labors, he both exhorts to
greater efforts, and yet will not let them be
elated, as being still outdone by the crowns
given in requital. And in another passage
he says, “For our light affliction, which is
but for a moment, worketh a far more exceed- |


ing and eternal weight of glory” (2 Cor. iv.
17): it being the deeper sort of persons he
was then speaking to. Here, however, he
does not allow that the afflictions were light;
but still he mingles comfort with them by
the compensation which good things to come
afford, in the words, ‘“ For I reckon that the
sufferings of this present time are not worthy
to be compared,” and he does not say, with
the rest (avesw) that is to come, but what is
much greater, “with the glory which is to
come.” For it does not follow, that where
rest is there is glory; but that where glory
is there is rest, does follow: then as he had
said that it is to come, he shows that it
already is. For he does not say, that which
is to be, but ‘‘ which shall be revealed in us,”
as if already existing but unrevealed. As
also in another place he said in clearer
words, ‘‘ Our life is hid with Christ in God.” }
Be then of a good heart about it. For
already hath it been prepared, and awaiteth
thy labors. But if it vexes you that it is yet
to come, rather let this very thing rejoice
you. For it is owing to its being great and
unutterable, and transcending our present
condition, that it is stored up there. And so
he has not put barely “the sufferings of this
present time,’”’ but he speaks so as to show
that itis not in quality only, but in quantity
also, that the other life has the advantage.
For these sufferings, whatever they are, are
attached to our present life ; but the blessings
to come reach themselves out over ages with-
out end. And since he had no way of giving
a particular description of these, or of putting
them before us in language, he gives them a
name from what seems to be specially an
object of desire with us, “glory.’’ For the
summit of blessings and the sum of them,
this seems to be. And to urge the hearer on
in another way also, he gives a loftiness
to his discourse by the mention of the crea-
tion, gaining two points by what he is next
saying, the contempt of things present, and
the desire of things to come, and a third be-
side these, or rather the first, is the showing
how the human race is cared for on God’s
part and in what honor He holds our nature.
And besides this, all the doctrines of the
philosophers, which they had framed for
themselves about this world, as a sort of
cobweb or child’s mound,” he throws down
with this one doctrine. But that these things
may stand in a clearer light, let us hear the
Apostle’s own language.

Ver, 19, 20. ‘“‘For the earnest expectation
of the creation waiteth,’ he says, “for the


1 Col. iii. 3. Ver. 4, confirms his application of it.
2 Perhaps alluding to II. xv. 362.


444 THE WORKS OF


ST.) CHRYSOSTRR:.


|HomILy XIV.


revelation of the sons of God. For the creat-
ion was made subject to vanity, not willingly,
but by reason of him who hath subjected the
same in hope.”

And the meaning is something of this kind.
The creation itself is in the midst of its
pangs, waiting for and expecting these good
things whereof we have just now spoken.
For “earnest expectation” (azoxapadoxia, look-
ing out) implies expecting intensely. And
so his discourse becomes more emphatic, and
he personifies this whole world as_ the
prophets also do, when they introduce the
floods clapping their hands, and little hills
leaping, and mountains skipping, not that we
are to fancy them alive, or ascribe any rea-
soning power to them, but that we may learn
the greatness of the blessings, so great as to
reach even to things wifhout sense also.*
The very same thing they do many times
also in the case of afflicting things, since they
bring in the vine lamenting, and the wine
too, and the mountains, and the boardings?
of the Temple howling, and in this case too
it is that we may understand the extremity
of the evils. It is then in imitation of these
that the Apostle makes a living person of
the creature here, and says that it groaneth
and travaileth: not that he heard any groan
conveyed from the earth and heaven to him,
but that he might show the exceeding great-
ness of the good things to come; and the
desire of freedom from the ills which now per-
vaded them. “For the creature was made
subject to vanity, not willingly, but by rea-
son of him who hath subjected the same.”
What is the meaning of, “the creation was
made subject to vanity?” Why that it became
corruptible. For what cause, and on what
account? On account of thee,O man. For
since thou hast taken a body mortal and
liable to suffering, the earth too hath received
a curse, and brought forth thorns and thistles.
But that the heaven, when it is waxen old
along with the earth, is to change afterwards


* Chrysostom’s interpretation of 9 «riots is undoubtedly cor-
rect in principle, although he probabiy gives to it too general
an idea in calling it ‘‘ this whole world ’’—reaching “even to
things without sense also.”’ It is more likely that the apostle
has in mind distinctively the zxrational creation. (So Meyer,
Godet, Thayer, Dwight). Nature is subject to ‘‘ vanity ’—i. e.
the law of decay and death, and is poetically spoken of as
awaiting the revelation of the sons of God in the hope of
sharing init. The apostle explains that the xrtots was placed
in this condition not of its own accord but on account of the
will of God, who, however, subjected it to the forces of decay
and death on the ground of hope. Hope was the attendant
condition of this subjection which took place in consequence
of the fall. Hence this condition is not final and the creation
desires and groans to be delivered and to share in the ‘‘ mani-
festation of the sons of God ’’—the revelation of them in their
true character in the presence of the universe at the coming of
Christ.—G. B. S.

1 datvwyata, Heb. nyaw. Amos viii. 3. LXX. Hesych.
gavidwuata. See Schleusner, Lex. Gr. Vet. Test. for con-
jectures to account for the translation.


to a better portion (Ajéw v. p. 384) hear from
the Prophet in his words; ‘Thou, O Lord,
from the beginning hast founded the earth,
and the heavens are the work of Thy hands. :
They shall perish, but thou shalt endure ; and
they all shall wax old as doth a garment,
and asa cloak shalt Thou fold them up, and
they shall be «changed.» (Ps, cit. 25)) 26.)
Isaiah too declares the same, when he says,
“Look to the heaven above, and upon the
earth beneath, for the heavens are as a firm-
ament of smoke,? and the earth shall wax
old like a garment, and they that dwell therein
shall perish in like manner. (Is, li. 6.) Now
you see in what sense the creation’ is “in
bondage to vanity,” and how it is to be freed
from the ruined state. For the one says,
“Thou shalt fold them up as a garment, and
they shall be changed;” and Isaiah says,
“and they that dwell therein shall perish in
like manner,” not of course meaning an utter
perishing. For neither do they that dwell
therein, mankind, that is, undergo such an
one, but a temporary one, and through it
they are changed into an incorruptible (1
Cor. xv. 53) state, and so therefore will the
creature be. And all this he showed by the
way, by his saying ‘‘in like manner” (2 Pet.
ili, 13), which Paul also says farther on. At-
present, however, he speaks about the bond-
age itself, and shows for what reason it be-
came such, and gives ourselves as the cause
of it. What then? Was it harshly treated
on another’s account? By no means, for it
was on my account that it was made. What
wrong then is done it, which was made for
my sake, when it suffereth these things for
my correction? Or, indeed, one has neo
need to moot the question of right and wrong
at allin the case of things void of soul and
feeling. But Paul, since he had made ita
living person, makes use of none of these
topics I have mentioned, but another kind of
language, as desiring to comfort the hearer
with the utmost advantage. And of what
kind is this? What have you to say? he
means. It was evil intreated for thy sake,
and became corruptible; yet it has had no
wrong done it. For incorruptible will it be
for thy sake again. This then is the meaning
of “in hope.” But when he says, it was
“not willingly ” that it was made subject, it
is not to show that it is possessed of judg-
ment that he says so, but that you may learn
that the whole is brought about by Christ’s
care, and this is no achievement of its own.
And now say in what hope?


2 Eng. ‘‘shall vanish away like smoke.’’ LXX. render nbn
eaTepewOn, they give the same for 779). Is. xlv. 12.


Homity XIV.}


Ver. 21. “‘ That the creature itself also shall} come.


be delivered from the bondage of corrup-
tion.”

Now what is this creation? Not thyself
alone, but that also which is thy inferior, and
partaketh not of reason or sense, this too
shall be a sharer in thy blessings. For “it
shall be freed,” he says, “from the bondage
of corruption,” that is, it shall no longer be
corruptible, but shall go along with the beauty
given to thy body; just as when this became
corruptible, that became corruptible also; so
now it is made incorruptible, that also shall
follow it too. And to show this he proceeds.
(cic) “‘ Into the glorious liberty of the children
of God.” That is, because of their liberty.
For as a nurse who is bringing upa_ king’s
child, when he has come to his father’s power,
does herself enjoy the good things along with
him, thus also is the creation, he means.
You see how in all respects man takes the
lead, and that it is for his sake that all things
are made. See how he solaces the struggler,
and shows the unspeakable love of God
toward man. For why, he would say, dost
thou fret at thy temptations? thou art. suffer-
ing for thyself, the creation for thee. Nor
does he solace only, but also shows what he
says to be trustworthy. For if the creation
which was made entirely for thee is ‘“‘in
hope,” much more oughtest thou to be,
through whom the creation is to come to the
enjoyment of those good things. Thus men


(3 Mss. fathers) also when a son is to appear at |


his coming to a dignity, clothe even the ser-
vants with a brighter garment, to the glory of
the son; so will God also clothe the creature
with incorruption for the glorious liberty of
the children.

Ver. 22. “ For we know that the whole
creation groaneth and travaileth in pain to-
gether until now.”

Observe, how he shames the hearer, saying
almost, Be not thou worse than the creation,
neither find a pleasure in resting in things
present. Not only ought we not to cling to
them, but even to groan over the delay of our
departure hence. For if the creation doth
this, much more oughtest thou to do so, hon-
ored with reason as thou art. But as this
was not yet enough to force their attention,
he proceeds.

Ver. 23. “ And not only they, but ourselves
also, which have the first-fruits of the Spirit,
even we ourselves groan within ourselves.”

That is, having had a taste of the things to


1 $a rnv. St. Chrysostom does not mean to say that one
preposition is used for another, as his illustration shows. For
the liberty of the sons of God is both the thing of which the
creation partakes, and the cause of its partaking; so that the
one is put in a sense which implies the other too.


Sa PIStEE! £O!) THE ROMANS!


445


For even if any should be quite stone
hard, he means what has been given already
is enough to raise him up, and draw him off
from things present, and to wing him after
things to come in two ways, both by the great-
ness of the things that are given, and by the
fact that, great and numerous as they are,
they are but first-fruits. For if the first-fruits
be so great that we are thereby freed even
from our sins, and attain to righteousness and
sanctification, and that those of that time
both drave out devils, and raised the dead by
their shadow (Acts v. 15), or garments (ib.
xix. 12), consider how great the whole must
be. And if the creation, devoid as it is of
mind and reason, and though in ignorance of
these things, yet groaneth, much more should
we. Next, that he may give the heretics no
handle, or seem to be disparaging our present
world, we groan, he says, not as finding fault
with the present system, but through a desire
of those greater things. And this he shows
in the words, “ Waiting for the adoption.”
What dost thou say, let me hear? Thou
didst insist on it at every turn, and didst cry
aloud, that we were already made sons, and
now dost thou place this good thing among
hopes, writing that we must needs wait for it ?
Now it is to set this right by the sequel that
he says, “to wit, the redemption? of our
body.” That is, the perfect glory. Our lot
indeed is at present uncertainty to our last
breath, since many of us that were sons have
become dogs and prisoners. but if we de-
cease with a good hope, then is the gift un-
movable, and clearer, and greater, having
no longer any change to fear from death and
sin. Then therefore will the grace be secure,
when our body shall be freed from death and
its countless ailments (or passions). For this
is full redemption (az02irpworr), not a redemp-
tion? only, but such, that we shall never again
return to our former captivity. For that thou
mayest not be perplexed at hearing so much
of glory without getting any distinct knowl-
edge of it, he partially exposes to thy view the
things to come, setting before thee the change
of thy body (Gr. changing thy body), and
along with it the change of the whole creation.
And this he has put in a clearer light in an-
other passage, where he says, “Who shall
change our vile body, that it may be fashioned
like unto His glorious Body.” (Phil. iii. 21.)
And in another place again he writes and
says, “ But when this mortal shall have put on


2 amroAvtpwov. Inthe meaning of this word sometimes the
manner, and sometimes the completeness of redemption pre-
dominates; see Rom. iii. 24, Pp. 377-

3 Avtpwots, Showing that the completeness is implied in the
preposition, which should be observed in the doctrinal use of
the term.


446 THE WORKS/OF


ST. CHRYSOST@UM, |HomILy XIV.


immortality, then shall be brought to pass
the saying that is written, Death is swallowed
up in victory.” (1 Cor. xv. 54.) But to show,
that with the corruption of the body the con-
stitution of the things of this life will also
come to an end, he wrote again elsewhere,
‘“‘ For the fashion of this world passeth away.”
Ce Cor, vil. 3 i:)

Ver. 24. “ For we are saved by hope,” he
says.

Now since he had dwelt upon the promise
of the things to come, and this seemed to
pain the weaker hearer, if the blessings are
all matter of hope; after proving before that
they are surer than things present and visible,
and discoursing at large on the gifts already
given, and showing that we have received the
first fruits of those good things, lest we should
seek our all in this world, and be traitors to
the nobility that faith gives us, he says, ‘“ For
we are (Gr. were) saved by hope.” And this
is about what he means. We are not to seek
our all in this life, but to have hope also.
For this is the only gift that we brought in to
God, believing Him in what He promised
shall come, and it was by this way alone we
were saved. If then we lose this hope, we
have lost all that was of our own contributing.
For I put you this question, he would say,
Wert thou not liable for countless sins? wert
thou not in despair? wert thou not under sen-
tence? were not all out of heart about thy
salvation? What then saved thee? It was
thy hoping! in God alone, and trusting to
Him about His promises and gifts, and noth-
ing besides hadst thou to bring in. If it was
this then that saved thee, hold it fast now also.
For that which afforded thee so great bless-
ings, to a certainty will not deceive thee in
regard to things to come. For in that it found
thee dead, and ruined, and a prisoner, and an
enemy, and yet made thee a friend, and a son,
and a freeman, and righteous, and a joint-heir,
and yielded such great things as no one ever
expected even, how, after such munificence
and attachment, will it betray? thee in what is
to follow? Say not to me, hopes again! ex-
pectations again! faith again! For it is in
this way thou wert saved from the beginning,
and this dowry was the only one that thou
didst bring in to the Bridegroom. Hold it
then fast and keep it: for if thou demandest
to have everything in this world, thou hast
lost that well-doing of thine, through which
thou didst become bright, and this is why he


1 This blending of faith and hope illustrates the connection
of faith and love, the Object of love being now known by
faith, and appropriated by hope. The personification which
follows is a powerful way of representing that in us which ap-
prehends God as itself His gift.

2 So the Mss. and Catena:
etat, ‘* will it not satisfy.”


the old reading was ov mpoana-


proceeds to say, “‘ But hope that is seen is not
hope ; for what a man seeth, why doth he yet
hope for?”

Ver. 25.—‘‘ But if we hope for that we see
not, then do we with patience wait for
its?

That is, if thou art to be looking for every-
thing in this world, what need is there for
hope? What is hope then? It is feeling
confidence in things to come. What great
demand then doth God make upon thee,
since He Himself giveth thee blessings quite
entire from His own stores? One thing only,
hope, He asks of thee, that thou too mayest
have somewhat of thine own to contribute
toward thy salvation. And this he intimates.
in what he proceeds with: “ For if we hope
for that we see not, then do we with patience
wait for it.” As then God crowneth him that
undergoes labors, and hardnesses, and count-
less toils, so doth He him that hopeth.
For the name of patience belongs to hard
work and much endurance. Yet even this
He hath granted to the man that hopeth, that
He might solace the wearied soul. And then
to show that for this light task we enjoy
abundant aid, he proceeds:

Ver. 26. “ Likewise the Spirit also helpeth
our infirmities.’’*

For the one point is thy own, that of
patience, but the other comes of the Spirit’s
furnishings, Who also cherisheth (Gr. anoint-
eth) thee unto this hope, and through it again
lighteneth thy labors. Then that thou might-


est know that it is not in thy labors only and .


dangers that this grace standeth by thee, but
even in things the most easy seemingly,’ it
worketh with thee, and on all occasions bears.
its part in the alliance, he proceeds to
say,


“For we know not what we should pray for


as we ought.”

And this he said to show the Spirit’s great
concern about us, and also to instruct them not
to think for certainty that those things are
desirable which to man’s reasonings appear
so. For since it was likely that they, when
they were scourged, and driven out, and
suffering grievances without number, ‘should
be seeking a respite, and ask this favor of
God, and think it was adv antageous to them,
by no means (he says) suppose that what
seem blessings to you really are so. For we


* Magna est vis Grect verbi cvvavtiAapBavéeoba, said Cal-
vin. The word means: “takes hold together with us, as if
on the other side or as if instead of us’? (Godet). The notion
of lifting the other end of a burden, or perhaps, of taking hold
of it in our place, seems to te = the basis of this expressive.
word. Cf. Luke x. 40.—G.

3 These words show that er, fen does not mean that
we do any good unaided, however much he insists on the
freedom of our will.


)


Homily XIV.]


THES EPISTLE TO: THE ROMANS.


447


need the Spirit’s aid even to do this. So
feeble is man, and such a nothing by himself.
For this is why he says, ‘‘ For we know not
what we should pray for as we ought.” In
order that the learner might not feel any
shame at his ignorance, he does not say, ye
know not, but, ‘we know not.” And that he
did not say this merely to seem moderate, he
plainly shows from other passages. For he
desired in his prayers unceasingly to see
Rome. Yet the time when he obtained it was
not at once when he desired it. And for
“the thorn” that was given him “in the
flesh” (2 Cor. xii. 8), that is the dangers, he
often besought God, and was entirely unsuc-
cessful.! And so was Moses, who in the Old
Testament prays to see Palestine (Deut. iii.
26), and Jeremiah when he made supplication
for the Jews (Jer. xv. 1), and Abraham when
he interceded for the people of Sodom. ‘“ But
the Spirit Itself maketh intercession for us
with groanings which cannot be_ uttered.”
This statement is not clear, owing to the ces-
sation of many of the wonders which then
used to take place. Wherefore I must needs
inform you of the state of things at that
time, and in this way the rest of the subject
will be cleared. What therefore was the
state of things then? God did in those days
give to all that were baptized certain excellent
gifts, and the name that these had was
spirits. For “the spirits of the Prophets,”
it‘says, “ are subject to the prophets.” (x Cor.
xiv. 32.) And one had the gift of prophecy
and foretold things to come; and another of
wisdom, and taught the many; and another
of healings, and cured the sick; and another
of miracles, and raised the dead; another of
tongues, and spake different languages. And
with all these there was also a gift of prayer,
which also was called a spirit, and he that
had this prayed for all the people. For since
we are ignorant of much that is profitable for
us and ask things that are not profitable, the
gift of prayer came into some particular per-
son of that day, and what was profitable for
all the whole Church alike, he was the ap-
pointed person to ask for in behalf of all, and
the instructor of the rest. Spirit then is the
name that he gives here to the grace of this
character, and the soul that receiveth the
grace, and intercedeth to God, and groaneth.
For he that was counted worthy of such grace
as this, standing with much compunction, and
with many mental groanings falling before
God, asked the things that were profitable for
all. Andof this the Deacon of the present
day is a symbol when he offers up the prayers


1 See Bishop Bull, Sex. VY. who discusses what this was.


for the people. This then is what Paul
means when he says, ? “ the Spirit itself mak-
eth intercession for us with groanings that
cannot be uttered.”

Ver. (27.@°5 But re
hearts.”

You see that it is not about the Comforter
that he is speaking, but about the spiritual
heart. Since if this were not so, he ought to
have said, ‘‘ He that searcheth” the Spirit.
But that thou mayest learn that the language
is meant of a spiritual man, who has the gift
of prayer, he proceeds, “ And he that search-
eth the hearts knoweth what is the mind of
the Spirit,” that is, of the spiritual man.

‘Because he maketh intercession for the
saints according to the will of God.”

Not (he means) that he informs God as if
ignorant, but this is done that we may learn
to pray for proper things, and to ask of God
what is pleasing to Him. For this is what the
“according to God” is. And so this was
with a view to solace those that came to Him,
and to yield them excellent instruction. For
He that furnished the gifts, and gave besides
blessings without number, was the Comforter,
Hence it says, “all these things worketh one
and the’ self-sameé. Spirit.” « (@ Cor. aii..amy)
And it is for our instruction that this takes
place, and to show the love of the Spirit, it
condescendeth even to this. And it is from
this that the person praying getteth heard,
because the prayer is made ‘according to the
will of God.”

You see from how many points he instructs
them in the-love that was shown them and
the honor that was done them. And what
is there that God hath not done for us? The
world He hath made corruptible for us, and
again for us incorruptible. He suffered His
Prophets to be ill-treated for our sake, sent
them into captivity for us, let them fall into
the furnace, and undergo ills without number.
Nay, He made them prophets for us, and
the Apostles also He made for us. He gave
up for us His Only-Begotten, He punisheth
the devil for us, He hath seated us on the
Right Hand, He was reproached for us.
“For the reproaches of them that reproached
thee,” it says, “fell upon me.” (Ps. xix. 9.)
Yet still, when we are drawing back after so
great favor, He leaveth us not, but again
entreats, and on our account inciteth others to
entreat for us, that He may show us favor.
And so it was with Moses. For to him He
says, “ Let Me alone, that I may blot them
out ” (Ex. xxxii. 10), that He might drive him


that searcheth the


|upon supplicating on their behalf. And now


2 St. Ambrose, Z/7st. 36, gives the same interpretation.


~


448


THE WORKS: OF ST. CHRYSOSTGRE


[Homity XIV.


He doth the same thing.
gift of prayer. But this He doth, not as
Himself standing in need of entreaty, but
that we might? not, from being saved without
effort (ax20c), grow indifferent. For this
cause it is on account of David, and of this
person and that, He often says, that He is rec-
onciled with them, to establish again this very
thing, that the reconciliation may be with all
due formality.” Still He would have looked
more loving toward man, if it had not been
through this and the other prophet, but of
Himself, that He told them that He ceased to
be wroth. But the reason of His not holding
to that point was, that this ground of recon-
ciliation might not become an occasion for
listlessness. Wherefore to Jeremiah also He
said, “Pray not for this people, for I will not
hear thee” (Jer. xi. 14), not as wishing to
stop his praying (for He earnestly longeth
for our salvation), but to terrify them: and
this the prophet also seeing did not cease
praying. And that you may see that it was
not through a wish to turn him from it, but to
shame ® them that He said this, hear what it
says. “ Seest thou not what these are
doing?” (Ez. vili. 6, not verbally-from LXX.)
And when He says to the city “ Though
thou wash thee with nitre, and take thee much
soap (Gr. herb), yet thou art stained before
Me” ( Jer. ii. 22), it is not that He may cast
them into despair that He so speaks, but that
He may rouse them to repentance. For as
in the case of the Ninevites, by giving the
sentence without limitation, and holding out
no good hope, He scared them -the more, and
led them to repentance, so He doth here also,
both to rouse them, and to render the prophet
more venerated, that in this way at least they
may hearhim. Then, since they kept on in a
state of incurable madness, and were not to
be sobered even by the rest being carried
away, he first exhorts them to remain there.
But when they kept not up to this, but de-
serted to Egypt, this indeed He allowed them,
but requires of them not to desert to irrelig-
ion as well as to Egypt. (Jer. xliv. 8.) But
when they did not comply in this either, He
sendeth the prophet along with them, so that
they might not after all suffer total wreck.
(Ver. 28.) For since they did not follow Him
when He called, He next followeth them to
discipline them, and hinder their being hur-
ried further into vice, and as a father full of
affection does a child who takes all treatment


1 The peculiar position of the negative resembles that in
Eur. Hec. 1131 (al. 1149), tv’ GAAos wy Tes cidetn TaAde.

2 6 Mss. with glorying, i.e. with something good done on
man’s part.

3 €vtpewar perhaps ‘“‘to urge him to compassion ;”’ (there is
no pronoun with this verb).


Hence He gave the|/in the same peevish way, conducting him


about everywhere with himself, and following
him about. ‘This was the reason why He sent
not Jeremiah only into Egypt, but also Ezekiel
into Babylon, and they did not refuse to go.
For when they found their Master love the
people exceedingly, they continued them-
selves todo so likewise. Much as if a right-
minded servant were to take compassion upon
an intractable son when he saw his father
grieving and lamenting about him. And what
was there that they did not suffer for them?
They were sawn asunder, they were driven
out, they were reproached, they were stoned,
they underwent numberless grievances.
And after all this they would run back to
them. Samuel, for instance, c€ased not to
mourn for Saul, miserably insulted as he was
by him, and injured irreparably. (1 Sam. xv.
35.) Still he held none of these things in
remembrance. And for the people of the
Jews, Jeremiah has composed Lamentations
in writing. And when the general of the
Persians had given him liberty to dwell se-
curely, and with perfect freedom, wherever he
pleased, he preferred above dwelling at home
the affliction of the people, and their hard
durance in a strange land. (Jer. xi. 5.) So
Moses left the palace and the sort of living:
herein, and hasted to be among their calam-
ities. And Daniel abode for twenty days
following without food, pinching himself with
the most severe fast, that he might reconcile
God to them. (Dan. x. 2.) And the three
Children too, when in the furnace, and so
fierce a fire, put up a supplication for them.
For it was not on their account that they were
grieved, as they were saved; but since they
considered that then was the time for the
greatest boldness of speech, they consequently
prayed in their behalf; hence too they said,
“In a contrite heart and an humble spirit let
us be accepted.” (Song. ver. 16.) For them
Joshua also rent his garments. (Josh. vii. 6.)
For them Ezekiel too wailed and lamented
when he saw them cut down. (Ez. ix. 8.)
And Jeremy‘ said, “ Let me alone, I will
weep bitterly.” (Is. xxii. 4.) And before
this, when he did not venture openly to pray
for a remittance of their sad estate, he sought
for some limited period, when he says, “ How
long, O, Lord? ”\: Gb vivant.) i Hor lie
affectionateness is the whole race of the
saints. Wherefore also St. Paul saith, “ Put
on therefore, as the elect saints of God,
bowels of mercy, kindness, humbleness of
mind.” «(Col: ail. a2) You ise tthemsemes
propriety of the word, and how he would have


# So all Mss. but one, and that is obviously an emendation:
both the passages cited are from Isaiah.


HomILy XIV.]


SEE, BRISELE: FO. THE, ROMANS.


449


us continually merciful. For he does not say,
“show mercy ” only, but put it on, that like
as our garment is always with us, so may
mercy be. And he does not say merely
mercy, but “bowels of mercy,” that we may
imitate the natural affection of relations.
But we do just the contrary, and if any one
comes to ask a single penny of us, we insult
them, abuse them, call them impostors.
Dost thou not shudder, man, and blush to
call him an impostor for bread? Why even
supposing such an one is practising impost-
ure, he deserves to be pitied for it, because
he is so pressed with famine as to put on such
acharacter. This then is a reproach to our
cruelty. For since we had not the heart to
bestow with readiness, they are compelled to
practise a great many arts, so as to put a
cheat off upon our inhumanity, and to soften
down our harshness. Now if it was gold and
silver that he asked of thee, then there would
be some reason in thy suspicions. But if it is
necessary food that he comes to thee for, why
be showing thyself wise so unseasonably, and
take so over exact an account of him, accus-
ing him of idleness and sloth? For if we
must talk in this way, it is not others but our-
selves that we ought to address. When there-
fore thou art going to God to ask forgiveness
for thy sins, then call these words to mind,
and thou wilt know thou deservest to have
these things said to thee by God, much more
than the poor man by thee. And yet God
hath never said such words to thee as “ Stand
off, since thou art an impostor, always coming
to church and hearing My laws, but when
abroad, setting gold, and pleasure (érAuuiav),
and friendship, and in fact anything above
My commandments. And now thou makest
thyself humble, but when thy prayers are over
thou art bold, and cruel, and inhuman. Get
thee hence, therefore, and never come to Me
any more.” Yet this, and more than this, we
deserve to have said to us; but still He never
did reproach us in any such way, but is long-
suffering and fulfils everything on His own
part, and gives us more than we ask for.
Calling this to mind then, let us relieve the
poverty of those that beg of us, and if they do
impose upon us, let us not be over exact
about it. For such a salvation is it that we
ourselves require, one with pardon, with kind-
ness (gcAavépwriac), With much mercy along with
it. For it is not possible, it certainly is not,
if our estate were searched into strictly, that
we should ever be saved, but we must needs
be punished and brought to ruin altogether.
Let us not then be bitter judges of others
lest we also get a strict account demanded of
us. For we have sins that are too great to


29


plead any excuse. And therefore let us show
more mercy towards those who have com-
mitted inexcusable sins, that we also may lay
up for ourselves the like mercy beforehand.
And yet be as large-hearted as we may, we
shall never be able to contribute such love
toward man as we stand in need of at the
hand of a God that loveth man.’ How then
is it other than monstrous, when we are in
need of so many things ourselves, to be over
exact with our fellow servants, and do all we
can against ourselves? For thou dost not in
this way so much prove him unworthy of
thy liberality, as thyself of God’s love toward
man. For he that deals over exactly with his
fellow servant, will be the more sure to find
the like treatment at God’s hand. Let us not
speak against ourselves, but even if they come
out of idleness or wilfulness,! let us bestow.
For we also do many sins through wilfulness,
or rather we do them all through wilfulness,
and yet God doth not presently call us to
punishment, but gives us a set time for pen-
ance, nurturing us day by day, disciplining us,
teaching us, supplying us with all other
things, that we too may emulate this mercy of
His. Let us then quell this cruelty, let us
cast out this brutal spirit, as benefiting
thereby ourselves rather than others. For to
these we give money, and bread, and clothing,
but for ourselves we are laying up beforehand
very great glory, and such as there is no put-
ting into words. For we receive again our
bodies incorruptible, and are* glorified to-
gether and reign together with Christ. And
how great this is we shall see from hence—
or rather there is no means of making us see
it clearly now. But to start from our present
blessings, and to get from them at least some
kind of scanty notice of it, I will endeavor so
far as I may be able to put before you what
Ihave been speaking of. Tell me then, if
when you were grown old, and were living in
poverty, and any one were to promise suddenly
to make you young, and to bring you to the
very prime of life, and to render you very
strong, and preéminently beautiful, and were
to give you the kingdom of the whole earth
for a thousand years, a kingdom in the state
of the deepest peace, what is there that you
would not choose to do, and to suffer to gain
this promise? (4 Mss.and Sav. Mar. object.)
See then, Christ promises not this, but much
more than this. For the distance between
old age and youth is not to be compared with

1 All Mss. read xav & apytav xav Sa padvucav, which order
agrees with the stronger sense here given to pa@vara: “ list-
lessness’’ is generally too little expressive of that readiness to
yield to temptations which this word implies. But 1 Ms.
reads “ rather all through vice,’’ kaxiav, which tends to give


the other word a lighter sense.
2 6 Mss. pres., and so all just above.


450


the difference of corruption and incorruption,
nor that of a kingdom and poverty to that of
the present glory and the future, but the dif-
ference is that of dreams and a reality. Or
rather I have yet said nothing to the purpose,
since there is no language capable of setting
before you the greatness of the difference
between things to come and things present.
And as for time, there is no place for the idea
of difference. For what mode is there for
a man to compare with our present state a
life that hath no limit? And as for the peace


itis as far removed from any present peace,


as peace is different from war; and for the
incorruption, it is as much better asa clear
pearl is than aclod of clay. Or rather, say
as great a thing as one may, nothing can put
it before you. For were I even to compare
the beauty of our bodies then to the light of
the sunbeam, or the brightest lightning, I
shall not yet be saying aught that is worthy of
that brilliancy. Now for such things as these
what money so much that it were not worth
the while to give up? what bodies, or rather
what souls? is it not worth one’s while to give
up? At present if any one were to lead thee
into the palace, and in presence of all were to
give thee an opportunity of conversing with
the king, and make thee sit at his table, and
join in his fare, thou wouldest call thyself the
happiest of men. But when you are to go up
to Heaven, and stand by the King of the
universe Himself, and to vie with angels in
brightness, and to enjoy even that unutterable
clory, do you hesitate whether you ought to
give up money? whereas if you had to put
off life itself, you ought to leap and exult, and
mount on wings of “pleasure. But you, that
you may get an office (apyjv), as a place to
pillage from (for call a thing of this sort gain,
I cannot), put all you have to hazard, and
after borrowing of others, will, if need be,
pawn your wife and children too without hesi-
tation. But when the kingdom of Heaven is
set before you, that office (apyjc) which hath
none to supersede you in it, and God bids
you take not a part of a corner of the earth,
but the whole of Heaven entirely, are you
hesitating, and reluctant, and gaping after
money, and forgetful that if the parts of that
Heaven which we see are so fair and delight-
ful, how greatly so must the upper Heaven be,
and the Heaven? of Heaven? But since we
have as yet no means of seeing this with our
bodily eyes, ascend in thy thought, and stand-
ing above this Heaven, look up unto that


1 Or lives, but see above, p. 433, where the spirit seems to
be considered apart from the soul.

2 See St. Augustin’s Confessions, p. 250, Oxf. Tr. Clem.
Recog. iii. 75; Aristot. Metaph. p. 997; 15, p. 1071, 23, Bekker.


THE WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTEORSE


[HomILy XIV.


Heaven beyond this, into that height without
a bound, into that Light surcharged with awe,
into the crowds of the Angels, into the endless
ranks of Archangels, into the rest of the incor-
poreal Powers. And then lay hold again of
the image (cf. Plat. #ep. vii. p. 516) thereof
we have, after coming down ae above, and
make a sketch of the estate of a king with us,
as his men in gold armor, and his pairs of
white mules proudly decked with gold, and
his chariots set with jewels ® and his snow-like
cushions (crpwuvyv Poll. x. 41), and the span-
gles that flutter about the chariot, and the
dragons shaped out in the silken hangings,
and the shields with their gold bosses, and
the straps that reach up from. these to the rim
of them through so many gems, and the
horses with the gilded trappings and the gold
bits. But when we see the king we immedi-
ately lose sight of all these. For he alone
turns our eyes to him, and to the purple robe,
and the diadem, and the throne, and the
clasp, and the shoes, all that splendor of his
appearance. After gathering all these things
together then with accuracy, then again
remove your thoughts from these things to
things above, and to that awful day in which
Christ is coming. For then you will not see
any pairs of mules, nor golden chariots, nor
dragons and shields, but things that are
big with a mighty awe, and strike such amaze-
ment that the very incorporeal Powers are
astonished. For the ‘‘ powers of the Heay-
ens,’ He says, “shall be shaken.” (Matt.
xxiv. 29.) Then is the whole Heaven thrown
open, and the gates of those concaves unfold
themselves, and the Only-begotten Son of
God cometh down, not with twenty, not with a
hundred men for His body-guard, but with
thousands, ten thousands of Angels and
Archangels, Cherubim and Seraphim, and
other Powers, and with fear and trembling
shall everything be filled, whiles the earth is
bursting itself up, and the men that ever were
born, from Adam’s birth up to that day, are
rising from the earth, and all are caught up;
(1 Thess. iv. 17) when Himself appears with
such great glory as that the sun, and the
moon, “and all light whatever, is cast into the

shade, being outshone by that radiance.
What ‘language is to set before us that bless-
edness, brightness, glory? Alas! my soul.
For weeping comes upon me and great groan-
ing, as I reflect what good things we have
fallen from, what blessedness we are es-
tranged from. For estranged we are (I am
now speaking of my own case still), unless we
do some great and astonishing work; speak


3 ALGoxoAAnTa, v. Jungerm. ad Polluc. x. 143, V.1. xpucoKo—
AAnTa.


_ Homiry XIV.]_


THE EPISTLE! TO: THE ROMANS


451


not then of hell to me now, for more grievous
than any hell is the fall from this glory, and
worse than punishments unnumbered the es-
trangement from that lot. But still we are
gaping after this present world, and we take
not thought of the devil’s cunning, who by lit-
tle things bereaves us of those great ones, and
gives us clay that he may snatch from us gold,
or rather that he may snatch Heaven from us,
and showeth usa shadow that ne may dis-
possess us of the reality, and puts phantoms
before us in dreams (for such is the wealth of
this world), that at daybreak’ he may prove
us the poorest of men. Laying these things
to heart, late though it be, let us fly from this
craft, and pass to the side of things to come.
For we cannot say that we were ignorant how
exposed to accidents the present life is, since
things every daydin in our ears more loudly
than a trumpet, the worthlessness, the ridicu-
lousness, the shamefulness, the dangers,
the pitfalls, of the present scene. What de-
fence then shall we have to set up for pursu-
ing things so subject to hazards, and laden
with shame, with so much eagerness, and
leaving things unfailing, which will make us
glorious and bright, and giving our whole
selves up to the thraldom of money? For
the slavery to these things is worse than any
bondage. And this they know who have been
counted worthy to obtain their freedom from
it. That ye then may also feel this goodly
liberty, burst the bonds asunder, spring out
of the snare. And let there be no gold lying
by in your houses, but that which is more
precious than millions of money, alms and
love to man, for your treasure. For this gives
us boldness toward God, but the other covers
us with deep shame, and causes the devil to
bear hard (ogodpdv zveiv) upon us. Why then
arm thy enemy, and make him stronger?
Arm thy right hand against him, and transfer
all the splendor of thy house into thy soul,
and stow away all thy fortune in thy mind,
and instead of a chest and a_ house, let
heaven keep thy gold. And let us put all our
property about our own selves; for we are
much better than the walls, and more digni-
fied than the pavement. Why then do we, to
the neglect of our own selves, waste all our
attention upon those things, which when we
are gone we can no longer reach, and often
even while we stav here we cannot keep hold
of, when we might have such riches as to be
found not in this life only, but also in that, |
in the easiest circumstances? For he who|
carries about his farms and house and gold|
upon his soul, wherever he appears, appears


with all this wealth. And how is this possible
to be effected ? one may ask. It is possible,
and that with the utmost ease. For if you
transfer them to Heaven by the poor man’s
hand, you will transfer them entire into your
own soul. And if death should afterwards
come upon thee, no one will take them from
thee, but thou wilt depart to be rich in the
next world too. This was the kind of treas-
ure Tabitha had. Hence it was not her
house that proclaimed her wealth, nor the
walls, nor the stones, nor the pillars, but the
bodies of widows furnished with dress, and
their tears that were shed, and death that
played the runaway, and life that came back
again. Let us also make unto ourselves such-
like treasures, let us build up for ourselves
such-like houses. In this way we shall have
God for our Fellow-worker, and we ourselves
shall be workers together with Him. For
Himself brought the poor from not being into
being, and you will prevent them, after they
have been brought into life and being, from
perishing with hunger and other distress, by
tending them and setting them upright, stay-
ing up the Temple of God in every quarter.
What can be equal to this in respect both of
utility and of glory? Or if as yet you have
not gained any clear notion of the great
adornment He bestowed upon thee when He
bade thee relieve poverty, consider this point
with thyself. If He had given thee so great
power, that thou wert able to set up again
even the Heaven if it were falling, wouldest
thou not think the thing an honor far too
great for thee? See now He hath held thee
worthy of a greater honor. For that which in
His esteem is more precious than the
Heavens, * He hath trusted thee to repair.
For of all things visible there is nothing in
God’s esteem equal to man. For Heaven
and earth and sea did He make for him, and
finds more pleasure in dwelling with him than
in the Heaven. And yet we, though with a
knowledge of this, bestow no attention nor
forethought upon the temples of God; but
leaving them in a neglected state, we provide
houses. splendid and large for ourselves.
This is why we are devoid of all good things,
and greater beggars than the poorest poor,
because we pride ourselves in these houses
which we cannot take away with us when we
go hence, and leave those alone which we
|might move away along with our own selves.
For the bodies of the. poor after dissolution
must needs rise again; and God, Who hath
| given this charge, will bring them forth, and
praise those who have taken care of them,


1 Night being put for the time of our sojourn here, Cf.


Om. X111. 12.


2 Several Mss.


‘“ which is more precious than the Heavens
| themselves.”


452


and treat such with regard (6avyudcera), because
when they were on the point of falling to ruin
at one time by starvation, at another by
nakedness and cold, these repaired them by
all means in their power. But still, even
with all these praises set before us, we loiter
yet, and decline undertaking this honorable
charge. And Christ indeed hath not where
to lodge, but goeth about a stranger, and
naked, and hungry, and you set up houses out
of town, and baths, and terraces, and cham-
bers without number, in thoughtless vanity ;
and to Christ you give not even a share of a
little hut, while for daws and vultures you
deck out upper chambers. What can be
worse than such insanity as this? What
more grievous than such madness? for mad-
ness it is in the last stage of it, or rather one


THE WORKS OF °ST. CHRYSOS Ham


{HomILy XV.


has no name to suit it, use whatever one may.
Yet still if we be so minded, it is possible to
beat off the disorder, tenacious as it is; and
not possible only, but even easy; and not
easy merely, but even easier is it to get rid of
this pest than of the sufferings of the body,
since the Physician is so much greater. Let
us then draw Him to ourselves, and _ invite
Him to aid us in the attempt, and let us con-
tribute our share, good-will, I mean, and
energy. For He will not require anything
further, but if He can meet with this only,
He will confer all that is His part. Let us
then contribute our share, that in this world
we may enjoy a genuine health, and may
attain to the good things to come, by the
grace and love towards man, etc.


FO Miler aye


ROM. VIII.


28.


“And we know that all things work together for good | wards delighted at being persecuted, and in-


to them that love God.”


HERE he seems to me to have mooted this
whole topic with a view to those who were in
danger; or, rather, not this only, but also
what was said a little before this. For the
words, “the sufferings of this present time
are not worthy to be compared with the glory
which shall be revealed in us;” and those,
that “the whole creation groaneth;” and the
saying, that ‘‘we are saved by hope;” and
the phrase, “ we with patience wait for;” and
that, “we know not what we should pray for
as we ought ;”’ are all of them said to these.
For he instructs them not to choose just what
they may think, themselves, to be useful, but
what the Spirit may suggest ; for many things
that seem to one’s self profitable, do some-
times even cause much harm. Quiet, for
instance, and freedom from dangers, and liv-
ing out of fear, seemed to be advantageous
for them. And what wonder if they did to
them, since to the blessed Paul himself this
seemed to be so? still he came afterwards to
know that the opposite to all these are the
things advantageous, and when he came to
know it, he was content. So he that besought
the Lord thrice to be freed from hazards,1
when once he heard Him say, “ My grace is
sufficient for thee, for My Power is perfected
in weakness” (2 Cor. xii. 8, 9), was after-


”)


1 See p. 447, and on 2 Cor. xii. 7, Hom. 26, p. 294 O. T.


sulted, and having irreparable ills done him.
For, “I glory,” he says, “in persecutions, in
insults’ (Eng. V. reproaches), “in necessi-
ties.” . (2 Cor. »xil:; ro.)* Amd this awaseis
reason for saying, “‘ For we know not what we
should pray for as we ought.” And he ex-
horted all men to give up these matters to the
Spirit. For the Holy Spirit is very mindful
of us, and this is the will of God. Having
then cheered them by all methods, he pro-
ceeds to what we have heard to-day, putting
forward a reason strong enough to reclaim
them. For he says, “ we know that all things
work together for good to them that love
God.” Now when he speaks of “all things,”
he mentions even the things that seem pain-
ful. For should even tribulation, or poverty,
or imprisonment, or famines, or deaths, or
anything else whatsoever come upon us, God
is able to change all these things into the
opposite. For this is quite an instance of His
unspeakable power, His making things seem-
ingly painful to be lightsome to us, and turn-
ing them into that which is helpful to us.
And so he does not say, that “them that love
God,” no grievance approacheth, but, that it
“works together for good,” that is to say,
that He useth the grievous things themselves
to make the persons so plotted against ap-
proved. And this is a much greater thing
than hindering the approach of such griev-
ances, or stopping them when they have come.


HomiLy XV.]


And this is what He did even with the fur-
nace at Babylon. For He did not either pre-
vent their falling into it, or extinguish the
flame after those saints were cast into it, but
let it burn on, and made them by this very
flame greater objects of wonder, and with the
Apostles too He wrought other like wonders
continually. (St. Mark xvi. 18.) For if men
who have learnt to he philosophic can use the
things of nature to the opposite of their inten-
tion, and appear even when living in poverty
in easier circumstances than the rich, and
shine’ through disgrace: much more will
God work for those that love Him both these
and also greater things by far. For one needs
only one thing, a genuine love of Him, and
all things follow that. As then things seem-
ingly harmful do good to these, so do even
things profitable harm those who love Him
not. For instance, the exhibition of miracles
and wisdom in His teaching only injured the
Jews, as did the rightness of doctrine; and
for the former they called Him a possessed
person (John viii. 48), for the other one that
would be equal to God (ib. v. 18): and be-
Gause “of /the miracles) Gb. xi. 47, 53), they
even went about to kill Him. But the thief
when crucified, when nailed to the Cross, and
reviled, and suffering ills unnumbered, not
only was not hurt, but even gained the great-
est good therefrom. See how for those who
love God all things work together for good.
After mentioning then this great blessing, one
which far exceeds man’s nature, since to
many this seemed even past belief, he draws
a proof of it from past blessings, in these
words, “‘ to them who are called according to
His? purpose,”” Now consider, he means,
from the calling, for instance, what I have
just said. Why then did He not from the
first call all? or why not Paul himself as soon
as the rest? Does it not seem that the defer-
ring was harmful? But it was still by the
event shown to be for the best. The purpose
he here mentions, however, that he might not
ascribe everything to the calling; since in
this way both Greeks and Jews would be sure
to cavil. For if the calling alone were suffi-
cient, how came it that all were not saved?
Hence he says, that it is not the calling alone,
but the purpose of those called too, that works
the salvation. For the calling was not forced


1 kai éy TovTo.s Stadaumrer TO Kadov, Eth. i. 2. “Seven in these
(misfortunes) the noble character shines forth.”’

2 The word His perhaps rightly inserted in our version, is
not in the Greek, and Theodoret seems not to have taken it
so; he says, “ for he calleth not any as it may be (amAd@s), but
those who have a purpose ”’ (a predisposition), mpob_eowv, and
so does St. Chrysostom below, and Cécumenius. See on Eph.
i. 11, Hom. ii. p. 112 O. T. and note. St. Augustin rejects this
exposition and adopts that of our version, Ad Bonif. 1. ii. § 22,
De Corr. et. Gr. § 23.


CHE) EP ISLE TO? THEA ROMANS:


453
upon them, nor compulsory. All then were
called, but all did not obey the call.

Ver. 29. ‘For whom He did foreknow,
He also did predestinate to be conformed to
the Image of His Son.”

See what superb honor! for what the Only-
begotten was by Nature, this they also have
become by grace. And ’still he was not satis-
fied with this calling of them conformed
thereto, but even adds another point, “ that
He might be the first-born.” And even here
he does not come to a pause, but again after
this he proceeds to mention another point,
‘“ Among many brethren.” So wishing to use
all means of setting the relationship? in a
clear light. Now all these things you are to
take as said of the Incarnation.* For accord-
ing to the Godhead He is Only-begotten.
See, what great things He hath given unto
us! Doubt not then about the future. For
he showeth even upon other grounds His con-
cern for us by saying, that things were fore-
ordered ® in this way from the beginning.
For men have to derive from things their con-
ceptions about them, but to God these things
have been long determined upon,’ and from
of old He bare good-will toward us (zpoc juac
dtéKetto), he says.

Ver. 30. “Moreover whom He did pre-
destinate, them He also called; and whom
He called, them He also justified.”

Now He justified them by the regeneraiion
of the laver. ‘‘ And whom He justified, them
He also glorified ” by the gift, by the adoption.

Ver. 31. ‘‘What shall we then say to these
things?”

As if he should say, Let me then hear no
more about the dangers and the malicious
devices from every quarter. For even if
some disbelieve the things to come, still they
have not a word to say against the good things
that have already taken place; as, for instance,
the friendship of God towards thee from the
first, the justifying, the glory. And yet these
things He gave thee by means seemingly dis-
tressing. And those things which you thought
to be disgracing, the Cross, scourges, bonds,
these are what have set the whole world
aright. As then by what Himself suffered,
though of aspect forbidding in man’s eye,
even by these He effected the liberty and
salvation of the whole race; so also is He
wont to do in regard to those things which
thou endurest, turning thy sufferings unto
glory and renown for thee. “If God be for
us, who can be against us ?”’


yA geste sins, but Mar. and 6 Mss. evy. nobility.
Gr. Economy, see p. 338, note 3,

Or “marked out.” mporetu7ao@at,

See Sir Thomas Brown, ed. Med. pt. i. p. 22.


ovenLee


454


THE WORKS. OF ST. CHRYSOS#GaE


[HomILy XV.


Why, it may be said, who is there that is
not against us? Why the world is against
us, both kings and peoples, both relations and
countrymen. Yet these that be against us, so
far are they from thwarting us at all, that
even without their will they become to us the
causes of crowns, and procurers of countless
blessings, in that God’s wisdom turneth their
plots unto our salvation and glory. See how
really no one is against us! For it was this
which gave new lustre to Job, the fact that the
devil was in arms against him. For the devil
moved at once friends against him, his wife
against him, and wounds, and servants, and a
thousand other machinations. And it turned
out that none of them was against him on
the whole. And yet this was no great thing
to him, though it was great in itself, but what
is a far greater thing is, that it turned out
that they were all for him. For since God
was for him, even things seemingly against
him all became for him. And this happened
with the Apostles also, inasmuch as both the
Jews, and they of the Gentiles, and false
brethren, and rulers, and peoples, and fam-
ines, and poverty, and ten thousand things
were against them; and yet nothing was
against them. For the things which made
them the most bright and conspicuous, and
great in the sight both of God and of men,
were these. Just reflect then what a word
Paul hath uttered about the faithful, and
those who are truly (axpiBdc) crucified, such
as not even the Emperor with his diadem
can achieve. For against him there are
abundance of barbarians that arm themselves,
and of enemies that invade, and of body-
guards that plot, and of subjects many that
oftentimes are ever and anon rebelling, and
thousands of other things. But against the
faithful who taketh good heed unto God’s
laws, neither man, nor devil, nor aught
besides, can stand! For if you take away his
money, you have become the procurer of a
reward to him. If you speak ill of him, by
the evil report he gains fresh lustre in God’s
sight. If you cast him into starvation, the
more will his glory and his reward be. If
(what seems the most severe stroke of all)
you give him over to death, you are twining
a crown of martyrdom about him.* What


* Chrys. apprehends well the practical purpose for which
the apostle introduced verses 28-30. Notwithstanding all the
imperfections of the Christian’s spiritual life (26, 27) and the
trials which have been so fully described (1-24) we have the
assurance that all these things are working in accordance with
God’s gracious plan for his ultimate good. In passing over
from the idéa of believers as those who love God to its coun-
terpart that they are those called according to His purpose
(not to be taken of the ée/Zever's purpose, as Chrys.) the apos-
tle develops from this idea of Jusfose a series of conceptions
designed to emphasize the believer’s security. ‘‘ You who
love God can be sure of the outcome of all suffering in good
for you are included in God’s purpose which he purposed in


then is equivalent to this way of life, being
that against which nothing can be done, but
even they that seem to devise mischief are no
less of service to him than benefactors?
This is why he says, “If God be for us, who
can be against us? Next, not being satisfied
with what he had already said, the greatest
sign of His love for us, and that which he
always is dwelling over, that he sets down
here also; I mean, the slaying of His Son.
For He did not only justify us, he means, and
glorify us, and make us conformed to that
Image, but not even His Son did He spare
for thee. And therefore he proceeds to say,

Ver. 32. “He that spared not His own Son,
but delivered Him up for us all, how shall He
not with Him also freely give us all things ? ”

And here the words he uses are high-
wrought (uel irepBorjc) and exceedingly warm,
to show his love. How then is He to neglect
us, in whose behalf ‘‘ He spared not His own
Son, but delivered Him up for us all? For
reflect what goodness it is not to spare even
His own Son, but to give Him up, and to
give Him up for all, and those worthless, and
unfeeling, and enemies, and _ blasphemers.
‘““ How then shall He not with Him also freely
give us all things? What he means then is
much as follows; If He gave His own Son,
and not merely gave Him, but gave Him to
death, why doubt any more about the rest,
since thou hast the Master? why be dubious
about the chattels, when thou hast the Lord ?
For He that gave the greater thing to His
enemies, how shall He do else than give the
lesser things to His friends ?

Ver. 33. ‘Who shall lay anything to the
charge of God’s elect ?”

Here he is against those who say, that faith
is no profit, and will not believe the complete
change. (i.e. in baptism see p. 349.) And
see how swiftly he stops their mouths, by the
worthiness of Him that elected. He does
not say, “‘Who shall lay anything to the
charge of God’s ” servants? or of God’s faith-
ful ones? but “of God’s elect?” And elec-
tion is a sign of virtue. For if when a horse-
breaker has selected colts fit for the race, no
one can find fault with them, but he would
get laughed at who should find fault; much
more when God selecteth souls are they that
“lay any charge against ” them deserving of
laughter.

“Tt is God that justifieth.”

Ver. 34. ‘“‘ Who is He that condemneth ?
Christ Jesus our Lord.” (Eph. iii. rr.) You have all the strength
and solidity of God's eternal plan on your side. When the
divine purpose of redemption was before the mind of God in
eternity, you were the prospective participants in it, as truly
as you now are the real participants. What you are God from


eternity intended you to be. The stability of his immutable
counsel is pledged to you.”’—G., B. S.


Homity XV.]


THE EPISTLE, TO. THE: BROMANS;


455


He does not say, it is God that forgave our
sins, but what is much greater, “It is God
that justifieth.” For when the Judge’s sen-
tence declares us just, and a Judge such as
that too, what signifieth the accuser? Hence
neither is it right to fear temptations, for God
is for us, and hath shown it by what He hath/e
done ; nor again Jewish triflings, for He has
both elected and justified us, and the won-
drous thing is that it was also by the death
of His Son that He didso. Who then is to
condemn us, since God crowns us, and Christ
was put to death for us, and not only was put
to death, but also after this intercedeth for
uss *

Pons tt isaseurist” he, says, .‘‘ that_.died,
yea rather, that is risen from the dead, Who
is at the right hand of God, Who also maketh
intercession for us.”

For though seen now in His own dignity,
He hath not left caring for us, but even
‘maketh intercession for us,’”’ and still keep-
eth up the same love. For He was not con-
tented with being put to death alone. And
this is a sign for the most part of very great
love, to be doing not only what falls to His
lot, but also to address Another on this be-
half. For this is all he meant to signify by
the interceding, using a way of speaking bet-
ter suited to man, and more condescending,
that he might point out love. Since unless
we take the words, ‘“‘ He spared not,’ also
with the same understanding, many inconsis-
tencies will come of it. And that you may
see that such is the point he is aiming at,
after first saying, that He “is at the Right
Hand, he next proceeds to say, that He

“maketh intercession for us,” when he had
shown an equality of honor and rank, so that
hence it may appear that the Intercession is
not a sign of inferiority,’ but of love only.
For being Life itself (airofwy) (Ps. xxxvi. 9.),
and a Well of good things of every kind, and
with the same power as the Father, both to
raise up the dead and to quicken them, and
do all besides that He doth, how could He
need to be a suppliant in order to help us?
(John y..19, 21, 36.) He that of His own
power set free those who were given over and
condemned, even from that condemnation ;
and made them righteous, and sons, and led
them to the very highest honors, and brought


* The argument of vv. 33, 34 which is so condensed in form,
may be A Sal ae thus: ‘‘ Who shall lay anything to the
charge of God’s elect? Noone shall. Why? Because their
justifier is God himself. No one may accuse whom He acquits.

ho, then, can appear against them and condemn them? No
one can, for it is no less a person than Christ who died and
rose on their behalf.’"—G. B. S.

1 Theodoret notices the same thing, ad Zoc. St. Basil, De Sp.
S. c. xx, answers a similar argument against the equal Divin-
ity of the Holy Spirit, by showing that it would apply to the
Son if at all.


to pass things which had never been hoped
for: how should He, after having achieved
all this, and having shown our nature on the
King’s throne, require to be a suppliant to do
the easier things? (Acts vil. 55; Heb. x. 12;
Réy. Vil. 17.) "You see how it is shown by
every argument, that there is no other reason
for his having mentioned intercession, save to
show the warmth and vigorousness of His
love for us; for the Father also is represented
to us as beseeching men to be reconciled to
Him. ‘ For we are ambassadors of ayiee
as though God did beseech you by u (2
Cor. v. 20.) Still, though God heseenere
and men are “ ambassadors in Christ’s stead ”
to men, we do not understand on that account
anything done unworthy of that dignity; but
one thing only do we gather from all that is
told us, namely, the intenseness of the love.
This then let us do here also. If then the
Spirit even “ maketh intercession for us with
groanings that cannot be uttered,” and Christ
died and intercedeth for us, and the Father
“spared not His own Son” for thee, and
elected thee, and justified thee, why be afraid
any more? Or why tremble when enjoying
such great love, and having such great inter-
est taken in thee? In this way then, after
showing His great providence over us from
the first, he afterwards brings out what comes
next in a bold style, and does not say, ye
ought also to love Him, but, as if grown en-
thusiastic at this unspeakable Providence over
us, he says,

Ver. 35. “Who shall separate us from the
love of Christ ?”

And he does not say of God, so indifferent
is it to him whether he mentions the Name of
Christ or of God. ‘Shall tribulation, or dis-
tress, or persecution, or famine, or nakedness,
or peril, or sword?” Observe the blessed
Paul’s judgment. For he does not mention
the things that we are daily getting taken by,
love of money and desire of glory and the
thraldom of anger, but things that are far
more enthralling than these, and of power
to put a force? upon nature itself, and to
wrench open the sternness of the resolution
many times even against our will, are what he
puts down here, tribulations and distresses.
For even if the things mentioned are easy to
tell up, still each single word has in it thou-
sands of lines of temptation. For when he
says, tribulation, he mentions prisons and
bonds, and calumnies, and banishments, and
all the other hardships, so in one word run-
ning through an ocean of dangers without


2 Shakespeare, Lear, act ii. sc. iv. “‘ We are not ourselves
when nature being oppressed commands the mind to suffer
with the body,”’ etc.


456


stint, and exhibiting to us, in fact by a single |


word, all the evils that men meet with. Yet
still he dares them all!
them forward in the shape of questions, as if
it was incontrovertible that nothing could
move a person so beloved, and who had en-
joyed so much providence over him. Then
that this might not seem as if he had forgotten
himself, he brings in the Prophet also, who
declared this before, a long while ago and
saith,

Wer, 36. 1 For™ Why sake ‘wear ‘killed
all the day long, we are accounted as sheep
por the slaughter. sCPs. -xltvs7223)

That is, we are exposed to all to be evil
entreated of them. But yet against so many
and so great dangers and these recent horrors,
the object of our conflicts is given as a suffh-
cient consolation, or rather not sufficient only,
but even much more. For it is not for men,
nor for any other of the things of this
life that we suffer, but for the King (he says)
of the universe. But this is not the only
crown, for he encircles them with another
besides, and that varied and manifold. Since
then, as they were men they could not have


THE? WORKS OF ST. ‘CHRYSOs@ea


Wherefore he brings |


deaths without number to undergo, he shows |


that in this way the prize is none the less.
For even if by nature it were fated to die
once, by choice God hath granted us to suffer
this every day, if we be so minded. Whence
it is plain that we shall depart with as many
crowns as we have lived days, or rather with
many more. For it is possible in a day to die
not once alone or twice, but many times. For
he who is always ready unto this, keeps con-
tinually receiving a full reward. This then is
what the Psalmist (Mpoogryc) hints at, when he
says, ‘all the day.” And for this reason the
Apostle also brought him before them to
rouse them up the more. For if, he means,


those in the old dispensation, who had the |


land as their reward, and the other things
which come to a close along with this life,
did so look down upon the present life and
the temptations and dangers of it, what par-
don should we find if we deal so languidly
after the promise of Heaven, and the King-
dom above, and its unutterable blessings, so
as not to come even up to. the same measure
as they? And this he does not say indeed,
but leaves it to his hearers’ consciences, and
is satisfied with the quotation alone. He
shows too that their bodies become a sacrifice,
and that we must not be disturbed or troubled
at God having so ordered it. And he
exhorts them in other ways besides. For to
prevent any from saying that he is merely
philosophizing here before having any expe-
rience of realities, he adds, ““we are ac-


[HomiLy XV.


counted as sheep for the slaughter,” meaning
the daily deaths of the Apostles. You see
his courage and his goodness. For as they,
he means, when slaughtered make no resist-
ance, so neither do we. But since the
feebleness of the mind of man, even after so
great things, was afraid of the multitude of


|temptations, see how he again rouses the


hearer, and gives him a lofty and exulting
spirit, by saying,

Ver. 37. ‘Nay, in all these things we are
more than conquerors through Him that loved
LS a

For what is indeed wonderful is this, not
that we are conquerors only, but that we are so
by the very things meant as plots against us.
And we are not merely conquerors, but we are
‘‘more than conquerors,” that is, are so with
ease, without toil and labor. For without
undergoing the real things, by only setting
our mind aright, we raise our trophies against
our enemies. And with good reason. For it
is God that striveth together with us. Do
not then be doubtful, if though beaten we
get the better of our beaters, if driven out
we overcome our persecutors, if dying we
put the living to fight. For when you take
the power and also the love of God into
account, there is nothing to prevent these
wondrous and strange things from coming to
pass, and that victory the most advantageous
should shine upon us. For they did not
merely conquer, but in a wondrous way, and
so that one might learn that those who plotted
against them had a war not against men, but
against that invincible Might. See the Jews
then with these among them, and at a loss
quite, and saying, “What are we to do to
these men?” (Acts iv. 16.) For it is mar-
vellous indeed, that though they had hold of
them and had got them liable to their courts,
and imprisoned them and beat them, they
were yet at a loss and in perplexity, as they


| got overcome by the very things whereby they


expected to conquer. And neither kings nor
people, nor ranks of demons, nor the devil
himself, had power to get the better of them,
but were all overcome at a very great disad-
vantage, finding that all they planned against
them became for them. And therefore he
says, ‘“‘we are more than conquerors.” For
this was a new rule of victory for men to
prevail by their adversaries, and in no instance
to be ovcrcome, but to go forth to these
struggles as if they themselves had the issue
in their own hands.

Ver. 38, 39. “For I am_ persuaded, that
neither death nor life, nor angels, nor princi-
palities, nor powers, nor things present, nor
things to come, nor height, nor depth, nor


HomMILy XV.]


any other creature, shall be able to separate us
from the love of God, which is in Christ
Jesus our Lord.”

These are great things here mentioned.
But the reason we do not enter into them is,
because we have not so great love. Yet still
though they are great, as he wished to show
that they were nothing beside the love where-
with he was loved of God; after it he then
places his own, lest he should seem to be
saying great things about himself. And what
he says is somewhat of this kind. Why
speak, he means, of things present, and evils
inherited in this life? For even if a person
were to tell me of things to come, and of
powers ; of things, such as death and life; of
powers, such as angels and archangels, and all
the superior orders of beings; even these
would be little to me compared with the love
of Christ. For even if a person were to
threaten me with that future death to which
there is no death, to separate me from Christ,
nor if he promised the life without end, would
I agree to it. Why mention kings here below
and consuls? and this one or that? for if
you tell me of angels, or all the powers above,
or all existing things, or all that are to
come, they are all small to me, both those in
the earth, and those in heaven, and those
under the earth, and those above heaven,
compared to this charm. Then as though
these were not enough to set before them the
strong desire which he had, he gives a being
to others again of like magnitude, and says,
“nor any other creation.” And what he
means is nearly this, even if there were any
other creation as great as the visible, and as
great as the intelligible) none of them could
part me from that love. This he says not as
if the Angels attempted it, or the other
Powers, far from it, but as wishing to show
quite to the utmost the charm he had toward
Christ. For Christ he loved not for the
things of Christ, but for His sake the things
that were His, and to Him alone he looked,
and one thing he feared, and that was falling
from his love for Him. For this thing was in
ifself more dreadful than hell, as to abide
in it was more desirable than the King-
dom.

What then should we now deserve, when he
is found not to esteem even the things in
Heaven as compared with the desire for
Christ, and we set more store by things of
mire and clay than by Christ? And he out
of desire of Him would take up with falling
into hell, and being banished from the King-
dom, if the choice between the two were put


_ 1 Intelligible is used in old Platonist writers for invisible, as |
in German.


THEVEPISTLE : TO THE: ROMANS.


457


to him: but we are not even above the pres-
ent life. Are we worthy then to touch his
very shoes, when we have come to be so far
short of his largeness of mind? For he for
Christ’s sake does not think anything even of
a kingdom; but we think slightingly of Him-
self, but things of His we make great account
of. And would it were of things of His.
But now it is not even this, but with a King-
dom held out to us, we let that alone, and
keep pursuing shadows and dreams all our
days. And yet God in His love toward man
and exceeding gentleness, hath done the same
as if an affectionate father should, on his
son’s becoming disinclined to a continual
stay with him, manage to bring this about in
another way. For since we have not the
right feeling of desire after Him, He keeps
putting divers other things before us, so as to
hold us to Himself. Yet not even for this do
we abide with Him, but we keep springing
off to childish playthings. Not so Paul, but
like a noble spirited child, who is open and
attached to his father, he seeks only after the
Father’s presence, and other things he sets
not so much store by; or rather, it is much
more than a child. For he does not value
the Father and things that are His at the
same rate, but when he looks to the Father,
he counts them nothing, but would choose
rather to be chastised and beaten, so he was
with Him, than to be apart from Him and
indulge his ease. Let us then shudder, all of
us that do not even feel above money for the
sake of Christ, or rather such of us as do not
feel above it for our own sakes. For it was
Paul alone who suffered in good earnest all
things for Christ’s sake, not for the sake of
the kingdom, or his own honor, but owing to
his affection to Him. But as for us, neither
Christ nor the things of Christ draw us from
the things of this life; but as serpents, or
snakes, or swine, or even as all of them at
once, so do we keep dragging on in the mire.
For wherein are we better than those brutes,
when with so many and such great examples
before us we still keep bowing down, and
have not the heart to look up to Heaven for
ever so little a time? Yet did God give up
even His Son. But thou wilt not so much as
share thy bread with Him, Who was given up
for thee, Who was slain for thee. ‘The Father
for thy sake spared not Him, and this too
when He was indeed His Son, but thou doest
not look upon Him even when pining with
starvation, and this too when thou shouldest
but spend of His own, and spend it too for
thy own good! What can be worse than such
a breach of law as this? He was given up for
thee, He was slain for thee, He goeth about in


458


hunger for thee, it is of His own thou should-
est give, that thou mayest thyself get the gain,
aud still thou dost not give! What sort of
stone is there than which these are not more
senseless, who in despite of such great induce-
ments, continue in this diabolical cruel-
heartedness? For He was not satisfied even
with death and the Cross only, but He took
up with becoming poor also, and a stranger,
and a beggar, and naked, and being thrown
into prison, and undergoing sickness, that so
at least He might call thee off. If thou wilt
not requite Me, He says, as having suffered
for thee, show mercy on Me for My poverty.
And if thou are not minded to pity Me for
My poverty, do for My disease be moved, for
My imprisonment be softened. And if even
these things make thee not charitable, for the
easiness of the request comply with Me. For
it is no costly gift I ask, but bread and lodg-
ing, and words of comfort; but if even after
this thou still continuest unsubdued, still for
the Kingdom’s sake be improved for the
rewards which I have promised. Hast thou
then no regard even for these? yet still for
very nature’s sake be softened at seeing Me
naked, and remember that nakedness where-
with I was naked on the Cross for thee ; or,
if not this, yet that wherewith I am now
naked through the poor. I was then bound
for thee, nay, still am so for thee, that
whether moved by the former ground or the
latter, thou mightest be minded to show some
pity. I fasted for thee, again I am hungry
for thee. I was athirst when hanging on the
Cross, I am athirst also through the poor,
that by the former as also by the latter I may
draw thee to Myself, and make thee chari-
table to thine own salvation. Hence also of
thee that owest Me the requital of benefits
without number, I make not demand as of
one that oweth, but crown thee as one that
favoreth Me, and a kingdom do I give thee
for these smail things. For I do not say so
much as put an end to My poverty, or give
Me riches, and yet I did become poor for
thee; yet still I ask for bread and clothing,
and a small solace for My hunger. And if I


THE! WORKS) OF JST. (CHRYSOS#2 Re


[HomILy XV.


be thrown into prison, I do not insist upon
thy loosing My bonds and setting Me free,
but one thing only do I seek after, that thou
wouldest visit Me, Who was (or am) bound
for thee, and I shall have received favor
enough, and for this only will I give thee
Heaven. And yet I delivered thee from most
galling bonds, but for Me it is quite enough,
if thou wilt but visit Me when in prison. For
I am able indeed to crown thee even without
all this; yet I would fain be a debtor to thee,
that the crown may give thee some feeling of
confidence. This is why, though I am able
to support Myself, I come about begging, and
stand beside thy door, and stretch out Mine
hand, since My wish is to be supported by
thee. For I love thee exceedingly, and so
desire to eat at thy table, which is the way
with those that love a person. And I glory
(John xv. 8) in this. And when the whole
world are spectators, then am I to herald thee
forth, and in the hearing of all men to display
thee as My supporter. Yet we, when we are
supported by any one, feel ashamed, and
cover our faces; but He, as loving us exceed-
ingly, even if we hold our peace, will then
tell out what we did with much praise, and is
not ashamed to say, that when Himself was
naked we clothed Him, and fed Him when
hungry. Let us then lay all these things to
heart, and not be contented with passing
mere praises upon them, but let us even
accomplish what I have been speaking of.
For what is the good of these applauses and
clamors? JI demand one thing only of you,
and that is the display of them in real action,
the obedience of deeds. This is my praise,
this your gain, this gives me more lustre than
a diadem. When you have left the Church
then, this is the crown that you should make
for me and for you, through the hand of the
poor; that both in the present life we may be
nourished with a goodly hope, and after we
have departed to the life to come, we may
attain to those good things without number,
to which may all of us,attain by the grace and
love toward man, etc.


Homity XVI.]


THE: EPISTLE TO THESROMANS,


459


| Hs 1 an, Ba


ROM.


*I say the truth in Christ, I lie not, my conscience also
bearing me witness in the Holy Ghost.”


Dip I not seem yesterday to you to have
spoken some great and exorbitant things of
Paul’s love toward Christ? And great indeed
they were; too great for any words to express.
Yet what you have heard to-day are as far
above those things, as those things were
above ours. And yet I did not think they
could be exceeded, still when I came to what
has been read to-day? it did appear far more
glorious than the whole of the former. And
that he was aware of this himself he shows by
his exordium. For as on the point of enter-
ing upon greater things than those, and there-
fore liable to be disbelieved by the generality,
he first uses a strong asseveration about the
matter he is going to speak of; which many
are in the habit of doing when they are going
to say somewhat whichis not believed by the
generality, and about which they feel the
utmost certainty in their own minds. Hence
he says, “I say the truth in Christ, I lie not,
and my conscience beareth witness,”

Ver. 2, 3. “That I have a great heaviness
and continual sorrow in my heart. For I
could wish that myself were accursed from
Senrist,” *

What sayest thou, O Paul? from Christ,
thy beloved One, from Whom neither king-
dom nor hell, nor things visible nor intelligi-
ble, nor another world as great, would separate
thee, is it from Him that thou wouldst now
be accursed? What has happened? Hast
thou changed, hast thou given over that love?
No, he replies, fear not. Rather I have even
made it more intense. How then is it that
thou wouldest fain be accursed, and seekest a
separation, and a removal to such a distance,
that after it there is no possibility of finding a
more distant one? Because I love Him ex-


1 So Field from one Ms. Vulg. ‘‘ what has been read to-day,
as it reached my ears.”’

* Chaps. ix. x. and xi. may be viewed asa kind of appen-
dix to the doctrinal part of the epistle, in which the apostle
considers the problems to which the unbelief and rejection of
the Jews gave rise. It is Paul’s purpose in these chapters to
show that his doctrine does not contradict God's promises to
the Jews. Chap. ix. contains strong assertions that the provi-
dential dealing of God with the Jews is not to be called in
question. It is evident from the gradual approach of the
apostle to this theme, how painful it was to him to be com-
pelled to contemplate it.—G. B. S.


TEX 2.


ceedingly, he may reply. How, pray, and in
what manner? For the things seem a riddle.
Or rather, if you will, let us learn what the
| Curse is, and then we will question him upon
these points, and shall understand this
unspeakable and extraordinary love. What
then is the curse? Hear his own words, “ If
any man love not our Lord Jesus Christ, let
him be accursed.” (anathema, 1 Cor. xvi.
22.) That is, let him be set apart from all,
removed from all. For as in the case of a
thing dedicated (avatjua), which is set apart
for God, no one would venture so much as to
touch it with his hand or even to come near
it; so too with aman who is put apart from
the Church, in cutting him off from all, and
removing him as far off as possible, he calls
him by this name (ardéeua) in a contrary sense,2
thus with much fear denouncing to all men to
keep apart from him, and to spring away from
him, For the thing set apart, no one, from
respect of it, ventures to come near to. But
from him who is cut off, all men separate
themselves from a very opposite feeling.
And so the separation is the same, and both
the one and the other are equally removed
from the generality. Still, the mode of sepa-
ration is not the same, but in this case it is
the opposite to what it is in that. For from
the one they keep back as being dedicated to
God; from the other as being estranged from
God, and broken off from the Church. This
then is what Paul means when he says, “I
could wish that myself were accursed from
Christ.” And he does not say merely that I
could be willing, but using a stronger term,
he says even, “I could wish” (or pray yiydum).
But if what he says trouble you in your
(aofevécrepov) feebleness, consider the real state
of the case, not only that he wished to
be separated, but also the cause for which
he wished it, and then you will see the
greatness of his love.t For he even


2 Thus sacey is used in both senses, and devoted in our own
language somewhat similarly.

+ The force of nuxounv here is: ‘I would wish, ifit werea
thing which could possibly be realized for the advantage of
my brethren.’’ The word ava@exa means anything devoted to
God and then (as in the N. T.) something devoted to his
wrath, i. e. accursed. The expression is to be understood as
the language of intense passion and can scarcely mean any-


thing less than a readiness to perish if by so doing he could
save his people Israel.—G. B. S.


460


THE WORKS . OF <‘ST..CHRYSOSIOM:


[HomiLy XVI.


circumcised (Timothy, Acts xvi. 3), and
we pay no attention to what was done,
but to the intention of it, and the cause of it,
and hence we wonder at him the more. And
he not only circumcised a person, but he even
shaved himself and sacrificed (Acts xviil. 18 ;
xxi. 24), and yet surely we do not therefore
assert him to bea Jew, but upon this very
score to be perfectly free from Judaizing, and
clear of it, and a genuine worshipper of
Christ. As then when you see him circumcis-
ing and sacrificing, you do not therefore con-
demn him as Judaizing, but upon this very
score have the best reason for crowning him
as quite an alien to Judaism; thus when thou
seest him to have become desirous of being
accursed, do not therefore be troubled, but
upon this very ground give him the loudest
praise, when thou knowest the cause why he
wishes this. For if we do not look narrowly
into the causes, we shall call Elijah a man-
slayer, and Abraham not a manslayer only,
but a murderer of his son. And Phinees and
Peter we shall implead for murder likewise.
Nor is it in the case of the saints alone, but
also of the God of the universe, that he who
does not keep to this rule, will be suspecting
sundry unbecoming things. Now to prevent
this happening in all cases of the kind, let us
bring together both the cause, and the inten-
tion, and the time, and all that makes in
behalf of what is so done, and in this way let
us investigate the actions. And this we must
do now also in the,case of this blessed soul.
Noy what is the cause? It is Jesus Himself
Who is so beloved. And yet he does not say
jor Him; for what he says is, I would wish
that I were accursed from Him for my breth-
ren. And this comes of his humbleness of
mind. For he has no wish to make himself
conspicuous, as if he were saying something
great, and doing Christ a favor in this.
Wherefore also he said “my kinsmen,” that
he may conceal his high aim (ricovéxrnuc).
Since to see that he wished it all for Christ’s
sake, just hear what comes next. After
speaking of kinsmen then, he proceeds,

Ver. 4, 5. ‘‘To whom pertaineth the adop-
tion, and the glory, and the covenants, and
the giving of the Law, and the service of God,
and the promises; whose are the father’s, and
of whom as concerning the flesh Christ came,
Who is over all, God blessed for ever.
Amen.”

And what is this? one asks. For if with a
view to the belief of others he was willing to
become accursed, he ought to have also
wished for this in the Gentiles’ behalf. But


1 Aug. de Civ. Dei,i. 21. Butler, Azad. p. 262, ii. 3, v. fin.


if he wishes it in the Jews’ behalf only, it is a
proof that he did not wish it for Christ's sake,
but for his own relationship to them. But in
fact if he had prayed for the Gentiles only,
this would not have been equally clear. But
since it is for the Jews only, it is a clear proof
that it is only for Christ’s glory that he is thus
earnest. And I am aware that what I am
saying will seem a paradox to you. Still if ye
do not make a disturbance,’ I will presently
endeavor to make it clear. For what he has
said he has not said nakedly; but since all
were talking and accusing God, that after
being counted worthy of the name of sons,
and receiving the Law, and knowing Him
beyond all men, and enjoying such great
glory, and serving him beyond the whole
world, and receiving the promises, and being
from fathers who were His friends, and what
was the greatest thing of all, having been
forefathers of Christ Himself (for this is the
meaning of the words, ‘‘ of whom, as concern-
ing the flesh, Christ came’’), they are now cast
out and disgraced; and in their place are
introduced men who had never known Him,
of the Gentiles. Now since they said all this,
and blasphemed God, Paul hearing it, and
being cut to the heart, and vexed for God’s
glory’s sake, wished that he were accursed,
had it been possible, so that they might be
saved, and this blasphemy be put a stop to,
and God might not seem to have deceived the
offspring of those to whom He promised the
gifts. And that you may see that it was in
sorrow for this, that the promise of God might
not seem to fall to the ground, which said to
Abraham, “I will give this land to thee and
to thy seed,” that he uttered this wish, he
proceeds,

Ver. 6. “ Not as though the word of God
had taken none effect.”

To show that he had courage (Mar. and 4
Mss. wished) to bear all these things for the
word of God, that is, the promise made to
Abraham. For as Moses seemed to be plead-
ing for the Jews, yet was doing everything for
God’s glory (for he says, “Lest they say,
Because He was not able to save them, He
led them forth to destroy them in the wilder-
ness” (Deut. ix. 28); stay Thy wrath), so also
does Paul, That they may not say (he means)
that the promise of God has fallen to the
ground, and He has disappointed us of that.
He vouched to us, and this word has not
issued in deed, I could wish to be accursed.


This then was why he did not speak of the


2 This was sometimes done; but the Mss. vary unusually in
this word, and three different readings mean, “if ye are not
disturbed.”” See Twining on Arist. Poet. note 22, and Gaisf.
on Fhet. p. 46.


HomiLy XVI.]


Gentiles (for to them no promises had been
made by Him, nor had they worshipped Him,
wherefore neither did any blaspheme Him on
their account), but it was for the Jews who
had both received the promise, and had also
been brought into closer connection with Him
than others, that he expressed this wish. Do
you see, that if he had expressed it for the
Gentiles, he would not have been shown to be
doing this so purely for Christ’s glory? But
since he was willing to become accursed in
the Jews’ behalf, then it was most evidenced
that it was for Christ’s sake only that he
desired this.’ And for this cause he says,

“To whom pertaineth the adoption, and
the glory, and the service of God, and the
promises.”

For the Law, he means, which speaks of
Christ, comes from thence, and all the cove-
nants made with them, and Himself came
from them, and the Fathers who received the
promises were all from them. Yet still the
opposite has resulted, and they have fallen
from all their good things. Hence, he means,
I am vexed, and if it were possible to be sep-
arated from the company about Christ, and to
be made an alien, not from the love of Him
(that be far from him; for even all this he was
doing through love), but from all that enjoy-
ment and glory, I would accept that lot, pro-
vided my Master were not to be blasphemed,
that He might not have to hear some saying,
that it has been all for stage-effect ; He prom-
ises to one, and gives to another. He was
sprung from one race, He saved another. It
was to the forefathers of the Jews that He


made the promises, and yet He has deserted


their descendants, and put men, who never at
any time knew Him, into their good things.
They labored in the practice of the Law, and
reading the Prophets, while men who have
~come but yesterday from heathen altars and
images have been set up above them. What
foresight is there in all this? Now that these
things may not be said of my Master, he
means, even if they are said unjustly, I would
willingly lose even the kingdom and that glory
unutterable, and any sufferings would I un-
dergo, as considering it the greatest consola-
tion possible no longer to hear Him Whom I
so long for, so blasphemed. But if you be
still against allowing this explanation, just
reflect that many fathers have at many times
taken up with thus much for their children, and
have chosen to be separated from them, and
rather to see them in honor, considering their
honor dearer to them than their company.
But since we are so short of love like this


1 As galled at the blasphemies against Him for breaking
His promise.


THE EPISiLeE 1+PO. THE! ROMANS.


401


(Bacon, N. O. Aph. lib. 2, § 7), we cannot
even form an idea of what ishere meant. For
there be some that are so wholly unworthy
even to hear the name of Paul, and that stand
at such an interval and distance from that
vehemency of his, as to fancy that he says this
of temporal death. Who I should say were as
ignorant of Paul, as the blind of the sun’s
rays, oreven much more so. For he that died
daily, and set before him dangers thick as a
snow-storm, and then said, “‘Who shall sepa-
rate us from the love of Christ? shall tribula-
tion, or distress, or persecution, or famine?”
and still unsatisfied with what he had said,
and after going above the heaven and the
heaven of heavens, and running through the
Angels and Archangels, and all the higher
orders of beings, and taking in at once things
present, things to come, things visible, things
intelligible, things grievous, and things good,
that were on either part, and leaving nothing
out at all, yet not even thus satiated, but even
bodying forth another non-existing creation,
how should he, by way of saying some great
thing after all those things, make mention of a
temporal death? It is not so, surely it is not!
But such a notion is that of worms nestling in
their dunghill. For had he said this, in what
sense would he be wishing himself accursed
from Christ? For death (Phil. i. 23) of that
sort would have joined him more closely with
the band of Christ, and made him enjoy that
glory the more. Yet some there are who ven-
ture to say things different from these, even
more ridiculous. It was not then, they say,
death that he wished to have, but to be a
treasure, a thing set apart, of Christ’s. And
who even of the most worthless and indolent
that would not wish for this? And in what
way was this likely to be in his kinsmen’s be-
half? Let us then leave these fables and
trifles (for it is no more worth while making a
reply to these things than to children babbling
at play), and let us go back again to the
words themselves, luxuriating in this very
ocean of love, and fearlessly swimming there
in every direction, and reflecting upon the
unspeakable flame of love—or rather say what
one may, one shall say nothing worthy the
subject. For there is no ocean so wide, no
flame so intense, as this. And no language
can set it forth as it deserves, but he alone
knew it who in good earnest gained it. And
now let me bring the words themselves before
you again.

“For I could wish that I myself were ac-
cursed.” What does the “I myself’ mean?
It means I that have been a teacher (1 Cor.
ix. 27) of all, that have gathered together
countless good deeds, that am waiting for


462


THE WORKS “OF ST. CHRYSOST@ RE


[HomILy XVI.


countless crowns, that desired Him so much,
as to value His love above all things, who all
my days am burning for Him, and hold all
things (Phil. iii. 8) of second importance to
the love of Him. For even being loved by
Christ was not the only thing he cared for, but
loving Him exceedingly also. And this last
he cared most for (robrov udiora yv). So it was
that he looked to this only, and took all things
light-heartedly. For he kept one aim in view
in all circumstances, the fulfilling of this ex-
cellent love. And this he wishes for. But
since things were not to take this course, nor
he to become accursed,’ he next attempts to
go into a defence against the charges, and so
to bring what was bruited abroad by all be-
fore them as to overthrow it. And before he
openly enters into his defence against these,
he first lays down some seeds of it before-
hand. For when he says, “ to whom pertain-
eth the adoption, and the glory, and the giving
of the Law, and the service of God, and the
promises,” he does but say that God willed
them indeed to be saved, and this he showed
by His former dealings, and by Christ’s hav-
ing sprung from them, and by what He
promised to the Fathers. But they out of
their own untreatable temper thrust the bene-
fit away from them. And this is also the
reason of his setting down such things as set
forth God’s gift, not such as were encomiums
upon them. For the adoption came of His
grace, and so too the glory, and the promises,
and the Law. After taking all these things
then into consideration, and reflecting how
earnest God along with His Son, had been for
their salvation, he lifts up his voice aloud, and
says,‘ Who is? blessed forever. Amen.”

So himself offering up thanksgiving for all
men unto the Only-Begotten of God. What,
he says, if others do blaspheme? Still we
who know His mysteries, and His unspeakable
Wisdom, and great Providence over us, know
well that it is not to be blasphemed, but to be
glorified, that He is worthy. Still not satisfied
with being himself conscious of it, he en-
deavors next to use arguments, and to use a
sharper way of speech against them. And he
does not direct his aim at them, without first
divesting them of a suspicion they had. Lest
then he should seem to be addressing them as
enemies, further on he says “ Brethren, my
heart’s desire and prayer to God for Israel is,


1 This passage makes, perhaps, a comment on the words,
Luke ix. 24, Whosoever will lose his life (rnv Wuxqv), the same
shall save it.

2 So all copies of St. Chrys. The following words, however,
‘mply that this was not his reading of the text, (which had
before been read at length, as the first words of this Homily
show, see p. 459), he quotes it as in our text, in Hom. xx. on 1
Cor. viii. 5, p. 266 O. T. and elsewhere. See note in Mill's G.
T. All Mss. agree with the rec. text.


that they might be saved.” (Rom. x. 1.) And
here, along with other remarks, he so ordered
things, as not to seem to be saying what he
was going to say out of enmity against them.
Hence he does not decline calling them even
kinsmen and brothers. For even if it was for
Christ’s sake that he said what he did, still he
is for drawing (émoxara) their mind to him
also,’ and paves his way to what he has to say,
and quits himself of all suspicion owing to
what had to be said against them, and then he
at last goes into the subject most of them were
looking for. For many, as I have already
stated, wanted to know what was the reason
why they who had received the promise fell
short of it, while those who had even never
heard of it were saved before them. There-
fore, to clear up this difficulty, he brings forward
the answer before the objection. For to pre-
vent any from saying, What? Art thou more
thoughtful for God’s glory than God is for His
own? And does He need thy aid that His
word may not fall to the ground? In reply
to these things he says, I spoke this not as if
God’s Word had fallen to the ground, but to
show my love for Christ. For as things have
had this issue, we are in no want of words in
God’s behalf, or of showing that stand His
promise did. God said to Abraham, “To
thee and to thy seed will I give the land.”
And, ‘In thy seed shall all the nations of the
earth be blessed.” (Gen. xii. 7, 3.) Let us see
then, he says, of what sort this seed is. For
it is not all that are from him that are his
seed. Whence he says, “ For they are not all
Israel that are of (or from) Israel.”

Ver. 7. °“ Neither," because) they eaten ume
seed of Abraham, are they all children.”

Now when you come to know of what kind
the seed of Abraham is, you will see that the
promise is given to his seed, and know that
the word hath not fallen to the ground. * Of
what kind, pray, is the seed then? It is no
saying of mine, he means, but the Old Tes-
tament itself explains itself by saying as


3-1 Ms. he is aware of their way of thinking, émiotarat, this
gives a more common sense to étavorav.

* At v. 6 begins Paul's theodicy in view of the lapse of the
Israelites. The argument of vv. 6-13 is: God's promise can-
not fail because it applies to the ¢rwe /sraed. This point he
illustrates from Old Testatment examples. The argument
throughout this chapter is conducted from the point of view
of God’s sovereign election. In the two subsequent chapters,
other considerations drawn from the freedom and disobedience
of the people are introduced. It is as if the apostle had said:
Ged has done according to His sovereign good pleasure. We
might leave the matter there. To one who should say : why
then does he blame me? (v. 19), or: why has he made me
thus ? (23), we might reply: who art thou to reply against
God? The apostle does not rest the consideration of the
case with the presentation of this view. In the closing
verses of the chap. he shifts the point of view and asks: why
did Israel fail? why was she cut off and the Gentiles chosen ?
(31). He answers, because they did not seek righteousness by
faith ; they were not trustful and obedient, and hence they
found the Messiah a stone of stumbling and failed to realize
the ideal of their prophetic history.—G. B. S.


HomiLty XVI.]


THE’ EPISTLE *FO' THE ROMANS.


403


follows, ‘‘In Isaac shall thy seed be called.”


eon xm. fee) What is, “ In’ Isaac?”
Explain.
Ver. 8. “That is, they which are the


children of the flesh, these are not the chil-
dren of God: but the children of the prom-
ise, these are counted for the seed.”

And observe the judgment and depth of
Paul’s mind. For in interpreting, he does
not say, “they which are the children of the
flesh, these are not” the children of Abra-
ham, but, “the children of God:” so blend-
ing the former things with the present, and
showing that even Isaac was not merely
Abraham’s son. And what he means _ is
something of this sort: as many as have been
born as Isaac was, they are sons of God, and
of the seed of Abraham. And this is why he
said, “in Isaac shall thy seed be called.”
That one may learn that they who are born
after the fashion of Isaac, these are in the
truest sense Abraham’s children. In what
way was Isaac born then? Not according to
the law of nature, not according to the power
of the flesh, but according to the power of the
promise. What is meant then by the power
of “the promise ?”

Ver. 9. “At this time will I come, and
Sarah shall have a son.”

This promise then and word of God it was
that fashioned Isaac, and begat him. For
what if a womb was its instrument and the
belly of a woman? Since it was not the
power of the belly, but the might of the
promise that begat the child. Thus are we
also gendered by the words of God. Since in
the pool of water it is the words of God
which generate and fashion us. For it is by
being baptized into the Name of the Father
and of the Son and of the Holy Ghost that
we are gendered. And this birth is not of
nature, but of the promise of God. (John iii.
Peeton:.ve 26% James 1, 18 ;\ .1-Peteaiil. 217.)
For as after first foretelling the birth of
Isaac, He then accomplished it; so ours also
He had announced before, many ages ago by
all the Prophets, and afterwards brought it
to pass. You know how great He has set it
forth as being, and how, as He promised a
great thing, He furnished it with abundant
Bees (ribs, 1. x, Etc.) But’ ifthe’ Jews
were to say, that the words, “In Isaac shall
thy seed be called,” mean this, that those born
of Isaac should be reckoned -to him for a
seed, then the Edomites too, and all those
people, ought to be denominated his sons,
since their forefather Esau was a son of his.
But now so far are they from being called
sons, that they are the greatest possible
aliens. You see then that it is not the chil-


dren of the flesh that are the children of God,
but that even in nature itself the generation
by means of baptism from above was sketched
out beforehand. And if you tell me of the
womb, I in return have to tell you of the
water. But as in this case all is of the Spirit,
so in the other all was of promise. For the
womb was more chilled than any water owing
to barrenness and to old age. Let us then
gain accurate knowledge of our own nobility,
and display a life worthy of it. For in it is.
nothing fleshly or earthy: hence neither let
there be in us. For it was neither sleep, nor
the will of the flesh (John i. 13), nor em-
braces, nor the madness of desire, but “‘God’s
love toward man,” which wrought the whole.
(Tit. ili. 5.) And as in that case it was when
the age was past hope, so in this also it was
when the old age of sins had come over us,
that Isaac’ suddenly sprang up in youth, and
we all became the children of God, and the
seed of Abraham. (Is. xl. 31.)

Ver. 10. “And not only this; but when
Rebecca also had conceived by one, even by
our father Isaac.”

The subject in question was an important
one. Hence he turns to several arguments,
and endeavors by all means to solve the
difficulty. For if it was at once strange and
new for them to be cast out after so great
promises, it is much more strange that we
even should come into their good things, who
did not expect anything of the kind. And
the case was the same as if a king’s son, who
had promises made him that he should suc-
ceed to the power he had, were to be cast
into the level of disreputable men, and in
his place a condemned man, and one laden
with evils unnumbered, after being taken out
of prison, were to come into the power, which
properly was the other’s. For he means,
what have you to say? that the son is unwor-
thy? Well, but so is this man unworthy, and
much more so. Hence he ought either to
have been punished along with the former,
or to have been honored along with him.
Now it was something of this sort which befel
the Jews and the Gentiles, or something far
more strange than this. Now that all were
unworthy, he has shown above, where he
says, “For all have sinned, and come short
of the glory of God.” (Rom. iii. 23.) But the
new thing is, that when all were unworthy,
the Gentiles were saved alone. And beside
this there is another difficulty that some one
may start, he says. If God had no intention
of fulfilling the promises to them, why make
them at all? For men who know not the


1 ij. e. the true Seed of promise.


464


future, and are many times deceived, do
promise even the undeserving that they shall
have their largesses. But He Who knoweth
beforehand things to come as well as things
present, and hath a clear knowledge that they
will make themselves undeserving of the
promises, and theretore will not receive any
of the things specified,—why should He prom-
ise at all? Now what is Paul’s way of meet-
ing all this? It is by showing what the Israel
is to whom He made the promise. For when
this has been shown, there is at the same
time demonstrated the fact that the promises
were all fulfilled. And to point this out he
said, ‘“‘ For they are not all Israel that are of
Israel.”’ And this is why he does not use the
name of Jacob,! but that of Israel, which was
a sign of the virtue of that just man, and of
a gift from above, and of having seen God.
(Gentocrxiineds) Wet salloihe. says,” have
sinned, and come short of the glory of God.”
(Rom. iii. 23.) Now if all have sinned, how
come some to be saved, and some to perish?
It is because all were not minded to come to
Him, since for His part all were saved, for all
were called. However, he does not set this
down yet awhile, but meets it from an advan-
tageous position, and from other exam-
ples, by bringing before them another ques-
tion, and as in the former case meets a
difficulty very great, by another difficulty.
For when he was discussing how by Christ
being justified all the rest enjoyed that
righteousness, he brought in Adam’s case,
saying, ‘ For if by one man’s offence death
reigned, much more they which receive abun-
dance of grace shall reign in life.” (Rom. v. 17.
And the case of Adam, indeed, he does not
clear up, but from it he clears up His (or his
own), and shows that it was more reasonable
that He Who died in their behalf should have
power over them at His will. For that when
one had sinned all should be punished, does
not seem to be so very reasonable to most
men. But that when One had done aright all
should be justified, is at once more reason-
able and more suited to God. Yet still he
has not solved the difficulty he raised. For
the more obscure that point remained, the
more the Jew was put to silence. And the
difficulty of his position passed over to the
other, and this become clearer from it (Mar.
and 4 Mss. “than that”). So in this passage
also, it is by raising other difficulties that he
meets the questions raised, inasmuch as it
was against Jews that he was contending.
Hence he takes no pains to solve the exam-


1 Didymus in Psalm xcvii. 3, and Hesych. ps. lii. 7, 2. Cor-
dertum, t. 2.


THE, WORKS*OFVS1 CHRY SOST@RE


[HomiLy XVI.


ples which he has brought before us. For he
was not answerable for* them as in the fight
against the Jews. But from them he makes
his own subject throughout clearer. Why do
you feel surprised, he means, that some of
the Jews were saved, and some not saved at
this time? Why of old, in the patriarch’s
times, one may see this happening. For why
was Isaac only called the seed, and yet he
was the father of Ishmael also, and of several


others. ‘‘ But he was of a mother that was a
slave,” And what has this to do with his
father? Still I will not be captious. Let


this son be set aside on his mother’s account.
What are we to say of those sprung from
Keturah? were they not free, and from a
mother that was free? How came they not
to be honored with the same preference as
Isaac? And why do I speak of these? for
Rebecca was even Isaac’s only wife, and
bearing two children she bore them both to
Isaac; still those so born, though of the
same father, and the same mother, and the
fruit of the same labor, being both of one
father and one mother, and twins besides, yet
did not enjoy the same lot. And yet here
you have no mother’s slavery to account for
it, as in Ishmael’s case, nor can you say that
one was begotten of this womb and the other
of a different one, as in the case of Keturah
and Sarah, since in this case they had the
same hour in common to them for their birth.
This was why Paul then, in order to give a
clearer example, says that this happened not
in Isaac’s case only, “ but when Rebecca also
had conceived by one, even by our father
Isaac.”

Ver. 11-13. “ For the children being not
yet born, neither having done any good or
evil, that the purpose of God according to
election might stand, not of works, but of him
that calleth, it was said unto her, the elder
shall serve the younger. As it is written,
Jacob have I loved, but Esau have I hated.”

What was the cause then why one was loved
and the other hated? why was it that one
served, the other was served? It was because
one was wicked, and the other good.2 And
yet the children being not yet born, one was
honored and the other condemned. For
when they were not as yet born, God said,
“the elder shall serve the younger.” With
what intent then did God say this? Because
He doth not wait, as man doth, to see from
the issue of their acts the good and him who


2 Gr. to them, i. e. to them considered as objections. Com-
pare Matt. xxi. 27. ‘‘ Neither tell I you by what authority I
do these things.

3 If this is to be read interrogatively, so as to imply the neg-
ative, it must be understood of that time exclusively, as the
context shows.


HomiLy XVI]


is not so, but even before these He knoweth
which is the wicked and which not such. And
this took place in the Israelites’ case also, in
a still more wonderful way. Why, he says, do
I speak of Esau and of Jacob, of whom one
was wicked and the other good? For in the
Israelites’ case, the sin belonged to all, since
they all worshipped the calf. Yet notwith-
standing some had mercy shown them, and
others had not.?

Ver. 15. “ For I will have mercy, He says,
on whom I will have mercy, and I will show
compassion on whom I will show compassion.”
(ix, xkxill- Tg.)

This one may see also in the case of those
who are punished, for what would you say of
Pharaoh who was punished, and had to pay so
heavy a penalty? You say he was hardened
and disobedient. Was hethen alone such, and
not even one person else? Howcame he then
to be so severely punished? Why even in the
case of the Jews did he call that a people
which was no people, or again, why not count
all worthy of equal honor? “ For if they be”
(it says) “‘as the sand of the sea, yet shall a
remnant be saved.” (Is. x. 22.) And why is
it to be only aremnant? You see what diffi-
culty he has filled the subject with. And with
great propriety. For when you have power to
throw your adversary into perplexity, do not
at once bring forward the answer, because if
he be found himself responsible for the same
ignorance, why take unnecessary dangers
upon yourself? Why make him more bold, by
drawing it all upon yourself? Now tell me, O
thou Jew, that hast so many perplexing ques-
tions, and art unable to answer any of them,
how thou comest to annoy us on account of
the call of the Gentiles? I, however, have a
good reason to give you why the Gentiles were
justified aud ye were cast out. And what is
the reason? It is that they are of faith, ye of
the works of the Law. And it is owing to this
obstinacy of yours that ye have in every way
(Mar. and several Mss. all) been given up.
For, “ they being ignorant of God’s righteous-
ness, and going about to establish their own
righteousness, have not submitted themselves
unto the righteousness of God.” (Rom. x. 3.)
The clearing up then of the whole passage, to
give the whole sense summarily, is here brought
out by that blessed person. But that this may
be clearer, let us investigate the things he says
also one by one; this knowing, that what the
blessed Paul aimed at was, to show by all that
he said that God only knoweth who are worthy,
and no man whatever knoweth, even if he


1 He refers to the occasion on which the words next quoted
were spoken, viz. when Moses interceded for them after that
sine


30


THEOCEPISTLE! TO: THe ROMANS;


495


seem to know ever so well, but that in this
sentence of his there are sundry aberrations.
For He that knoweth the secrets of the hearts,
He only knoweth for a certainty who deserve
a crown, and who punishment and vengeance.
Hence it is that many of those, by men es-
teemed good, He convicts and punishes, and
those suspected to be bad He crowns, after
showing it not to be so; thus forming his sen-
tence not after the judgment of us slaves, but
after his own keen and uncorrupt decision,
and not waiting for the issue of actions to
look at the wicked and him who is not so
therefrom. But that we may not make the
subject more obscure, again let us go to the
very words of the Apostle.

Ver. ro. “And not only this, but when
Rebecca also had conceived by one.”

I might, he implies, have mentioned the
children by Keturah besides, but I do not.
But to gain the victory from a vantage ground
it is those born of one and the same father,
and mother too, that I bring forward. For
they were both sprung from Rebecca, and
from Isaac the true-born, the elect, the son
honored above all, of whom He said, “In
Isaac shall thy seed be called,” who became
“the father of us all;” but if he was our
father, then should his sons have been our
fathers; yet it was not so. You see how this
happens not in Abraham’s case only, but also
in that of his son himself, and how it is faith
and virtue in all cases that is conspicuous, and
gives the real relationship its character.
For hence we learn that it is not only from the
manner of birth, but owing to their being
worthy of the father’s virtue, that the children
are called children of him. For if it were
only owing to the manner of the birth, then
ought Esau to have enjoyed the same as
Jacob did. For he also was from a womb as
good as dead, and his mother was barren.
Yet this was not the only thing required, but
the character too, which fact contributes no
common amount of practical instruction for
us. And he does not say that one is good
and another bad, and so the former was hon-
ored; lest this kind of argument should be
wielded against him, “ What, are those of the
Gentiles good men rather than those of the
circumcision?” For even supposing the truth
of the matter was so, still he does not state it
yet, as that would have seemed to be vexa-
tious. But it is upon God’s knowledge that
he has cast the whole, and this no one would
venture to gainsay, though he were ever so
frantic. “For the children being not yet
born,”’ he says, “it was said unto her, The elder
shall serve the younger.” And he shows that
noble birth after the flesh is of no avail, but


406 THE: WORKS OF


ST.) CHRYSOS PARE |Homity XVI.


we must seek for virtue of soul, eee Whence also he says, “ Jacob have I


even before the works of it God knoweth of.
For “the children,” he says, “‘ being not yet
born, nor having done any good or evil, that
the purpose! of God according to election
might stand, it was said unto her that the
elder shall serve the younger:”’ for this was a
sign of foreknowledge, that they were chosen
from the very birth. That the election made
according to foreknowledge, might be mani-
festly of God, from the first day He at once
saw and proclaimed which was good and which
not. Do not then tell me that thou hast read
the Law (he means) and the Prophets, and
hast been a servant for such a long time. For
He that knoweth how to assay the soul, know-
eth which is worthy of being saved. Yield
then to the incomprehensibleness of the elec-
tion. For itis He alone Who knoweth how
to crown aright. How many, for instance,
seemed better than St. Matthew; to go by the
exhibition of works then visible. But He that
knoweth things undeclared, and is able to
assay the mind’s aptitude, knew the pearl
though lying in the mire, and after passing by
others, and being well pleased with the beauty
of this, He elected it, and by adding to the
noble born free-will grace from Himself, He
made it approved. For if in the case of these
arts which are perishable, and indeed in other
matters, those that are good judges do not use
the grounds on which the uninstructed form
their decision, in selecting out of what is put
before them; but from points which they are
themselves well aware of, they many times
disparage that which the uninstructed approve,
and decide upon what they disparage: and
horse-breakers often do this with horses, and
so the judges of precious stones, and work-
men in other arts: much more will the God
that loveth man, the infinite Wisdom, Who
alone hath a clear knowledge of all things,
not allow of man’s guesses, but will out of His
own exact and unfailing Wisdom pass his sen-
tence upon all men. Hence it was that He
chose the publican, the thief, and the harlot;
but dishonored priests, and elders, and rulers,
and cast them out. And this one may see hap-
pening in the martyrs’ case also. Many ac-
cordingly of those who were utterly cast aside,
have in the time of trial been crowned. And,
on the other hand, some that have been held
great ones by many have stumbled? and
fallen. Do not then call the Creator to ac-
count, nor say, Why is it that one was
crowned and another punished? For He
knoweth how to do these things with exact-


1 This expression supports St. Augustin’s interpretation of
Rom. viii. 28.
2 Perhaps alluding to the supplanting of Esau.


loved, and Esau have I hated.” That it was
with justice, you indeed know from the result :
but Himself even before the result knew it
clearly. For it is not a mere exhibition of
works that God searcheth after, but a nobleness
of choice and an obedient temper (yréum edyvé-
uova) besides. For a man of this kind, if he
should ever sin through some surprise,® will
speedily recover himself. And if he should
even stay long haply in a state of vice, he will
not be overlooked, but God Who knoweth all
things will speedily draw him out. And so he
that is herein corrupted, even if he seem to do
some good things, will perish, in that he doth
this with an ill intention. Hence even David,
after committing murder and adultery, since
he did this as being carried away by surprise,
and not from habitual practice of wickedness,
speedily washed it out. The Pharisee, how-
ever, who had not perpetrated any such crime
(Luke xviii. 11), but even had good deeds be-
sides to boast of, lost aJl by the bad spirit he
had chosen.


Ver. 14. “What shall we say then? Is
there unrighteousness with God? God
forbid.”


Hence there is no such thing in the case
of us and the Jews. And then he goes
on with another thing, a more clear than
this. And of what sort is it ?.

Ver. 15. “For he saith to Moses, I will
have mercy on whom I will have mercy,
and I will have compassion on whom [I will
have compassion.”

Here again he adds force to the objection
by dividing it in two and meeting it, and
starting another fresh difficulty. But to
make what I have said clearer, one must
needs explain it. God, he means, said that
“the elder shall serve the younger,” before:
the travail. What then? “Is God unright-
eous?”’ By no means. Now listen to what
follows also. For in that case the virtue or
the vice, might be the decisive thing. But
here there was one sin on which all the
Jews joined, that of the molten calf, and still
some were punished, and some were not
punished. And this is why He says, “I will
have mercy on whom I will have mercy, and
I will have compassion on whom I will have
compassion.” (Ex. xxxill. 19: observe con-
text.) For it is not thine to know, O Moses,
he means, which are deserving of My love
toward man, but leave this to Me. But
if Moses had no right to know, much less
have we. And this is why he did not barely
quote the passage, but also called to our


3 Literally under some circumstance, but meprotacts implies.
surrounding and assault.


Bes


HomILy XVI.]


THE: EPISTLE -TO \THE;ROMANS.


467


minds to whom it was said. For it is Moses,
he means, that he is speaking to, that at
least by the dignity of the person he might
make the objector modest. MHaving then
given a solution ef the difficulties raised,
he divides it in two, by bringing forward
another objection besides, as follows :

Ver. 16, 17. “So then it is not of him
that willeth, nor of him that runneth, but
of God that showeth mercy. For the
Scripture saith unto Pharaoh, Even for this
same purpose have I raised thee up, that
I might show my power in thee, and that
my name might be declared throughout all
the earth.”

As then in the one case, he means, some
were saved and some were punished, so here


also. This man was reserved for this very
purpose. And then he again urges the
ebjection.


Ver. 18, 19. ‘“‘ Therefore He hath mercy on
whom He will have mercy, and whom He
will He hardeneth. Thou wilt say then unto
me, Why doth he then find fault? For who
hath resisted His will?”

See what pains he takes to embarrass
the subject in every way. And the answer
he does not produce forthwith, it being a


useful thing not to do so, but he first
stops the disputant’s mouth, saying as
follows,


Ver. 20. “Nay but, O man, who art thou
that repliest against God?”

This he does to take down the objector’s
unseasonable inquisitiveness, and excessive
curiosity, and to puta check upon it, and
teach him to know what God is, and what
man, and how incomprehensible His fore-
knowledge is, and how far above our reason,
and how obedience to Him in all points
is binding. So when he has made this
preparatory step in his hearer, and has
hushed and softened down his spirit, then
with great felicity he introduces the answer,
having made what he says easy of admittance
with him. And he does not say, it is
impossible to answer questions of this kind,
but that (5 Mss. No, but what? that) it is
presumptuous to raise them. For our busi-
ness is to obey what God does, not to be
curious even if we do not know the reason
of them. Wherefore he said, “‘Who art thou
that repliest against God?” You see how
very light he makes of him, how he bears
down his swelling spirit! ‘ Who art thou?”
art thou a sharer of His power? (compare


1 One Ms. adds, ‘‘ Isaac, for his part, wished to bless Esau,
he ran to the field (wacdiov, by a common mistake for 7edcov)
to do his father’s bidding, desirous of the blessing. But God
brought in Jacob who was worthy, and by a just judgment de-
clared him deserving of the blessing.”


Job xxxviii.) nay, art thou sitting in judgment


upon God? Why in comparison with Him
thou canst not have a_ being even! nor
this or that sort of being, but absolutely


none! For the expression, “who art thou?”
doth much more set him at naught than
“thou art nothing.” And he takes other
ways of showing further his indignation in
the question, and does not say, ‘* Who art
thou that” answerest “‘God?” but, ‘that
repliest against,” that is, that gainsayest, and
that opposest. For the saying things ought
to be so, and ought not to be so, is what a
man does that “replieth against.” See how
he scares them, how he terrifies them, how
he makes them tremble rather than be ques-
tioning and curious. This is what an excellent
teacher does ; he does not follow his disciples’
fancy everywhere, but leads them to his own
mind, and pulls up the thorns, and then puts
the seed in, and does not answer at once
in all cases to the questions put to him.

Ver. 20, 21. “Shall the thing formed say
to Him that formed it, Why hast Thou made
‘me thus? Hath not the potter (Read Jer.
xvill, I-10) power, of the same lump to
make one vessel unto honor, and another
unto dishonor?”

Here it is not to do away with free-will
that he says this, but to show, up to what
point we ought to obey God. For in respect
of calling God to account, we ought to be as
little disposed to it as the clay is. For we
ought to abstain not from gainsaying or
questioning only, but even from speaking
or thinking of it at all, and to become like
that lifeless matter, which followeth the
potter’s hands, and lets itself be drawn about
anywhere he may please. And this is the only
point he applied the illustration to, not, that
is, to any enunciation of the rule of life, but
to the complete obedience and _ silence
enforced upon us. And this we ought to
observe in all cases, that we are not to
take the illustrations quite entire, but after
selecting the good of them, and that for
which they were introduced, to let the rest
alone. As, for instance, when he says,
“He couched, he lay down as a lion;”
(Numb. xxiv. 9) let us take out the indomita-
ble and fearful part, not the brutality, nor
any other of the things belonging to a lion,
And again, when He says, “I will meet them
as a bereaved bear”’ (Hos. xiii. 8), let us take
the vindictiveness. And when he says, “our
God is a consuming fire” (Deut. iv. 24; and
Heb. xii. 29), the wasting power exerted in
punishing. So also here must we single out
the clay, the potter, and the vessels. And


| when he does go on to say, “ Hath not the


468 THE WORKS 70OF


potter power over the clay, of the same lump
to make one vessel unto honor, and another
unto dishonor?” do not suppose that this
is said by Paul as an account of the creation,
nor as implying a necessity Over the will,
but to illustrate the sovereignty and differ-
ence of dispensations; for if we do not take
it in this way, divers incongruities will follow,
for if here he were speaking about the will, and
those who are good and those not so, He
will be Himself the Maker of these, and man
will be free from all responsibility. And
at this rate, Paul will also be shown to be
at variance with himself, as he always bestows
chief honor upon free choice. There is
nothing else then which he here wishes to
do, save to persuade the hearer to yield
entirely to God, and at no time to call Him
to account for anything whatever. For as
the potter (he says) of the same lump makes
what he pleaseth, and no one forbids it;
thus also when God, of the same race of men,
punisheth some, and honoreth others, be not
thou curious nor meddlesome herein, but
worship only, and imitate the clay. And as
it followeth the hands of the potter, so do
thou also the mind of Him that so ordereth
things. For He worketh nothing ‘at random,
or mere hazard, though thou be ignorant of the
secret of His Wisdom. Yet thou allowest
the other of the same lump to make divers
things, and findest no fault: but of Him you
demand an account of His punishments and
honors, and will not allow Him to know
who is worthy and who is not so; but since
the same? lump is of the same substance, you
assert that there are the same dispositions.
And how monstrous this is! And yet not
even is it on the potter that the honor and
the dishonor of the things made of the lump
depends, but upon the use made by those
that handle them, so here also it depends
on the free choice. Still, as I said before,
one must take this illustration to have one
bearing only, which is that one should not
contravene God, but vield to His incompre-
hensible Wisdom. For the examples ought
to be greater than the subject, and than the
things on account of which they are brought
forward, so as to draw on the hearer better.
Since if they were not greater and did not
mount far above it, he could not attack as
he ought, and shame the objectors. How-
ever, their ill-timed obstinacy he silenced in
this way with becoming superiority. And
then he introduces his answer. Now what is
the answer ?


1 Such is plainly the sense, but most Mss. have 70 aro |
dvpaua THs ovalas éoTt, it is the same lump in regard of the |


substance. |


ST. CHRYSOSDEM:


[HomiLty XVI.


Ver. 22, 23, 24. “What if God, willing to
show His wrath, and to make His power
known, endured with much _long-suffer-
ing the vessels of wrath fitted to destruction :
and that He might make known the riches of
His glory on the vessels of mercy, which He
had afore prepared unto glory, even us, whom
He hath chosen, not of the Jews only, but
also of the Gentiles.”

What he means is somewhat as follows.
Pharaoh was a vessel of wrath, that is, a man
who by his own hard-heartedness had kindled
the wrath of God. For after enjoying much
long-suffering, he became no better, but re-
mained unimproved. Wherefore he calleth
him not only “a vessel of wrath,” but also
one ‘fitted for destruction.” That is, fully
fitted indeed, but by his own proper self.
For neither had God left out aught of the
things likely to recover him, nor did he leave
out aught of those that would ruin him, and
put him beyond any forgiveness. Yet still,
though God knew this, “‘ He endured him with
much _ long-suffering,” being willing to bring
him to repentance. For had He not willed
this, then He would not have been thus long-
suffering. But as he would not use the long-
suffering in order to repentance, but fully
fitted himself for wrath, He used him for the
correction of others, through the punishment
inflicted upon him making them better, and in
this way setting forth His power. For that it
is not God’s wish that His power be so made
known, but in another way, by His benefits,
namely, and kindnesses, he had shown above
in all possible ways. For if Paul does not
wish to appear powerful in this way (“not
that we should appear approved,” he says,
“but that ye should do that which is honest,”’)
(2 Cor. xiii. 7), much less doth God. But
after that he had shown long-suffering, that
He might lead to repentance, but he did not
repent, He suffered him a long time, that He
might display at once His goodness and His
power, even if that man were not minded to
gain anything from this great long-suffering.
As then by punishing this man, who continued
incorrigible, He showed His power, so by
having pitied those who had done many sins
but repented, He manifested His love toward
man. But it does not say, love towards man,
but glory, to show that this is especially God’s
glory, and for this He was above all things
earnest. But in saying, “which He had afore
prepared unto glory,” he does not mean that
all is God’s doing. Since if this were so,
there were nothing to hinder all men from
being saved. But he is setting forth again


2 The Greek word, xatynptiouevoy, makes this more obvious.


we


HomILy XVI]


His foreknowledge, and doing away with the
difference between the Jews and the Gentiles.
And on this topic again he grounds a defence
of his statement, which is no small one. For
it was not in the case of the Jews only that
some men perished, and some were saved, but
with the Gentiles also this was the case.
Wherefore he does not say, all the Gentiles,
but, “of the Gentiles,” nor, all the Jews, but,
“‘of the Jews.” As then Pharaoh became a
vessel of wrath by his own lawlessness, so did
these become vessels of mercy by their own
readiness to obey. For though the more part
is of God, still they also have contributed
themselves some little. Whence he does not
say either, vessels of well-doing, or vessels of
boldness (cappyciac), but “vessels of mercy,”
to show that the whole is of God. For the
phrase, “it is not of him that willeth, nor of
him that runneth,” even if it comes in the
course of the objection, still, were it said by
Paul, would create no difficulty. Because
when he says, “it is not of him that willeth,
nor of him that runneth,” he does not deprive
us of free-will, but shows that all is not one’s
own, for that it requires grace from above.
For it is binding on us to will, and also to
run: but to confide not in our own labors, but
in the love of God toward man. And this he
has expressed elsewhere. ‘ Yet not I, but the
grace which was with me.” (1 Cor. xv. ro.)
And he well says, “ Which He had afore pre-
pared unto glory.” Forsince they reproached
them with this, that they were saved by grace,
and thought to make them ashamed, he far
more than sets aside this insinuation. For if
the thing brought glory even to God, much
more to them through whom God was glori-
fied. But observe his forbearance, and un-
speakable wisdom. For when he had it in his
power to adduce, as an instance of those pun-
ished, not Pharaoh, but such of the Jews as
had sinned, and so make his discourse much
clearer, and show that where there were the
same fathers, and the same sins, some per-
ished, and some had mercy shown them, and
persuade them not to be doubtful-minded,
even if some of the Gentiles were saved, while
the Jews were perishing; that he might not
make his discourse irksome, the showing forth
of the punishment he draws from the foreigner,
so that he may not be forced to call them
“vessels of wrath.’ But those that obtained
mercy he draws from the people of the Jews.
And besides, he also has spoken in a sufficient
way in God’s behalf, because though He knew
very well that the nation was fitting itself as a
vessel of destruction, still He contributed all


on His part, His patience, His long-suffering, |


THE “EPISTLE TO THE ROMANS.


|


'what does Isaiah cry?


469


long-suffering ;”’ yet still he was not minded to
state it barely against the Jews. Whence
then are some vessels of wrath, and some of
mercy? Of their own free choice. God,
however, being very good, shows the same
kindness to both. For it was not those in a
state of salvation only to whom He showed
mercy, but also Pharaoh, as far as His part
went. For of the same long-surfering, both
they and he had the advantage. And if he
was not saved, it was quite owing to his own
will: since, as for what concerneth God, he
had as much done for him as they who were
saved. Having then given to the question
that answer which was furnished by facts, in
order to give his discourse the advantage of
other testimony in its favor, he introduces the
prophets also making the same declarations
aforetime. For Hosea, he says, of old put this
in writing, as follows:

Ver. 25. “I will call them My people, which
were not My people; and her beloved, which
was not beloved.”

Here to prevent their saying, that you are
deceiving us here with specious reasoning, he
calls Hosea to witness, who crieth and saith,
“T will call them My people, who were not
My people.” (Hos. ii. 23.) Who then are
the not-people? Plainly, the Gentiles. And
who the not-beloved? The same again.
However, he says, that they shal] become at
once people, and beloved, and sons of
God.

Ver. 26. “ For even they shall be called,”
he says, “the children of the living God.”

But if they should assert that this was said
of those of the Jews who believed, even then
the argument stands. For if with those who
after so many benefits were hard-hearted and
estranged, and had lost their being as a peo-
ple, so great a change was wrought, what is
there to prevent even those who were not es-
tranged after being taken to Him, but were
originally aliens, from being called, and, pro-
vided they obey, from being counted worthy
of the same blessings? Having then done
with Hosea, he does not content himself with
him only, but also brings Isaiah in after him,
sounding in harmony with him.

Ver. 27. ‘For Esaias,” he says, “crieth
concerning Israel.”

That is, speaks out boldly, and uses no dis-
simulation. Why then lay a charge against
us, when they afore declared the same thing
with more than trumpet’s loudness? And
“Though the number
of the children of Israel be as the sand of the
sea, a remnant shall be saved. (Is. x. 22.)

Do you see that he too does not say that all


and that not merely long-suffering, but “‘ much | are to be saved, but that those that are worthy


470 THE WORKS: OF
shall? For I regard not the multitude, he
means, nor does a race diffused so far distress
me, but those only do I save that yield them-
selves worthy of it. And he does not men-
tion the ‘“‘sand of the sea” without a reason,
but to remind them of the ancient promise
whereof they had made themselves unworthy.
Why then are you troubled, as though the
promise had failed, when all the Prophets
show that it is not all that are to be saved?
Then he mentions the mode of the salvation
also. Observe the accuracy of the Prophet,
and the judgment of the Apostle, what a testi-
mony he has cited, how exceedingly apposite !
For it not only shows us that those to be
saved are some and not all, but also adds the
way they are to be saved. How then are they
to be saved, and how will God count them
worthy of the benefit ?

Ver. 28. “‘ He will finish the work, and cut
it short in righteousness,” he says, “‘ because
a short work will the Lord make upon the
Garth “(tbs 23, KX)

What he means then is somewhat of this
sort. There is no need of fetching a circuit,
and of trouble, and the vexation of the works
of the Law, for the salvation is bya very short
way. For such is faith, it holds salvation in a
few short words. ‘“ For if thou shalt confess
with thy mouth the Lord Jesus, and believe in
thine heart that God hath raised Him from
the dead, thou shalt be saved.” (Rom. x. 9.)
Now you see what this, ‘the Lord shall make
a short word (LXX. lit.) upon earth,” is.
And what is indeed wonderful is, that this
short word carries with it not salvation only,
but also righteousness.

Ver 29. “And as Esaias said before, Ex-
cept the Lord of Sabaoth had left us a seed,
we had been as Sodoma, and had been made
like unto Gomorrha.” (Is. i. 9.)

Here again he shows another thing, that not
even those few were saved from their own
resources, For they too would have perished,
and met with Sodom’s fate, that is, they would
have had to undergo utter destruction (for
they (of Sodom) were also destroyed root and
branch, and left not even the slightest rem-
nant of themselves,) and they too, he means,
would have been like these, unless God had
used much kindness to them, and had saved
them by faith. And this happened also in
the case of the visible captivity, the majority
having been taken away captive and perished,
and some few only being saved.

Ver. 30, 31. “What shall we say then?
That the Gentiles, which followed not after
righteousness, have attained to righteousness,
even the righteousness which is by faith. But
Israel, which followed after the law of right-


ST: CHRYSOS#OR: [Homiry XVI.


eousness, hath not attained to the law of
righteousness.”

Here at last is the clearest answer. For
since he had used a proof as well from facts
(“for they are not all Israel that are of
Israel”) as from the case of the forefathers
Jacob and Esau, and from the prophets Hosea
and Isaiah, he further gives the most decisive
answer, after first adding to the perplexity.
The points discussed, then, are two; one that
the Gentiles attained, and the other that they
attained it without following after it, that is,
without taking pains about it. And again in
the Jews’ case also there are two difficulties
of the same kind; one that Israel attained
not, the other that, though they took pains,
they attained not. Whence also his use of
words is more emphatical. For he does not
say that they had, but that they “attained to
righteousness.” For what is especially new
and unusual is, that they who followed after it
attained not, but they which followed not after
it attained. And he seems to be indulging
them by saying, ‘followed after.” But after-
wards he strikes the blow home. For since
he had a strong answer to give them, he had
no fear of making the objection a little
harsher. Hence he doth not speak of faith
either, and the righteousness ensuing thereon,
but shows that before the faith even, on their
own ground they were worsted and con-
demned. For thou, O Jew, he says, hast not
found even the righteousness which was by
the Law. For thou hast transgressed it, and
become liable to the curse. But these that
came not through the Law, but by another
road, have found a greater righteousness than
this, that, namely, which is of faith. And this
he had also said before. “ For if Abraham
was justified by works, he hath whereof to
glory, but not before God” (Rom. iv.): so
showing that the other righteousness was
greater than this. Before, then, I said that
there were two difficulties, but now they have
even become three questions: that the Gen-
tiles found righteousness, and found it without
following after it, and found a greater than that
of the Law. These same difficulties are again
felt in the Jews’ case with an opposite view.
That Israel did not find, and though he took
pains he did not find, and did not find even
the less. Having then thrust his hearer into
perplexity, he proceeds to give a concise
answer, and tells him the cause of all that is
said. When then is the cause?

Ver. 32. ‘Because they sought it not by
faith, but as it were by the works of the
Law.”

This is the clearest answer in the passage,
which if he had said immediately upon start-


HomiLy XVII.]


ing, he would not have gained so easy a hear-
ing. But since it is after many perplexities,
and preparations, and demonstrations that he
sets it down, and after using countless prepar-
atory steps, he has at last made it more intel-
ligible, and also more easily admitted. For
this he says is the cause of their destruction:
‘* Because it was not by faith, but as it were
by the works of the Law,” that they wished to
be justified. And he does not say, “ by
works,” but, “as it were by the works of the
Law,” to show that they had not even this


righteousness.

“For they stumbled at that stumbling-
stone;”

Ver. 33. “As it is written, Behold I lay in


Sion a stumbling-stone, and rock of offence :
and whosoever believeth on Him shall not be
ashamed.”

You see again how it is from faith that the
boldness comes, and the gift is universal;
since it is not of the Jews only that this is
said, but also of the whole human race. For
every one, he would say, whether Jew, or Gre-
cian, or Scythian, or Thracian, or whatsoever


THE EPISTLE ‘TO. THE, ROMANS:


else he may be, will, if he believes, enjoy the
privilege of great boldness. But the wonder
in the Prophet is that he foretells not only
that they should believe, but also that they
should not believe. For to stumble is to dis-
believe. As in the former passage he points
out them that perish and them that are saved,
where he says, “If the number of the chil-
dren of Israel be as the sand of the sea, the
remnant shall be saved. And, If the Lord of


ROM.


“ Brethren, my heart’s desire and prayer to God for
them is, that they might be saved.”


HE is now going again to rebuke them
more vehemently than before.* Wherefore he


* In ix. 30-33 Paul had stated that the reason of Israel’s
rejection was, that they sought after righteousness not by
faith but by works, while the Gentiles sought it by faith and
attained it. Chap. x. is an illustration and confirmation of
this position. Its leading idea is, that the Jews could not be
justified by works of the law, because a new system, that of
faith, had come in with Christ and had displaced the old.
The argument may be summarized thus: (1) Vv. 1, 2. Con-
ciliatory introduction in which the apostle avows his love
for his people. (2) Vv. 3,4. Their method, however, of seek-
ing righteousness by works is an effort to obtain a righteous-
ness of their own, which is impossible. Christ has put an
end to the system of works and He is himself the only
means of attaining God’s righteousness. Atv. 5 begins the
Scriptural argument concerning the two systems of works
and faith. (3) Vv. s5-ro. The principle of the system of works


471


Sabaoth had not left us a seed, we should
have been as Sodoma.” And, “He hath
called not of the Jews only, but also of the
Gentiles ;” so here too he implies that some
will believe, and some will stumble. But
stumbling comes of not taking heed, of gaping
after other things. Since then they did give
heed to the Law, they stumbled on the stone,
“And a_ stone of stumbling and rock of
offence” he calls it from the character and
end of those that believe not.

Is then the language used made plain to
you? or does it still want much in clearness?
I think indeed that, to those who have been
attending, it is easy to get a clear view of it.
But if it has slipped anybody’s memory, you
can meet in private, and learn what it was.
And this is why I have continued longer
upon this explanatory part of the discourse,
that I might not be compelled to break off the
continuity of the context, and so spoil the
clearness of the statements. And for this
cause too I will bring my discourse to a con-
clusion here, without saying anything to you
on the more immediately practical points, as I
generally do, lest I should make a fresh in-
distinctness in your memories by saying so
much. It is time now to come to the proper
conclusion, by shutting up the discourse with
the doxology to the God of all. Let us then
both pause, me that am speaking and you that
are hearing, and offer up glory to Him. For
His is the kingdom, and the power, and the
glory, for ever and ever. Amen.


HOMILY XVII.


bapa


again does away with every suspicion of
hatred, and makes a great effort beforehand
to correct misapprehension. Do not then, he
says, mind words or accusations, but observe


as stated by Moses is, keep the law and you will be saved by
it. The principle of faith,on the other hand, is, not that of
striving to reach something afar off, but of accepting the pre-
sent truth. Itis not struggle but acceptance; not attaining by
merit, but receiving by grace. (4) Vv. 11-13. The Scriptures
emphasize this principle of faith as the true aba g of sal-
vation, speaking of the assurance which it brings and that
to all, regardless of nationality or outward condition. (5) Vv.
14, 15. But in order that men may accept this message,
preachers must be sent to proclaim the glad tidings. (6) Vv.
16-21. This has been done in the case of the Jews. They
cannot shelter themselves behind the excuse that they have
not known God’s message. The scriptures of the Old Testa-
ment reveal God and require faith in Him and also intimate
the larger destination of the gospel for Gentiles as well as
Jews.—G. B. S.


472


that it is not in any hostile spirit that I say
this. For it is not likely that the same person
should desire their salvation, and not desire it
only, but even pray for it, and yet should also
hate them, and feel aversion to them. For
here he calls his exceeding desire, and the
prayer which he makes (cidoxiav), ‘ heart’s
desire.” For it is not the being freed from
punishment only, but that they may also be
saved, that he makes so great a point of,
and prays for. Nor is it from this only, but
also from the sequel that he shows the good-
will that he hath towards them. For from
what is open to him, as far as he can, he
forces his way, and is contentious to find out
some shadow at least of an excuse for them.
And he hath not the power, being overcome
by the nature of the facts.

Ver 2. Kori bear them,record, ‘says he,
“that they have a zeal of God, but not accord-
ing to knowledge.”

Ought not this then to be a ground for
pardoning and not for accusing them? For
if it is not of man’ that they are separated, but
through zeal, they deserved to be pitied
rather than punished. But observe how
adroitly he favors them in the word, and yet
shows their unseasonable obstinacy.

Ver. 3. “For they being ignorant,” he
says, “of God’s righteousness.”

Again the word would lead to pardon. But
the sequel to stronger accusation, and such as
does away with defence of any kind.

“And going about,” he says, “to establish
their own righteousness, have not submitted
themselves unto the righteousness of God.

And these things he says to show, that it
was from a petulancy and love of power that
they erred, rather than from ignorance, and
that not even this righteousness from the deeds
of the Law did they establish. (Matt. xxi.
38; John. xii. 19, 42.) For saying “going
about to establish” is what one would do to
show this. And in plain words indeed he has
not stated this (for he has not said, that they
fell short of both righteousnesses), but he has
given a hint of it in a very judicious manner,
and with the wisdom so befitting him. For
if they are still “going about” to establish
that, it is very plain that they have not yet
established it. If they have not submitted
themselves to this, they have fallen short of
this also. But he calls it their “ own right-
eousness,”’ either because the Law was no
longer of force, or because it was one of
trouble and toil. But this he calls God’s
righteousness, that from faith, because it
comes entirely from the grace from above, and


’


_} Referring to the expression, ‘a zeal of God,” see 1 Cor.
iii. 3, Gr.


THE. WORKS OF ST... CHRYSOS#GRE


.| hath received the whole,


[HomiLy XVII.


because men are justified in this case, not by
labors, but by the gift of God. But they that
evermore resisted the Holy Ghost, and vexa-
tiously tried to be justified by the Law, came
not over to the faith. But as they did not
come over to the faith, nor receive the right-
eousness thereupon ensuing, and were not
able to be justified by the Law either, they
were thrown out of all resources.

Ver. 4. “For Christ is the end of the
Law for righteousness to every one that
believeth.

See the judgment of Paul. For as he had
spoken of a righteousness, and a righteous-
ness, lest they of the Jews which believed
should seem to have the one but be excluded
from the other, and to be accused of lawless-
ness (for even these there was no less cause
to fear about as being still newly come in),
and lest Jews should again expect to achieve
it, and should say, Though we have not at
present fulfilled it, yet we certainly will fulfil
it, see what ground he takes. He shows that
there is but one righteousness, and that has its
full issue * in this, and that he that hath taken
to himself this, the one by faith, hath fulfilled
that also. But he that rejects this, falls short
as well of that also. For if Christ be “the
end of the Law,” he that hath not Christ,
even if he seem to have that righteousness,
hath it not. But he that hath Christ, even
though he have not fulfilled the Law aright,


physician’s art is health. As then he that can
make whole, even though he hath not the
physician’s art, hath everything; but he that
knows not how to heal, though he seem to be
a follower of the art, comes short of every-
thing: so is it in the case of the Law and of
faith. He that hath this hath the end of that
likewise, but he that is without this is an alien
from both. For what was the object of the
Law? To make man righteous. But it had
not the power, for no one fulfilled it. This
then was the end of the Law and to this it
looked throughout, and for this all its parts
were made, its feasts, and commandments, and
sacrifices, and all besides, that man might be
justified. But this end Christ gave a fuller
accomplishment of through faith.* Be not

2 Gr. ‘‘ is summed up,” avaxedadaovtar, See Irenzeus, ..
31, 32: lii. 21, 0, 10; xxii. 1 Massuet PP- 293, 204 O. T. where he
says the creation is ‘‘recapitulated’’ in Christ. Also iv. 74,
78, V. 13 iv. 38, I; 40. 3: V. 1,2. Mass. pp. 436, 444, 453 O. T.
much to the same purpose, and v. 29, p. 518 O. T. of the reca-
pitulation or consummation of iniquity in Antichrist ; the word
is the same.

* By the ‘end of the law,” the author seems to understand
the ability to secure righteousness to men which was the ideal
aim of the law but which it could not do. While this view is-
correct enough in itself, it seems not to present the full force
of réAos vowov which is best taken, with most recent inter—
preters, (as Meyer, Godet, De Wette, Olshausen, Dwight) to


signify literally the end or termination of the law. Christ
puts an end to the law system by fulfilling it. The meaning


For the end of the


Homity XVII.]


THE. SPISELE +}TO THEXROMANS.


473


then afraid, he says, as if transgressing the
Law in having come over to the faith. For
then dost thou transgress it, when for it thou
dost not believe Christ. If thou believest in
Him, then thou hast fulfilled it also, and
much more then it commanded. For thou
hast received a much greater righteousness.
Next, since this was an assertion, he again
brings proof of it from the Scriptures.

Ver. s. “‘ For Moses,” he says, ‘“ describeth
the righteousness which is of the Law.”

What he means is this. Moses showeth us
the righteousness ensuing from the Law,
what sort it is of, and whence. What sort is
it then of, and what does it consist in? In
fulfilling the commandments. “He (R. T.
the man), that doeth these things,” He says,
“shall live by (or in), them.” (Lev. xviii. 5.)
And there is no other way of becoming right-
eous in the Law save by fulfilling the whole of
it. But this has not been possible for any one,
and therefore this righteousness has failed
them. (Staréxrwxev). But tell us, Paul, of the
other righteousness also, that which is of
grace. What is that then, and of what does
it consist? Hear the words in which he gives
a clear sketch of it. For after he had
refuted } the other, he next goes on to this,
and says,

Ver. 6, 7, 8, 9. “But the righteousness
which is of faith speaketh on this wise, Say
not in thine heart, Who shall ascend into
heaven (that is, to bring Christ down from
above): or, Who shall descend into the deep?
(that is, to bring up Christ again from the
dead.) But what saith it? The word is nigh
thee, even in thy mouth, and in thy heart, that
is, the word of faith which we preach. That
if thou shalt confess with thy mouth the Lord
Jesus, and shalt believe in thine heart that
God hath raised Him from the dead, thou
shalt be saved.

To prevent the Jews then from saying, How
came they who had not found the lesser right-
eousness to find the greater? he gives a reason
there was no answering, that this way was
easier than that. For that requires the fulfil-
ment of all things (for when thou doest all,
then thou shalt live); but the righteousness
which is of faith doth not say this, but what?
“Tf thou confess with thy mouth the Lord
Jesus, and believe in thy heart that God hath
raised Him from the dead, thou shalt be
saved.” Then again that we may not seem to
be making it contemptible by showing it to be


is well given in Meyer’s paraphrase: ‘ For the validity of the
law has come to an end in Christ, in order that every believer
may be a partaker of righteousness.’’—G. B. S.

1 He seems to consider the words quoted from Lev. xviii. a
sufficient refutation, as the Jews thought to be justified by the
Law without fulfilling it. See Rom. il.


easy and cheap,” observe how he expands his
account of it. For he does not come imme-
diately to the words just given, but what does
he say? “But the righteousness which is of
faith saith on this wise; Say not in thine heart,
Who shall go up into heaven ? (that is, to bring
Christ down); or, Who shall descend into the
deep? (that is, to bring up Christ again from
the dead.’’) For as to the virtue manifested
in works there is opposed a listlessness, which
relaxeth our labors,’ and it requireth a very
wakeful soul not to yield to it: thus, when
one is required to believe, there are reasonings
which confuse and make havoc of the minds
of most men, and it wants a soul of some
vigor to shake them thoroughly off. And this
is just why he brings the same before one.
And as he did in Abraham’s case, so he does
here also. For having there shown that he
was justified by faith, lest he should seem to
have gotten so great a crown by a mere
chance, as if it were a thing of no account, to
extol the nature of faith, he says, “Who
against hope believed in hope, that he might
become the father of many nations. And
being not weak in faith, he considered his
own body now dead, and the deadness of
Sarah’s womb. Hestaggered not at the prom-
ise of God through unbelief; but was strong
in faith, giving glory to God; and being fully
persuaded that what He had promised He
was able also to perform” (Rom. iv. 18-21):


/so he showed that there is need of vigor, and


a lofty soul, that takes in things beyond ex-
pectation, and stumbles not at appearances.
This then he does here also, and shows that
it requires a wise mind, and a _ spirit
heavenly (Gr. heaven-reaching) and great.
And he does not say merely, ‘“ Say not,” but,
“Say not in thine heart,” that is, do not so
much as think of doubting and saying with
thyself, And how can this be? You see that
this is a chief characteristic of faith, to leave
all the consequences* of this lower world,
and so to seek for that which is above nature,
and to cast out the feebleness of calculation,
and so to accept everything from the Power
of God. The Jews, however, did not merely
assert this, but that it was not possible to be
justified by faith. But himself turns even
what had taken place to another account, that
having shown the thing to be so great, that
even after it had taken place it required faith,
he might seem with good reason to bestow a
crown on these: and he uses the words which

2 This term is admissible with respect to the method of at-


tainment; but there are two other readings of the passage;
one is “ that the easiness may not seem to make it contemptible


and cheap.”’ 2

3 ‘*sinews’’ Field, from Catena.

4 wacav axoAov@iay, i. e. the common order of cause and
effect.


474


are found in the Old Testament, being always
at pains to keep quite clear of the charges of
love of novelties, and of opposition to it. For
this, which he here says of faith, Moses says
to them of the commandment,’ so showing that
they had enjoyed at God's hand a great bene-
fit. For there is no need to say, “he means,
that one must go up to heaven, or cross a great
sea, and then receive the commandments, but
things so great and grand hath God made of
And what meaneth the


easy access to us.
phrase, “ The Word is nigh thee?” That is,
It is easy. For in thy mind and in thy tongue


is thy salvation. There is no long journey to
go, no seas to sail over, no mountains to pass,
to get saved. But if you be. not minded to
cross so much as the threshold, you may even
while you sit at home be saved, For “in thy
mouth and in thy heart”’ is the source of sal-
vation. Andthen on another score also he
makes the word of faith easy, and says, that
“God raised Him from the dead.” For just
reflect upon the worthiness of the Worker, and
you will no longer see any difficulty in the


thing. That He is Lord then, is plain from
the resurrection. And this he said at the
beginning even of the Epistle. ‘ Which was


declared to be the Son of God with power
. by the resurrection from the dead.”
(Rom. i. 4.) But that the resurrection is easy
too, has been shown even to those who are
very unbelieving, from the might of the
Worker of it. Since then the righteousness is
, greater, and light and easy to receive, is it
not a sign of the utmost contentiousness to
leave what is light and easy, and set about
impossibilities ? For they could not say that
it was a thing they declined as burdensome.
See then how he deprives them of all excuse.
For what do they deserve to have said in their
defence, who choose what is burdensome and
impracticable, and pass by what is light, and
able to save them, and to give them those
things which the Law could not give? All
this can come only from a contentious spirit,
which is in a state of rebellion against God.
For the Law is galling (éraytijc), but grace is
easy. The Law, though they dispute never so
much, does not save; Grace yieldeth the
righteousness resulting from itself, and that
from the Law likewise. What plea then is to
rescue them, since they are disposed to be
contentious against this, but cling to that to no
purpose whatever? Then, since he had made
a strong assertion, he again confirms it from
the Scripture. *
1 St. Augustin Quest. 72 Deut. lib. v. q. 54, discusses this
passage and its application, and considers it to refer to the
Spiritual meaning of the Law.


* The following analysis of Paul’s meaning in vv. 6-10 may
be useful in connection with the exposition of Chrys. The


THE’ WORKS ‘OF (ST. CHRYSOs tea.


[Homity XVII.


Ver. 11-13. ‘“‘ For the Scripture saith, ‘he
proceeds, ‘‘ Whosoever believeth on Him, shall
not be ashamed. For there is no difference
between the Jew and the Greek; for the
same Lord over all is rich unto all that call
upon Him. For whosoever shall call upon
the Name of the Lord shall be saved.”

You see how he produces witnesses, whether
to the faith, or to the confession of it. For
the words, c Every one that believeth,” point
out the faith, But the words, ‘ Whosoever
shall call upon,” set forth confession. Then
again to proclaim the universality of the
grace, and to lay their boasting low, what he
had before demonstrated at length, he here
briefly recalls to their memory, showing again
that there is no difference between the Jew
and the uncircumcised. ‘“ For there is,” he
says, “‘no difference between the Jew and the
Greek.” And what he had said about the
Father, when he was arguing this point, that
he says here about the Son. For as before
he said in asserting this, “Is He the God of
the Jews only? Is He not of the Gentiles
also? Yes, of the Gentiles also: seeing it is
one God” (Rom. iii. 29, 30):—so he says
here also, ‘‘ For the same Lord over all is
rich unto all (and upon all).” (Rom. iil. 22.)
You see how he sets Him forth as exceed-
ingly desiring our salvation, since He even
reckons this to be riches to Himself; so
that they are not even now to despair, or
fancy that, provided they would repent, they
were unpardonable. For He who considereth
it as riches* to Himself to save us, will not
cease to be rich. Since even this is riches,
the fact of the gift being shed forth unto all.
For since what distresseth him the most was,
that they, who were in the enjoyment of a
prerogative over the whole world, should now
by the faith be degraded from these thrones,
and be no wit better off than others, he brings
the Prophets in constantly as foretelling, that
they would have equal honor with them. ‘“ For
whosoever,” he says, ‘believeth on Him
shall not be ashamed” (Ise Kxvill.;£6) gana,
“Whosoever shall call upon the Name an the


apostle quotes Deut. xxx. 11-14 in which God assures the
people that his commandments are not beyond their power to
obey. He brings truth and duty near to them. These
expressions are typical of the principles of the Christian
faith. No striving, journeying or climbing are needful to
reach Christ and his truth and law. Christian truth and duty
are brought near in the apostolic message. After this pres-
entation of the faith-idea in Old Testament language, which
all might not grasp, he presents the message of the gospel in
Vv. 9, 10 in unmistakable terms. It includes two points, (1)
confession, (2) faith, and the object of both is stated. It is
Christ. Confess Christ : believe heartily in his resurrection
(which would carry belief in all the essential facts of his life
and person with itself). And then, reversing the order, and
throwing kapdia and orouate into special prominence, he repeats
the assurance that faith and confession conduct to the true
goal—eis dikavoavvnv—eis gcwtyptav (10).—G. B.S.

2 Hooker, v. 23, ‘* The higher any cause iS, the more it cov-
eteth to impart virtue unto things beneath it.’


Homity XVIL.]


THE CBPISTLE 'TO“THE: ROMANS.


475


Lord shall be saved.” (Joel ii. 32.) And the
““whosoever” is put in all cases, that they
might not say aught in reply. But there is
nothing worse than vainglory. For it was
this, this most especially, which proved their
ruin. Whence Christ also said to them,
“ How can ye believe, which receive glory one
of another, and seek not the glory which
cometh of God only?” (John v. 44.) This,
with ruin, exposes men also to much ridicule ;
and before the punishment in the other world,
involves them in ills unnumbered in this,
And if it seem good, that you may learn this
clearly, leaving for the present the heavens
which that puts us out of, and the hell which
it thrusts us into, let us investigate the whole
matter as here before us. What then can be
more wasteful than this ? what more disgrace-
ful, or more offensive? For that this disorder
is a wasteful one is plain from the people who
spend to no purpose whatsoever on theatres,
horse-races, and other such irrelevant expen-
ditures: from those that build the fine and
expensive houses, and fit up everything ina
useless style of extravagance, on which I must
not enter in this discourse. But that a per-
son diseased in this way must needs be ex-
travagant, and expensive, and rapacious, and
covetous, anybody can see. For that he may
have food to give the brute, he thrusteth his
hand into the substance of others. And why
do I talk of substance? It is not money only
but souls also that this fire devoureth, and it
worketh not death here only, but also here-
after. For vanity is the mother of hell, and
greatly kindleth that fire, and the venomous
worm. One may see that it hath power even
over the dead. And what can be worse than
this? For the other passions are put an end
to by death, but this even after death shows
its force, and strives to display its nature even
in the dead corpse. For when men give
orders on their death-bed to raise to them fine
monuments, which will waste all their sub-
stance, and take pains to lay out beforehand
a vast extravagance in their funeral, and in
their lifetime insult the poor that come to
them for a penny and a single loaf, but when
they are dead give a rich banquet to the
worm, why seek any more exorbitant thral-
dom to the disease? From this mischief also
irregular loves are conceived. For there are
many whom it is not the beauty of the appear-
ance, nor the desire of lying with her, but the
wish to boast that “I have made conquest of
such an one,” hath even drawn into adultery.
And why need I mention the other mischiefs
that spring of this? For I had rather be long
(3 Mss. dunvexic) the slave of ten thousand
Savages, than of vanity once. For even they


do not put such commands upon their cap-
tives, as this vice lays upon its votaries,
Because it says, Be thou every one’s slave, be
he nobler or be he lower than thyself. De-
spise thy soul, neglect virtue, laugh at free-
dom, immolate thy salvation, and if thou doest
any good thing, do it not to please God, but
to display it to the many, that for these things
thou mayest even lose thy crown. And if
thou give alms, or if thou fast, undergo the
pains, but take care to lose the gain. What
can be more cruel than these commands?
Hence grudging beareth sway, hence haughti-
ness, hence covetousness, the mother of evils.
For the swarm of domestics, and the black
servants liveried in gold, and the hangers
on, and the flatterers, and the silver-tin-
selled chariots, and the other absurdities
greater than these, are not had for any
pleasure’s sake or necessity, but for mere
vanity. Yes, one will say, but that this afflic-
tion is an evil, anybody can see; but how we
are to keep quite clear of it, this is what you
should tell us. Well then, in the first place,
if you persuade yourself that this disorder is a
baneful one, you will have made a very good
beginning towards correcting it. For when a
man is sick, he speedily sends for the phy-
sician, if he be first made acquainted with the
fact that he is sick. But if thou seekest for
another way besides to escape from hence,
look to God continually, and be content with
glory from Him; and if thou find the passion
tickling thee, and stirring thee to tell thy well-
doings to thy fellow-servants, bethink thyself
next, that after telling them thou gainest noth-
ing. Quench the absurd desire, and say to
thy soul, Lo, thou hast been so long big with
thy own well-doings to tell them, and thou
hast not had the courage to keep them to thy-
self, but hast blabbed them out to all. What
good then hast thou gotten from this? None
at all, but loss to the utmost, and avoidance
of all that had been gathered together with
much labor. And besides this, consider an-
other thing also, which is, that most men’s
opinion is perverted, and not perverted only,
but that it withers away so soon, For suppos-
ing they do admire you for the time, when the
occasion has gone by they will have forgot-
ten it all, and have taken away from thee the
crown God had given, and have been unable
to secure to thee that from themselves. And
yet if this were abiding, it were a most miser-
able thing to exchange that for this. But when
even this hath gone, what defence shall we be
able to make for betraying the abiding one
for the sake of the unabiding one, for losing
such blessings for the sake of credit with a
few? And indeed even if they who praise


476


were numerous, even for this they were to be
pitied, and the more so the more numerous
those who do it. But if thou art surprised at
what I have said, hear Christ giving His sen-
tence in this way, ‘‘Woe unto you, when all
men speak well of you.” (Luke vi. 26.)
And so indeed it should seem. For if in
every art you look to the workmen (dy0rpyove)
in it to be judges of it, how come you to trust
the proving of virtue to the many, and not
most of all to Him Who knoweth it more
surely then any, and is best able to applaud}
and to crown it? ‘This saying then, let us in-
scribe both on our walls and our doors and
our mind, and let us keep constantly saying
to ourselves, ‘‘ Woe unto us, when all men
speak well of us.” For even they that so
speak slander one afterward as a vain person,
and fond of honor, and covetous of their good
word. But God doeth not so. But when He
seeth thee coveting the glory that cometh of
Him, then He will praise thee most, and re-
spect (@avudcera om. in most Mss.) thee, and
proclaim thee conqueror. Not so man; but,
when he finds thee slavish instead of free, by
gratifying thee often by bare words with false
praise, he snatches from thee thy true meed,
and makes thee more of a menial than a pur-
chased slave. For those last men get to obey
them after their orders, but thou even without
orders makest thyself a slave. For thou dost
not even wait to hear something from them,
but if thou merely knowest wherein thou may-
est gratify them, even without their command
thou doest all. What hell then should we not
deserve, for giving the wicked pleasure, and
courting their service before they give orders,
while we will not hearken to God, even when
He every day commands and exhorts us?
And yet if thou art covetous of glory and
praise, avoid the praise that cometh of men,
and then thou wilt attain to glory. Turn
aside from fair speeches, and then thou wilt
obtain praises without number both from God
and from men. For there is no one we are
used to give so much glory to, as the man
who looks down upon glory, or to praise and
respect so much as the man who thinks scorn
of getting respected and praised. And if we
do so, much more will the God of the uni-
verse. And when He glorifieth thee and
praiseth thee, what man can be more justly
pronounced blessed? For there is not a
greater difference between glory and disgrace,
than between the glory from above and that
of men. Or rather, there is a much greater,
aye an infinite difference. For if this, even
when it does not get put beside any other, is


1 of “‘ confirm ’’ cvyxporetv.


THE’ WORKS: OF ‘ST. CHRYSOS#EOR:


[HomiLy XVII.


but a base and uncomely one, when we come
to scrutinize it by the other’s side, just con-
sider how great its baseness will be found to
be!
and lets herself out to any one, so are they
that be slaves of vanity. Or rather, these be
more base than she. For that sort of women
do in many instances treat those enamoured
of them with scorn. But you prostitute your-
self to everybody, whether runaway slaves, or
thieves, or cut-purses (for it is of these and
such as these that the play-houses that ap-
plaud you consist), andthose whom as individ-
uals you hold to be nothing worth, when in a
body, you honor more than your own salvation
and show yourself less worthy of honor than
any of them. For how can you be else than
less worthy, when you stand in need of the
good word of others, and fancy that you
have not enough by yourself, unless you
receive the glory that cometh of others?
Do you not perceive, pray, beside what I have
said, that as you are an object of notice, and
known to every body, if you should commit a
fault, you will have accusers unnumbered ;
but if unknown, you will remain in security ?
Yes, a man may say, but then if I do well
I shall have admirers unnumbered. Now
the fearful thing is, that it is not only when
you sin, but even when you do aright, that
the disorder of vanity does you mischief,
in the former case subverting thousands, in
the present bereaving thee entirely of thy
reward. It is then a sad thing, and replete
with disgrace of every kind, to be in love
with glory even in civil matters. But when
even in spiritual you are in the same plight
what excuse is there ieft remaining for you,
when you are not minded to yield God even
as much honor as you have yourself from
your servants? For even the slave “looketh
to the eyes of his master” (Ps. cxxiil. 2), and
the hireling to his employer, who is to pay
him wages, and the disciple to his master.
But you do just the contrary. Having left
the God that hired thee, even thy Master,
thou lookest to thy fellow-servants ; and this
knowing that God remembers thy well-doings
even after this life, but man only for the present.
And when thou hast spectators assembled
in Heaven, thou art gathering together spec-
tators upon earth. And where the wrestler
struggles, there he would be honored; but
thou, while thy wrestling is above, art anxious
to gain thee a crown below. And what can
be worse than madness like this? But let us
look, if it seem proper, at the crowns also.
For one is formed by haughtiness, and a second


2 Vide ad J. Polluc. Vii. 201.


For as a prostitute stands at her place 24


HomMILy XVII.]}


THE EPISELE “LO THE


ROMANS. 477


by grudging against another, and a third by
dissimulation and flattery, another again by
wealth, and another by servile obsequious-
ness. And like as children at their childish
play put crowns of grass upon one another,
and many a time laugh at him that is crowned
behind his back; thus now also they that
pass their praises upon thee, many a time
joke by themselves at their putting the grass


upon us. And would it were grass only!
But now the crown. is laden with much
mischief, and ruins all our well-doings.


Taking then the vileness of it into consider-
ation, flee from the damage entailed. For
how many would you have to praise you?
A hundred ? or twice, or thrice, or four times
as many? Or rather, if you please, put them
at ten times or twenty times as many, and
let there be two or four thousand, or if you
will, even ten thousand to applaud you.
Still these be no better than so many daws
cawing from above. Or rather taking the
assemblage of the angels into consideration,
these will seem more vile than even worms,
and their good word of not so much solidity
as a cobweb, or a smoke, or a dream. WHear
then how Paul, who saw through these things
thoroughly, is so far from seeking after them,
that he even deprecates them, in the words,
“ But God forbid that I should glory, save in
sie ’crossof) Christ.” (Gal:’ vi. 14.) This
glory then be thou also emulous of, that thou
mayest not provoke the Master, because in
so doing thou art insulting God, and not
thyself alone. For if thou even wert a
painter, and hadst some pupil, and he were
tc omit showing thee his practice of the
art, but set forth his painting publicly just
to any body that chanced to observe it, thou
wouldest not take it quietly. But if this even
with thy fellow-servants were an insult, how
much more with the Master! But if you
have a mind to learn on other grounds to
feel scorn for the thing, be of a lofty mind,
laugh at appearances, increase thy love of
real glory, be filled with a spiritual temper,
say to thy soul as Paul did, “ Knowest thou
not that we shall judge angels?” (1 Cor. vi.
3) and having by this roused it up, go on to
rebuke it, and say, Thou that judgest the
angels, wilt thou let thyself be judged of
off-scourings, and be praised with dancers,
and mimics, and gladiators, and _horse-
drivers? For these men do follow after
applause of this sort. But do thou poise
thy wing high above the din of these, and
emulate that citizen of the wilderness, John,
and learn how he was above regarding the


multitude, and did not turn him to look at
flatterers, but when he saw all the dwellers
in Palestine poured forth about him, and
wondering, and astonished at him, he was
not puffed up with such honor as this, but
rose up against them, and discoursing to
his great concourse as if to one youth, he
thus rebuked them and said, “ Ye serpents,
ye generation of vipers!” (Matt. iii. 7.) Yet
it was for him that they had run together,
and left the cities, in order to see that holy
personage, and still none of these things
unnerved him. For he was far above glory,
and free from all vanity. So also Stephen,
when he saw the same people again, not
honoring him, but mad upon him, and gnash-
ing their teeth, being lifted above their wrath,
said, “ Ye stiff-necked and uncircumcised
in heart.” (Acts vii. 51.) Thus also Elias,
when those armies were present, and the
king, and all the people, said, ‘‘ How long
halt ye upon both your hips?” (1 Kings
xvili. 21, LXX. true sense of “halt.”) -But
we flatter all, court all, with this servile
obsequiousness buying their honor. Where-
fore all things are turned upside down, and
for this favor’ the business of Christianity
is betrayed, and everything neglected for
the opinion of the generality. Let us then
banish this passion, and then we shall have
a right notion of liberty, and of the haven,
and the calm. For the vain man is ever like
persons in a storm, trembling, and fearing,
and serving a thousand masters. But he
that is clear of this thraldom, is like men in
havens, enjoying a liberty untainted. Not so
that person, but as many acquaintances as
he has, so many masters has he, and he is
forced to be a slave to all of them. How
then are we to get free from this hard
bondage? It is by growing enamoured of
another glory, which is really glory. For as
with those that are enamoured of persons, the
sight of some handsomer one doth by its
being seen take them off from the first: so
with those that court the glory which cometh
from us men, the glory from heaven, if it
gleameth on them, has power to lead them
off from this. Let us then look to this, and
become thoroughly acquainted with it, that
by feeling admiration of its beauty, we may
shun the hideousness of the other, and have
the benefit of much pleasure by enjoying
this continually. Which may we all attain
to by the grace and love toward man, etc.


1 étemécouev kai added after yapitos in 2 Mss. and in Ben
from Mss. ** we have fallen from this grace, and the business
of Christianity is treacherously given up.””


478


THE WORKS‘ OF ST. CHRYSOS@OmM,


[Homity XVIII.


HOMDPEY Xx VILE


ROM. X. 14, 15.


“How then shall they call on Him in Whom they have


not believed? and how shall they believe in Him |


of Whom they have not heard? and how shall
they hear without a preacher? and how shall they
preach except they be sent? as it is written.”


Here again he takes from them all excuse.
For since he had said, “I bear them record
that they have a zeal of God, but not accord-
ing to knowledge,” and that “being ignorant
of God’s righteousness, they submitted not
themselves”? to it: he next shows, that for
this ignorance itself they were punishable
before God. This he does not say indeed so,
but he makes it good by carrying on his dis-
course in the way of question, and so con-
victing them more clearly, by framing the
whole passage out of objections and answers.
But look further back. The Prophet, saith
he, said, ‘‘ Whosoever shall call upon the Name
of the Lord shall be saved.” Now somebody
might say perhaps, “ But how could they call
upon Him Whom they had not believed?
Then there is a question from him after the
objection; And why did they not believe?
Then an objection again. A person certainly
may say, And how could they believe, since
they had not heard? Yet hear they did, he
implies. Then another objection again.
“And how could they hear without a
preacher?” Then an answer again. Yet
preach they did, and there were many sent
forth for this very purpose. And whence
does it appear that these are those persons
sent? Then he brings the prophet in next,
who says, “How beautiful are the feet of
them that preach the Gospel of peace, and
bring glad tidings of good things!” (Is. ili.
7.) You see how by the kind of preaching he
points out the preachers. For there was
nothing else that these men went about telling
everywhere, but those unspeakable good
things, and the peace made by God with men.
And so by disbelieving, it is not we, he implies,
whom you disbelieve, but Isaiah the prophet,
who spake many years ago, that we were to be
sent, and to preach, and to say what we do
say. If the being saved, then, came of call-
ing upon Him, and calling upon Him from
believing, and believing from hearing, and
hearing from preaching, and preaching from


|being sent, and if they were sent, and did


preach, and the prophet went round with
them to point them out, and proclaim them,
and say that these were they whom they
showed of so many ages ago, whose feet even
they praised because of the matter of their
preaching; then it is quite clear that the not
believing was their own fault only. And that
because God’s part had been fulfilled com-
pletely.*

Ver. 16, 17. ‘‘ But they have not all obeyed
the Gospel. For Esaias saith, Lord, who
hath believed our report? So then faith com-
eth by hearing, and hearing by the word of
God.” (ib. liii. 1.)

Since they pressed him with another objec-
tion again to this effect, that if these were the
persons sent upon the mission by God, all
ought to have hearkened to them: observe
Paul’s judgment, and see how he shows that
this very thing which made the confusion, did
in fact do away with confusion and embar-
rassment. What offends you, O Jew, he
would say, after so great and abundant
evidence, and demonstration of the points?
that all did not submit to the Gospel? Why
this very thing, when taken along with the
others, is of force to certify thee of the truth


* Vv. 14, 15 state a threefold objection to Paul’s doctrine of
the Jews’ responsibility. Vv. 16-21 are the reply to this
objection. Paul takes up three points which are summarized
in the objections. (x) Shall the fact that they have not
believed constitute any excuse? (16, 17). he apostle
answers that the real fact is that the message of faith and of
the Messianic salvation has been proclaimed to the Jews and
a large part of them have rejected and disobeyed it. They
must therefore have heard, for disobedience, on the one hand,
and faith, on the other, depends upon hearing the message
and hearing it depends upon God having spoken it. (2) Then
comes the prior question concerning the hearing on which
disobedience or hearing is dependent (18). Certainly they
have heard, answers Paul, for we might apply to God’s mes-
sage the words of the Psalm (xix. 5) which describe the
movements of the heavenly bodies, so plain and wide-spread
have been God’s messages concerning Christ and the princi-
ples on which his Gospel is based. (3) Since Israel has heard,
does it not follow that they knew and are therefore inexcus-
able? (19). Yes. The Jews complain that God’s promise has
failed; that He has not preserved to them their promised
prerogatives. Hence it is excusable for them to fall away
from confidence in Him, etc. The apostle answers that this is
an entire misunderstanding of their own providential history.
The coming of the Gentiles into the kingdom of God was
already foreshadowed in the Old Testament, e. g. Moses
(Deut. xxxii. 21) speaks of Israel being made jealous and
angry by a ‘‘no-people’—‘‘a foolish nation’’ (heathen).
And again, Isaiah (Ixv. 1, 2) uses very bold words which the
apostle applies to the relation of Jews and Gentiles. The
three points placed in close relation are: (1) Israel has heard
and (2) hence knows, and (3) is blameworthy for the rejection
of the Messiah.—G. B. S.


Homity XVIII]


of my statements, even in that some do not
believe. For this too the prophet foretold.
Notice his unspeakable wisdom too; how he
shows more than they were looking for, or
expected him to have to sayin reply. For
what is it that you say? he means, Is it that
all have not believed the Gospel? Well!
Isaiah foretold this too from of old. Or
rather, not this only, but even much more
than this. For the complaint you make is,
Why did not all believe? But Isaiah goes
further than this. For what is it he says?
“Lord, who hath believed our report? Then
since he had rid himself of this embarrassment
by making the Prophet a bulwark against them,
he again keeps to the line he was before
upon. For as he had said that they must call
upon Him, but that they who call must
believe, and they who believe must hear first,
but they who are to hear must have preachers,
and the preachers be sent, and as he had
shown that they were sent, and had preached ;
as he is going to bring in another objection
again, taking occasion first of another quota-
tion from the Prophet, by which he had met
the objection a little back, he thus inter-
weaves it, and connects it with what went
before. For since he had produced the
Prophet as saying, ‘“‘ Lord, who hath believed
our report” (dxo7)? he happily seizes on the
quotation, as proving what he says, “So then
faith cometh by hearing ” (doje), And _ this
he makes not a mere naked statement. But
as the Jews were forever seeking a sign, and
the sight of the Resurrection, and were gaping
after the thing much; he says, Yet the
Prophet promised no such thing, but that it
was by hearing that we were to believe.
Hence he makes this good first, and says,
““so then faith cometh by hearing.” And
then since this seemed a mean thing to say,
see how he elevates it. For he says, I was
not speaking of mere hearing, nor of the need
of hearing men’s words and believing them,
but I mean a great sort of hearing. For the
hearing is “ by the word of God.”” They were
not speaking their own, but they were telling
what they learnt from God. And this is a
higher thing than miracles. For we are
equally bound to believe and to obey God,
whether speaking or working’ miracles.’
Since both works and miracles come of His
words. For both the heaven and everything
else was established in this way. (Ps. xxxiil.
6-8.) After showing then that we ought to
believe the prophets, who always speak God’s
words, and not to look after anything more,


1 Four Mss. The believing and obeying God equally when
He speaks and when He works wonders,


THE EPISTLE TO THE ROMANS.


479


he proceeds next to the objection I men-
tioned, and says,

Ver.v. 18... aabebedaeyy
heard?”

What, he means, if the preachers were
sent, and did preach what they were bid, and
these did not hear? Then comes a most
perfect reply to the objection.

“Yes, verily, their sound went into all the
earth, and their words unto the ends of the
world.” ?

What do you say? he means. They have
not heard? Why the whole world, and the
ends of the earth, have heard. And have
you, amongst whom the heralds abode such a
long time, and of whose land they were, not
heard? Nowcan this ever be? Sure if the
ends of the world heard, much more must
you. Then again another objection.

Ver. 19. ‘‘ But I say, Did not Israel know?”

For what if they heard, he means, but did
not know what was said, nor understand that
these were the persons sent? Are they not
to be forgiven for their ignorance? By no
means, For Isaiah had described their char-
acter in the words, ‘‘How beautiful are the
feet of them that preach the Gospel of peace.”
(Is. lii. 7.) And before him the Lawgiver
himself. Hence he proceeds.

“First Moses saith, I will provoke you to
jealousy by them that are no people, and by a
foolish nation I will anger you. (Deut. xxxii.
zis)

And so they ought even from him to have
been able to distinguish the preachers, not
from the fact of these disbelieving only, not
from the fact of their preaching peace, not
from the fact of their bringing the glad
tidings of those good things, not from the
word being sown in every part of the world,
but from the very fact of their seeing their
inferiors, those of the Gentiles, in greater
honor. For what they had never heard, nor
their forefathers, that wisdom did these® on a
sudden embrace (é¢uAocé¢ow). And this was a
mark of such intense honor, as should gall
them, and lead them to jealousy, and to recol-
lection of the prophecy of Moses, which said,


Have they not


2 Ps, xix. 4(V. and LXX. xviii). The mystical interpreta-
tion of this Psalm here indicated, is acknowledged fy the
Church in using it on Christmas day. An ancient Latin hymn
has this paraphrase on a part of it:


From Chastity, His Palace bright,

Forth came the Bridegroom decked with light,
Giant ! God and Man in one!

Glad His glorious race to run.

From the Eternal Father sent

Back to Him His circuit bent,

Down to hell His path descends,

At the throne of God it ends.


Origen on this passage (t. iv. p. 627), and St. Augustin on the
Psalm, enlarge upon its Christian interpretation.
3 “ They’’ “ their’’ i.e. the Jews: “these” i. e. the Gentiles.


480 THE WORKS OF


ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homity XVIII.


“TI will provoke you to jealousy by them that
are no people.” For it was not the greatness
of the honor alone that was enough to throw
them upon jealousy, but the fact too that
a nation had come to enjoy these things
which was of so little account that it could
hardly be considered a nation at all. “For I
will provoke you to jealousy, by them which
are no nation, and by a foolish nation will I
anger you.” For what more foolish than the
Greeks (Heathen, see pp. 373, 377)? or what
of less account? See how by every means
God had given from of old indications and
clear signs of these times, in order to remove
their blindness. For it was not any little
corner in which the thing was done, but in
land, and in sea, and in every quarter of the
globe. And they saw those in the enjoyment
of countless blessings now, who had formerly
been objects of their contempt. One should
consider then that this is that people of which
Moses said, “I will provoke you to jealousy
by them that are no people, and by a foolish
nation will I anger you.” Was it Moses only
then that said this? No, for Isaiah also after
Him saith so. And this is why Paul said,
‘First Moses,” to show that a second will
come who says the same things in a clearer
and plainer way. As then he says above, that
Esaias crieth, so too here.

Ver. 20. “But Esaias is very bold, and
saith.”

Now what he means is something of this
kind. He put a violence on himself, and was
ambitious to speak, not some thing veiled over,
but to set things even naked before your eves,
and choosing rather to run (Origen zz oc.)
into dangers from being plain spoken, than by
looking to his own safety, to leave you any
shelter for your impenetrableness ; although
it was not the manner of prophecy to say this
so clearly; but still to stop your mouths most
completely, he tells the whole beforehand
clearly and distinctly. The whole! what
whole? Why your being cast out, and also
their being brought in; speaking as follows,
**T was found of them that sought Me not, I
was made manifest of them that asked not
after Me.” (Is. Ixv. 1.) Who then are they
that sought not? who they that asked not
after Him? Clearly not the Jews, but they
of the Gentiles, who hitherto had not known
Him. As then Moses gave their character-
istic mark in the words, “no people” and
“4 foolish nation,’ so here also he takes the
same ground to point them out from, viz. their
extreme ignorance. And this was a very
great blame to attach to the Jews, that they
who sought Him not found Him, and they
who sought Him lost Him.


Ver. 21. “ But unto Israel He saith, All the
day long have I stretched forth My hands
unto a disobedient and gainsaying peo-
ple.” Gis: axyn:)

Observe now that difficulty, which so many
make a subject of question, is discovered laid
up from of old in the words of the Prophet,
and with a clear solution to it too. And what
is this? You heard Paul say before. “ What ~
shall we say then? That the Gentiles which
followed not after righteousness have attained
unto righteousness. But Israel which followed
after the law of righteousness hath not at-
tained to the law of righteousness.” (Rom.
ix. 30, 31.) This Esaias also says here. For
to say, “I was found of them that sought me
not, I was made manifest unto them which
asked not after me,” is the same with saying,
“that the Gentiles which followed not after
righteousness have attained unto righteous-
ness.” Then to show that what was
happening was not of God’s grace only,
but also of the temper of those who
came to Him, as also the casting off of
the others came of the disputatiousness
of those who disobeyed, hear what he proceeds
with. ‘But to Israel He saith, All the day
long have I stretched forth My hands to a
disobedient and gainsaying people;” here
meaning by the day the whole period of the
former dispensation. But the stretching out
of the hands, means calling and drawing!
them to Him, and inviting them. Then to
show that the fault was all their own, he says
“to a disobedient and gainsaying people.”
You see what a great charge this is against
them! For they did not obey Him even
when He invited them, but they gainsaid
Him, and that when they saw Him doing so,
not once or twice or thrice, but the whole
period. But others who had never known
Him, had the power to draw Him to them.
Not that he says they themselves had the
power to do it, but to take away lofty imagin-
ings even from those of the Gentiles, and to
show that it was His grace that wrought the
whole, He says, 7 was made manifest, and
f was found. It may be said, Were they
then void of everything? By no means, for
the taking of the things found, and the getting
a knowledge of what was manifested to them,
was what they contributed themselves.?
Then to prevent these saying, But why wast
Thou not made manifest to us also? he sets
down what is more than this, that I not only


1 This of course does not exclude the other interpretation of
J. Martyr. Afol. i. 35. p. 27 O. T. Tryph. 97, p. 193 O. T. and
others. See, on the contrary, St. John xii. 32, also St. Cyr.
Hier. Cat. xiii. 27, and note, p. 157 O. T. add St. Cyprian,
Test. ii. 20, p. 56, O. T. and note.

2 Asin Cornelius’ case. See p. 379, and context.


HomiLy XVIII]


THE EPISTLE: TO'THE“ ROMANS


481


was made manifest, but I even continue with
My hands stretched out, inviting them, and
displaying all the concern of an affectionate
father, and a mother that is set on her child.
See how he has brought us a most lucid
answer to all the difficulties before raised, by
showing that it was from their own temper
that ruin had befallen them, and that they are
wholly undeserving of pardon. For though
they had both heard and understood what was
said, still not even then were they minded to
come to Him. And what is far more, He did
not cause them to hear these things and to
understand them only, but a thing which hath
more force to rouse them up and draw them
to Him, when they were disobedient and gain-
saying, He added to the others. Now what
is this? It is His exasperating them, and
making them jealous. For ye know the
domineering might of the passion, and how
great the power is which jealousy is naturally
possessed of for bringing all disputatiousness
to an end, and rousing those who have grown
remiss. And why need one say this of man,
when in brutes without reason, and children
before they are of full age, the power it shows
isso great? Fora child often will not sub-
mit to its father when it is called, but con-
tinues obstinate. But when another child has
notice taken of it, then it even though not
called comes to its father’s bosom, and what
calling could not do, provoking to jealousy
will, This then God also did. For He not
only called and stretched out His hands, but
stirred up in them the feeling of jealousy also,
by bringing those far inferior to them (a thing
which makes men excessively jealous) not
into their good things, but (what was a much
stronger step, and makes the feeling even
more domineering,) into much greater good
things, and of greater necessity than theirs,
and such as they had never even fancied in a
dream. But still they did not submit. What
pardon then do they deserve who exhibit such
excessive obstinacy? None. Yet this he
does not say himself, but leaves it to the con-
sciences of his hearers, to gather it from the
conclusion of what he had stated, and again
also confirms it by what he goes on to in his
usual wisdom. And this he did also above,
by introducing objections both in the case of
the Law (see on Rom. vii. 7, pp. 420, 1)
and of the people, which presented an accusa-
tion beyond the true one; and then in the
answer, which was to overthrow this, yielding
as much as he pleased, and as the case
allowed, so as to make what he was saying not
unwelcome. And this he doth here, writing
as follows:

Chap. xi. ver. 1 “I say then, Hath God


31


cast away His people whom He foreknew?
God forbid.’”’*

And he introduces the form a person would
use in doubt, as though taking occasion from
what had been said, and after making this
alarming statement, by the denial of it he
causes the sequel to be allowed with readi-
ness ; and what by all the former arguments
he had been laboring to show that he makes
good here also. What then is this? That
even if there be but afew saved, the promise
yet stands good. This is why he does not
merely say “people,” but ‘people which He
foreknew.” Then proceeding with the proof
that the ‘people ” were not cast off, “For I
also am an Israelite, of the seed of Abraham,
of the tribe of Benjamin.”

I, he says, the instructor, the preacher.
Now since this seemed contrary to what was
said before in the words, ‘“ Who hath believed
our report?” and, ‘ All the day long have I
stretched forth My hands to a disobedient
and gainsaying people;” and, “I will pro-
voke you to jealousy by them which are no
people ;” he was not satisfied with the depre-
cation, nor with having said, “God forbid,”
but makes it good by taking it up again and
saying, “God hath not cast away His peo-
ple.” But this is not a confirmation, men
may say, but an assertion. Observe then the
confirmation, both the first, and that which
follows it. For the first is that he was him-
self of that race. But He would not, if on
the point of casting them off, have chosen
from them him to whom He entrusted all
the preaching, and the affairs of the world,
and all mysteries, and the whole economy.
This then is one proof, but the next, after it,
is his saying, that “people whom He fore-
knew,” that is, who He knew clearly were
suited to it, and would receive the faith.
(Pococke on Hos. p. 23. See Acts ii. 41 ; iv.
4; xxi. 20.) For three, five, even ten thou-
sand were believers from among them. And
so to prevent any from saying, Art thou the
people, then? And because thou hast been
called, hath the nation been called? he pro-
ceeds.

Ver. 2. “He hath not cast off His people,
whom He foreknew.”

As though he said, I have with me three,
five, or ten thousand. What then? has the


* The central thought of chap. xi. is that Israel’s rejection
is not forever; the nation is to be restored. The order of
thought is as follows: (1) The rejection is fartial. The
Scriptures furnish analogous rae of partial falls and
rejections of the nation, 1-10. (2) The fall of Israel is teme-
porary. Some branches were cut off because of unbelief and
Gentile branches inserted in their place, but the natural
branches shall yet be restored, 11-24. (3) Reflections upon
the wise and gracious purposes of God in all these dispensa-
tions, 25-36.—G. B. S.


482


THE WORKS: OF (Si. -CHERYSOS#er:


[HomiLy XVIII.


people come to be? three, five, or ten thou-
sand ? that seed that compared with the stars
of heaven for multitude, or the sand of the
sea? Is this the way you deceive us and put
a cheat upon us, by making the whole people
thvself and the few that are with thee; and
didst thou inflate us with idle hopes, and say
that the promise has been fulfilled, when all
are lost, and the salvation comes down to a
few? This is all bombast and vanity! we
cannot away with such sophistry as this!
Now, that they may not say this, see how in
the sequel he proceeds to the answer, not
giving the objection indeed, but before it
grounding the answer to it upon ancient
history. What then is the answer?

Ver. 2-5. “ Wot ye not,” he says, ‘‘ what
the Scripture saith of Elias ? how he (so most ;
Mss. Sav. who) maketh intercession to God
against Israel, saying, Lord, they have killed
Thy prophets, and digged down Thine altars ;
and I am left alone, and they seek my life.
But what saith the answer of God unto him?
I have reserved to Myself seven thousand
men, who have not bowed the knee to the
image of Baal. Even so then at this present
time also, there is a remnant according to the
election of grace.”

What he means is nearly this. ‘‘God hath
not cast off His people.” For had He done
so, He would have admitted none of them.
But if He did admit some, He hath not cast
them off. Still it is said, if He had not cast
off, He would have admitted all. This does
not follow; since in Elijah’s time the part
to be saved had come down to “seven thou-
sand:” and now also there are probably
many that believe. But if you do not know
who they are, this is no wonder, for that
prophet, who was so great and good a man,
did not know. But God ordered things for
Himself when even the prophet knew them
not. But consider his judgment. Now in
proving what was before him, he covertly
augments the charge against them. For this
is why he gave the whole passage, that he
might parade before them their untowardness,
and show that they had been so from of old.
For if he had not wished this, but had
directed his whole attention to prove that the
people lay in the few, he would have said that
even in Elijah’s time, seven thousand were
left. But now he reads to them the passage
further back, as having been throughout at
pains to show that it was no strange thing
that they did with Christ, and the Apostles,


1 Field with one Ms. reads ‘‘ What then? Is this the peo-
pleas ethatesecdy pe ee come to be 3, 5, Or 10,000?” and
mentions with approval the reading of the Catena ‘* What
then ? are the people come down to thee and 3, 5, or 10,000?”’


but their habitual practice. For to prevent
their saying that it was asa deceiver we put
Christ to death, and as impostors that we per-
secute the Apostles, he brings forward the
text which says, “ Lord, they have killed Thy
prophets, and digged down thine altars.’
(1 Kings xix. 14.) Then in order not to
make his discourse galling to them, he at-
taches another reason to the bringing forward
of the text. For he quotes it not as if it was
on purpose to accuse them, but as if intent
upon showing some other things. And he
leaves them without any excuse even by what
had before been done. For observe how
strong the accusation is even from the person
speaking. For it is neither Paul, nor Peter,
nor James, nor John, but one whom they held
in the greatest estimation, the chief of the
Prophets, the friend of God, a man who had
been so very zealous’ in their behalf as even
to be given up to hunger for them, who even
to this day hath never died. What then doth
this man say? “ Lord, they have killed Thy
prophets, and digged down Thine altars; and
I am left alone, and they seek my life.”
What could be more brutal cruelty than this ?
For when they should have besought pardon
for the offences they had already committed,
they were minded even to kill him. And all
these things put them quite beyond pardon.
For it was not during the prevalence of the
famine, but when the season was favorable,
and their shame was done away, and the
devils (i. e. false gods) had been put to
shame, and the power of God had been
shown, and the king had bowed beneath it,
that they committed these audacities, passing
from murder to murder, and making away
with their teachers, and such as would bring
them to a better mind. What then could
they have to say to this? Were they too de-
ceivers ? Were they too imposters? Did they
not know whence they were either? But they
distressed you. Yes, but they also told you
goodly things. But what of the altars? the
altars too did not surely distress you? Did
they too exasperate you? See of what obsti-
nacy, of what insolence they were ever yield-
ing proofs! This is why in another passage
too Paul says, when writing to the Thessa-
lonians, “ Ye also have suffered like things of
your own countrymen, even as they have of
the Jews, who both killed the Lord, and their
own prophets, and have persecuted us, and
please not God, and are contrary to all men
(1 Thess. ii. 14, 15); which is what he says.
here too, that they both digged down the
altars, and killed the prophets. But what


_ ? Referring to his words, 1 Kings xix. 14, and to his sharing
in the famine, xvii. 13.


Homity XVIITI_]


THE, EPISTLE “TO |THEIRGIMLANS.


483


saith the answer of God unto him? “I have | strange, having first taken those seven thou-


reserved to Myself seven thousand men who)


have not bowed the knee to the image of
Baal.” (1 Kings xix. 18.) And what has
this to do with the present subject? some
may say. It hath a great deal to do with
the present subject. For he shows here that
it is the worthy that God useth to save,
even it the promise be made to the whole
nation. And this he pointed out above when
he said, ‘‘ Though the number of the children
of Israel be as the sand of the sea, a rem-
nant shall be saved.” And, “Except the
Lord of Sabaoth had left us a seed, we
should have become as Sodoma.” (Rom.
ix. 27, 29.) And he points it out from this
passage also. Wherefore he proceeds to say,
“Even so then at this present time also, there
is a remnant according to the election of
grace.” Observe that each word maintains
its own rank, showing at once God’s grace,
and the obedient temper of them that receive
salvation. For by saying election, he showed
the approval of them, but by saying grace, he
showed the gift of God.

Ver. 6. “‘ And if by grace, then itis no more
of works, otherwise grace is no more grace:
but if it be of works, then is it no more grace,’
otherwise work is no more work.”

He again springs upon the disputatiousness
of the Jews, in what has just been quoted;
and on this ground bereaves them of excuse.
For you cannot, he means, so much as say,
that the Prophets called indeed, and God
invited, and the state of things cried aloud,
and the provoking to jealousy was enough to
draw us to Him, but what was enjoined was
grievous, and this is why we could not draw
nigh, since we had a display of works de-
manded of us, and laborious well-doings.
For you cannot even say this. For how
should God have demanded this of you, when
this would just throw His grace into the
shade? And this he said out of a wish to
show that He was most desirous that they
might be saved. (Deut. v. 29.) For not
only would their salvation be easily brought
about, but it was also God’s greatest glory to
display His love toward man. Why then are
you afraid of drawing nigh, since you have no
works demanded of you?) Why are you bick-
ering and quarrelsome, when grace is before
you, and why keep putting me the Law for-
ward to no purpose whatsoever? For you
will not be saved by that, and will mar this
gift also; since if you pertinaciously insist on
being saved by it, you do away with this grace
of God. Then that they might not think this


1 4 Mss. omit these words: most early Mss. and versions of
the N. T. omit the whole second half of the verse.


sand ; he said that they were saved by grace.
For when he says, “Even so then at this
present time also there is a remnant accord-
ing to the election of grace;” he shows that
they also were saved by grace. And not
hereby only, but likewise by saying, “I have
reserved unto Myself.” For this is the lan-
guage of One Who showeth that He Himself
was the chief Contributor. And if by grace,
it will be said, how came we all not to be
saved? Because ye would not. For grace,
though it be grace, saves the willing, not
those who will not have it, and turn away
from it, who persist in fighting against it, and
opposing themselves to it. Observe how
throughout the point he is proving is, “ Not
as though the Word of God had taken none
effect,” by showing that the worthy were those
to whom the promise came, and that these,
few though they be, may yet be the people of
God; and indeed he had stated it in the
beginning of the Epistle with much force,
where he says, “‘ For what if some did not
believe ” (Rom. iii. 3), and did not even stop
at this, but proceeded, ‘‘ Yea, let God be true,
and every man a liar.” (ib. 4.) And here
again he confirms it another way, and shows
the force of grace, and that always the one
were being saved, the other perished. Let us
then give thanks, that we belong to them that
are being saved, and not having been able to
save ourselves by works, were saved by the
gift of God. But in giving thanks, let us not
do this in words only, but in works and
actions. For this is the genuine thanks-
giving, when we do those things whereby
God is sure to be glorified, and flee from
those from which we have been set free.
For if we, after insulting the King, instead of
being punished have been honored, and then
go and insult Him afresh, since we are de-
tected in the utmost ingratitude, we should
with justice have to suffer the utmost punish-
ment, one greater far than the former. For
the former insolence did not show us so un-
grateful as that committed after honor and
much attention shown us. Let us then flee
those things from which we have been set
free, and not give thanks with our mouths
only, lest it be said of us also, “This people
honoreth Me with their lips, but with their
heart is far from Me.” (Is. xxix. 13.) For
how is it else than unseemly, when the
“heavens declare the glory of God” (Ps.
xix. 1), and thou, for whom the heavens were
made that glorify Him, doest such things that
through thee the God that made thee is blas-
phemed? It is for this that not only he
that blasphemeth, but thyself also, wilt be


424


liable to punishment. For the heavens also
do not glorify God by sending forth a voice,
but by putting others upon doing it at the
sight of them, and yet they are said “to de-
clare the glory of God.’’ Thus too they that
furnish a life to be wondered at, even though
they hold their peace, yet glorify God, when
others through them glorify Him. For He is
not so much reverenced because of the
heaven, as of a spotless life. When then we
are discoursing with the Gentiles, we cite
(4 Mss. read or point to the reading, “let us
not cite”) not the heavens before them, but the
men, whom though they were in worse plight
than brutes, He hath persuaded to be the
Angels’ competitors. And we (x Ms. “let us”)
stop their mouths by speaking of this change.
For far better than the heaven is man, anda
soul brighter than their beauty may he pos-
sess. For it, though visible for so long a
time, did not persuade’ much. But Paul,
‘after preaching a short time, drew the whole
world unto him. (St. Aug. on Ps. xix. 4.)
For he possessed a soul no less than the
heaven, which was able to draw all men unto
him. Our soul is not a match even for the
earth: but his is equal to the heavens. That
stands indeed keeping to its own boundary
and rule; but the loftiness of his soul tran-
scended all the heavens, and conversed with
@hrismrEimselt(2' Cor? xa5%, Roms oxv.
19, etc.) And the beauty of it was so great,
that even God heraldeth it forth. For the
stars did the angels marvel at when they were
made. (Job xxxviii. 7.) But this He mar-
velled at when He saith, “ He is a chosen
vessel unto Me.” (Acts ix. 15.) And this
Heaven doth a cloud many times overshadow.
But Paul’s soul no temptation overshadowed,
but even in storms he was clearer to the sight
than the hard sky (crafepac weonuBpiac) at noon,
and shone constantly as it had done before
the clouds came on. For the Sun who shone
in him sent not forth such rays as to be over-
clouded by the concourse of temptations, but
even then shone forth the more. Wherefore
he says, “ My grace is sufficient for thee, for
My Strength is made perfect in weakness.”
(2 Cor. xii. 9.) Let us then strive to be like
him, and then even to what we are this
heaven will be as nothing, if we wish it, nor
yet the sun, nor the whole world. For these
are for us, and not we for them. Let us show
that we are worthy of having had these made
for us. Forif we be found unworthy of these,
how shall we be worthy a kingdom? For
indeed all that live so as to blaspheme God
are unworthy to see the sun. They who
blaspheme Him are unworthy to enjoy the
creatures who glorify Him: since even a son


THE ‘WORKS "OF (3ST. CHRYSOSTRaE


[HomiILy XVIII.


who insulteth his father is unworthy to be
waited upon by the approved servants.
Hence these will enjoy glory, and_ that
great glory; but we shall have to undergo
punishment and vengeance. How miserable
then will it’ be for the creation which was
made for thee to be fashioned “ according to
the glorious liberty of the children of God,”
(Rom. viii. 21) but for us who were made
children of God, through our much listless-
ness, to be sent away to destruction and hell,
for whose sake the creation shall enjoy that
great festal time? Now to keep this from
coming to pass, let such of us as have a pure
soul keep it still such, or rather let us make
its brightness more intense. And let those
of us that have a soiled one, not despair.
For “if” (he says) “ your sins be as purple,
I will make them white as snow. And if they
be as scarlet, I will make them white as wool.”
(Is. i. 18.) But when it is God that prom-
iseth, doubt not, but do those things whereby
thou mayest draw to thee these promises.
Are they unnumbered, the fearful and out-
rageous acts done by thee? And what of
this? For hitherto thou art not gone away
into the grave where no man shall confess.
(ib. \xxxvill. 183 Pssjavi. ih) Heithertor see
arena (6éatpov) is not broken up for thee, but
thou art standing within the line, and thou
art able even by a struggle at the last to
recover all thy defeats. Thou art not yet
come to where the rich man was, for thee to
hear it said, “there is a gulf betwixt you
and us.” (Luke xvi. 26.) The Bridegroom
is not yet at hand, that one should fear to
give you of his oil. Still canst thou buy and
store up. And there is not one yet to say,
‘“Not so; lest there be not enough for us and
and you” (Matt. xxv. 9); but there are many
that sell, the naked, the hungry, the sick, the
imprisoned. Give food to these, clothing to
those, visit the sick, and the oil will: come
more than from fountains. The day of ac-
count is not here. Use the time as need be,
and make deductions from the debts, and to
him that oweth “an hundred measures of oil,
say, Take thy bill and write fifty.” (Luke
xvi. 6.) And with money, and with words,"
and with every other thing do in like manner,
imitating that steward. And advise this to
thyself, and also to thy relatives, for thou hast
still the power of saying so. Thou art not
yet come to the necessity of calling in another
in their behalf, but thou hast power to give
advice at once to thyself and to others.
(ib. 28.) But when thou art gone away


thither, neither of these things wilt thou have


1 All Field’s Mss. om. ‘‘ words,’’ which however may mean


‘ offence given by words.


HomiLy XVIII.]


it in thy power to do at need. And with
good reason. For thou who hast had so long
a period fixed thee, and neither done thyself
good, nor any else, how when thou art under
the Judge’s hands shalt thou be able to ob-
tain this grace? Putting all these things
together then, let us cling fast to our own
salvation, and not lose the opportunity of this
life present. For it is possible, it is, even at
our last breath to please God. It is possible
to gain approval by thy last will, not indeed
in such way as in our lifetime, still it is possi-
ble. How, and in what way? If thou leavest
Him among thine heirs, and givest Him also
(kat air@) a portion of thine whole estate.
Hast thou not fed Him in thy lifetime? At
all events when departed, when thou art no
longer owner, give Him a share of thy goods.
He is loving unto man, He doth not deal
niggardly by thee. It is a mark to be sure of
a greater desire, and so it will be more re-
warded, to feed Him in thy lifetime. But if
thou hast not done this, at all events do the
next best thing. Leave Him joint-heir (see
p. 384) with thy children, and if thou art dila-
tory over this, bethink thyself that His Father
made thee joint-heir with Him, and break
down thy inhuman spirit. For what excuse
wilt thou have if thou dost not even make
Him a sharer with thy children, who made
thee share the Heaven, and was slain for
thee? And yet all that ever He did, He did
not in repayment of a debt, but as bestowing
a favor. But you after so great benefits, have
been made a debtor as well. And yet, though
things are so, it is as if receiving a favor, not
as demanding payment of a debt, that He
crowneth thee; and this too when what He
is to receive is His own. Give then thy
money, which is now no longer of any use to
thee, and of which thou art no longer owner;
and He will give thee a Kingdom which shall
be of service to thee perpetually, and with it
will bestow also the things of this life. For
if He be made the joint-heir of thy children,
He doth lighten their orphanage for them, do
away with plots against them, beat off insults,
stop the mouths of pettifoggers. And if they
themselves be unable to stand up for their be-
queathments, He will Himself stand up, and
not let them be broken through. But if He
do even allow this, then He makes up of
Himself all that was ordered in the will with
still greater liberality, because He has been
but mentioned in it. Leave Him then thine
heir. For it is to Him that thou art upon the
point of going. He will be thy Judge Him-
self in the trial for all that hath been done
here. But there are some so miserable and


THE BRISTLE. FO tT HE” ROMARS.


485


still they have not the courage to do this, but
approve of giving that they have to hangers
on, and to flatterers, and to this person and
to that, sooner than to Christ, Who hath done
them so great benefits. And what can be
more unreasonable than this conduct? For
if one were to compare men of this cast to
asses, aye, or to stones, one shall not still be
saying anything tantamount to their unreason-
ableness and senselessness. Nor could one
find a similitude to put before you their mad-
ness and dementedness. For what pardon
shall they obtain for not having fed Him in
their lifetime, who, even when they are on the
point of departing to Him, have not the incli-
nation to give Him but a trifle out of those
goods, of which they are no longer the
owners, but are of such an inimical and hos-
tile disposition, as not even to give Him a
share in what is useless to themselves? Do
you not know how many of mankind have not
even been counted worthy to obtain an end of
this kind, but have been snatched off sud-
denly? But thee doth God empower to give
orders to thy kindred, and to speak with them
about thy property, and set all that is in thy
house in order. What defence then wilt thou
have to set up, when even after receiving this
favor from Him, thou hast treacherously
given up the benefit, and art standing as it
were in diametrical opposition to thy fore-
fathers in the faith? For they even in their
lifetime sold all, and brought it to the Apos-
tle’s feet. But thou, even at thy death, dost
not give any share to them that need. What
is the better part, and gives one much bold-
ness, is to remedy poverty in one’s lifetime.
But if thou hast not been minded to do this,
at all events do upon thy death-bed some
noble act. For this is not what a strong love
for Christ would do, yet still it is an act of
love. For if thou wilt not have the high
place with the Lambs, still even to be after
them at all is no light thing, and so not to be
placed with the goats nor on the left hand.
But if thou wilt not do even this, what plea is
to rescue thee, when neither the fear of death
nor thy money having become henceforth of
no use to thee, nor the leaving of safety be-
hind thee to thy children, nor the laying up of
much pardon there against the time to come,
will make thee merciful to man? Wherefore
I advise, as the best thing, that in your life-
time you give the larger half of your goods to
the poor. But if there be any of so narrowa
soul as not to have the heart to do so, at all
events let them by necessity become merciful.


|For when you were living as if there were no
death, then you clung close to your goods.


pinched, that though they have no children, | But now since you have learnt that you are to


486


THE WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOST@R


[HomiLy XIX.


die, at least now give over your opinion, and
deliberate about your affairs as one that must
die. Or rather as one that ought to enjoy
immortal life for evermore. For if what I am
going to say be distasteful, and big with
horror, still it must be said. Reckon with thy
slaves the Lord. Art thou giving thy slaves
liberty? Give Christ liberty from famine,
from distress, from imprisonment, from naked-
ness. Art thou horrified at the words? Is it
not then more horrible when thou dost not
even thus much? And here the word makes
thy blood curdle. But when thou art gone to
that world, and hast to hear things far more
grievous than these, and seest the tortures
which are incurable, what wilt thou say? To
whom wilt thou flee for refuge? Whom wilt


thou call to thy alliance and assistance?
Will it be Abraham? He will not hearken to
thee. Or those virgins? They will not give
thee of their oil. Thy father then or thy
grandfather? But none even of these, if he
be ever so holy, will have it in his power to
reverse that sentence. Weighing then all
these things, to Him Who alone is Lord to
blot out the bill against thee and to quench
that flame, to Him make prayer and supplica-
tion, and propitiate Him, by now feeding Him
and clothing Him continually: that in this
world thou mayest depart with a good hope,
and when thou art there thou mayest enjoy
eternal blessings, which may we all attain to
by the grace and love toward man, etc.


PAO) NT ee


ROM.


“ What then?! Israel hath not obtained that, which he
seeketh for; but the election hath obtained it,
and the rest were blinded.”


He had said that God did not cast off His
people ; and to show in what sense He had
not cast them off, he takes refuge in the
Prophets again.* And having shown by
them that the more part of the Jews were
lost, that he might not seem to be again
bringing forward an accusation of his own,
and to make his discourse offensive, and to be
attacking them as enemies, he takes refuge in
David and Isaiah, and says,

Ver. 8. “ According as it is written, God
hath given them the spirit of slumber.” (Is.
XxX. 00.)

Or rather we should go back to the begin-
ning of his argument. Having then men-
tioned the state of things in Elijah’s time, and
shown what grace is, he proceeds, ‘‘ What
then? Israel hath not obtained that which
he seeketh for.” Now this is as much what
an accuser would say, as what one who was

1 Field punctuates so as to give the sense ** Why then hath
not Israel attained to that which he seeketh after? Nay, but
the election hath obtained it;’’ which seems to be (at all
events) St. Chrysostom’s view of the passage.

* The course of thought here may be thus exhibited : God
in his gracious promise made simple faith the condition of
salvation, but Israel sought it in the line of works and has
not attained it. But the election obtained it because the
avowed principle of the election was grace, to which corre-
sponds faith. In other words: those who complied with the
express principle of the election and who sought salvation by
faith, receiving it as a gift of divine grace, were accepted.
Those who thought to establish their own righteousness have
failed, and this failure corresponds to that judicial harden-


ing with which God through Moses and Isaiah threatens the
disobedient Israelites inthe Old Testament.—G. B. S.


DN o'iGH


putting a question. For the Jew, he means,
is inconsistent with himself when he seeketh
for righteousness, which he will not accept.
Then to leave them with no excuse, he shows,
from those who have accepted it, their unfeel-
ing spirit, as he says, “ But the election hath
obtained it,” and they are the condemnation
of the others. And this is what Christ says,
“But if I by Beelzebub cast out devils, by
whom do your children cast them out?
Wherefore they shall be your judges.” (Luke
xi. 19.) For to prevent any one from accus-
ing the nature of the thing, and not their own
temper, he points out those who had obtained
it. Hence he uses the word? with great pro-
priety, to show at once the grace from above
and the zeal of these. For it is not to deny
free-will that he speaks of their having ‘“ ob-
tained’ (as by chance, Gr. éréruye) it, but to
show the greatness of the good things, and
that the greater part was of grace, though not
the whole. For we too are in the habit of
saying, “so and so chanced to get” (same
word), “so and so met with,” when the gain
has been a great one. Because it is not by
man’s labors, but by God’s gift, that the
greater part was brought about.

“And the rest was blinded.”

See how he has been bold enough to tell
with his own voice the casting off of the rest.
For he had indeed spoken of it already, but it


2 Or “language.” He has before remarked on the term
election as implying an approved character ; see on V. 5, p. 483.
3 Soon x. 21. But see on viii. 26, and Xi. 22.


Homily XIX.]


was by bringing the prophets in as accusers.
But from this point he declares it in his own
person. Still even here he is not content
with his own declaration, but brings Isaiah
the prophetin again. For after saying, “ were
blinded,” he proceeds; ‘‘ according as it is
written, God hath given them the spirit of
slumber.” Now whence came this blinding?
He had indeed mentioned the causes of it
before, and turned it all upon their own heads,
to show that it was from their unseasonable
obstinacy that they had to bear this. And
now he speaks of it too. For when he says,
“Eyes that they should not see, and ears that
they should not hear,” he is but finding fault
with their contentious spirit. For when they
had “eyes to see” the miracles, and were
possessed of ‘“‘ears to hear” that marvellous
‘Teaching, they never used these as were fitting.
And the “ He gave,” do not imagine to mean
here an agency, but a permission only. But
“slumber” (kxaradvvgic lit. piercing) is a name
he here gives to the habit of soul inclinable to
the worse, when incurably and unchangeably
so. For in another passage David says,
“that my glory may sing unto Thee, and I
may not be put to slumber” (Ps. xxx. 12,
LXX.): that is, I may not alter, may not be
changed. For as a man who is hushed to
slumber in a state of pious fear would not
easily be made to change his side; so too
he that is slumbering in wickedness would
not change with facility. For to be hushed}
to slumber here is nothing else but to be fixed
and riveted to a thing. In pointing then to
the incurable and unchangeable character of
their spirit, he calls it ‘‘a spirit of slumber.”
‘Then to show that for this unbelief they will
be most severely punished, he brings the
Prophet forward again, threatening the very
things which in the event came to pass.

Ver. 9. “Let their table be made a snare,
and a trap, and a stumbling-block.” (Ps. Ixix.
ae 28.)

That is, let their comforts and all their good
things change and perish, and let them be
open to attack from any one. And to show
that this is in punishment for sins that they
suffer this, he adds, ‘‘and a recompense unto
them.”

Ver. 10. ‘Let their eyes be darkened that
they may not see, and bow Thou down their
back alway.”

Do these things then still require any inter-


1 Accommodated to the A. V. Gr. ‘‘ to feel compunction”’: the
word is used thus on Rom. viii. 26, p. 447. In Is. xxix. ro, it is
for 7N737N a deep (often supernatural) sleep, as Gen. ii. 21, xv.
I2; 1 Sam. xxvi. 12; Ps. Ixxvi. 7. In Ps. xxx. (al. 20), 13, the
verb is on5 which signifies stillness (from horror or amaze-
ment). Wespeak of being penetrated with horror; here the
notion of piercing is taken, and applied to fixing. See Schleus-
ner On Katavvogouat,


THE EPISTLE’ TO THE, ROMANS:


487


preting? Are they not plain even to those
ever so senseless? And before our words,
the very issue of facts has anticipated us in
bearing witness to what was said. For at
what time have they ever been so open to
attacks ? at what time such an easy prey? at
what time hath He so “bowed down their
backs?” At what time have they been set
under such bondage? And what is more,
there is not to be any unloosing from these
terrors. And this the prophet hath also
hinted. For he does not say only, ‘“ bow
Thou down their back,” but, “forever bow
Thou down.” But if thou art disposed to dis-
pute, O Jew, about the issue, from what hath
gone before learn also the present case.
Thou didst go down to Egypt; and two hun-
dred years passed, and God freed thee speed-
ily from that bondage, and that though thou
wert irreligious, and wentest a whoring with the
most baneful whoredom. Thou wast freed
from Egypt, and thou didst worship the calf,
thou didst sacrifice thy sons to Baalpeor, thou
didst defile the temple, thou didst go after every
sort of vice, thou didst grow not to know
nature itself. The mountains, the groves, the
hills, the springs, the rivers, the gardens didst
thou fill with accursed sacrifices, thou didst
slay the prophets, didst overthrow the altars,
didst exhibit every excess of wickedness and
irreligion. Still, after giving thee up for
seventy years to the Babylonians, He brought
thee back again to thy former freedom, and
gave thee back the temple, and thy country,
and thy old form of polity,? and there were
prophets again, and the gift of the Spirit. Or
rather, even in the season of thy captivity
thou wast not deserted, but even there were
Daniel, and Ezekiel, and in Egypt Jeremiah,
and in the desert Moses. After this thou
didst revert to thy former vice again, and wast
a reveller (éeBaxyeifye 2 Macc. xiv. 33), therein,
and didst change thy manner of life (xoA:reiav
to the Grecian in the time of Antiochus the
impious Dan. vill. 14; 1 Macc. iv. §4). But
even then for a three years and a little over
only were ye given up to Antiochus, and then
by the Maccabees ye raised those bright
trophies again. But now there is nothing of
the sort, for the reverse hath happened
throughout. And this is ground for the great-
est surprise, as the vices have ceased, and the
punishment hath been increased, and is with-
out any hope of achange. For it is not sev-
enty years only that have passed away, nor a
hundred, nor yet twice as many, but three
hundred, and a good deal over, and there is


ino finding even a shadow of a hope of the


’


2 Most Mss. ** prophecy,” which if right must be interpreted
“theocracy.”


488


THE. ‘WORKS! OF \ST:: CHRYSOS#GnE


[HomiLy XIX.


kind. And this though ye neither are idol-
aters, nor do the other audacious acts ye did
before. What then isthe cause? The reality
hath succeeded to the type, and grace hath
shut out the Law. And this the prophet fore-
telling from of old said, ‘‘ And ever bow Thou
down their back.” See the minuteness of
prophecy, how it foretells their unbelief, and
also points out their disputatiousness, and
shows the judgment which should follow, and
sets forth the endlessness of the punishment.
For as many of the duller sort, through unbe-
lief in what was to come to pass, wished to
see things to come by the light of things
present, from this point of time God gave
proof of His power on either part, by lifting
those of the Gentiles who believed above the
heaven, but bringing down such of the Jews
as believed not to the lowest estate of desola-
tion, and giving them up to evils not to be
ended. Having then urged them severely
both about their not believing, and about what
they had suffered and were yet to suffer, he
again allays what he had said by writing as
follows :

Ver. 11. ‘‘I say then, Have they stumbled,
that they should fall? God forbid.”

When he has shown that they were liable
to evils without number, then he devises an
allayment. And consider the judgment of
Paul. The accusation he had introduced
from the prophets, but the allayment he makes
come from himself. For that they had sinned
greatly, he would say, none will gainsay.
But let us see if the fall is of such kind as to
be incurable, and quite preclude their being
set up again. But of such kind it is not.*
You see how he is attacking them again, and


under the expectation of some allayment he
proves them guilty of confessed sins. But let
us see what even by way of allayment he does
devise for them. Now what is the allayment?
“When the fulness of the Gentiles,’ he
says, “shall have come in, then shall all Israel
be saved,” at the time of his second coming,
and the end of the world.
not say at once. But since he had made a
hard onset upon them, and linked accusations
to accusations, bringing prophets in after
prophets crying aloud against them, Isaiah,
Elijah, David, Moses, Hosea, not once or
twice, but several times; lest in this way he
should both by driving these into despair,
make a wall to bar their access to the faith,
and should further make such of the Gentiles
as believed unreasonably elated, and they also
by being puffed up should take harm in matter
of their faith, he further solaces them by say-
ing, “But rather through their fall salvation
is come unto the Gentiles.” But we must not
take what is here said literally, but get ac-
quainted with the spirit and object of the
speaker, and what he aimed to compass.
Which thing I ever entreat of your love. For
if with this in our minds we take up what is
here said, we shall not find a difficulty in any
part of it. For his present anxiety is to
remove from those of the Gentiles the
haughtiness which might spring in them from
what he had said. For in this way they too
were more likely to continue unshaken in the
faith, when they had learnt to be reasonable,
as also those of the Jews were, when quit of
despair, more likely to come with readiness to
grace. Having regard then to this object of
his, let us so listen to all that is said on this


* The following paraphrase of the apostle’s argument in
vv. 16-24 by which he would show that the Jews’ rejection is
but temporary may be serviceable in connection with the
exposition of Chrysostom : granting then that the Jews have
sadly stumbled, have they done so in order that (tva, accord-
ing to a providential intention) they may fall (completely
away from God and be lost to all hope)? No. Thereisa
providential purpose in this sad lapse. God has overruled it
for the salvation of the Gentiles. When the Jews rejected
Christianity, then the gospel turned from them and went to
the Gentiles, so that the rejection of the Jews facilitated the
conversion of the heathen. And the acceptance of the Gen-
tiles reacted again in favor of the Jews because it provoked
them to jealousy and so stimulated them to accept the bless-
ings which the Gentiles were receiving. Thus their fall has
a twofold beneficial effect, (@) on the Gentiles, (4) through
them on themselves. (vv. 11-12) Now, ifso much good can
come out of their fall, how much more out of their restoration!
If their fault, by which they come so far short of their ideal
mission, could be such an (indirect) blessing to the Gentiles,
how much greater a blessing will the repairing of that
defect prove? (vv. 13-16.) I say the return of the Jews will be
a great blessing to you, my Gentile Christian brethren, and I
urge this point with you. It is all to be to your advantage.
In hoping and laboring for the conversion of my own people,
lam still laboring in the line of my mission as apostle to the
Gentiles. If Ican save any of the Jews and stimulate their
jealousy so that they will be desirous of availing themselves
of the blessings of the gospel, I shall be doing the greatest
possible good to the Gentile world. Why? (15) Because if
their rejection is the ‘reconciliation of the world’’—the
means of securing salvation to the Gentiles, their reception
back again shall be a veritable ‘“‘ resurrection from the dead,”
—from it shall flow streams of spiritual life, compared with


which that indirect blessing which sprang from their rejec-
tion is as nothing (16). And such is the divine, final destina-
tion of the Jewish people. They are still hoiy unto the Lord,
a peculiar possession, and cannot be finally and utterly cast
away. (vv. 17-24) Hence you Gentiles have no ground of
glorying over the Jews, either in the fact that some of them
have been cut off or that you have been grafted in. Israel is
still the stock. At most you are but branches and that wild-
olive branches! If now you seize upon what was said (in vv.
11-12) and maintain that the Jews were rejected to make
place for you (19), I reply that there is another to the matter
(20). From the point of view of the divine providence this is.
true, but from the point of view of the Jews’ own action,
unbelief explains their rejection. You have nothing to do
with God’s providential purposes in the case. What you
have to do is to be obedient and faithful. If you draw an
assurance from the one view, I shall draw a warning from
the other and that too from the side with which you have
to do and for which you are responsible. ‘* Be not high-
minded. but fear.’’ God will deal with you on the same
principles upon which he has dealt with the Jews (21). These
dispensations reveal the two sides of God’s nature—his.
sevcrity toward disobedience and his goodness to all who
continue in relation to his goodness (22). Those portions of
the nation which have been cut off shall be grafted in again
unless they persist in unbelief (23). And if the branches
from awild-olive tree were grafted into the genuine olive
tree, contrary to their nature, how much more natural to-
suppose that the branches which originally belonged to the
true olive stock shall be returned and grafted again into that
stock to which they naturally belong (24). There is no good
ground for the opinion of Chrys. (rz) that the salvation of
Israel is to occur at the second coming and the end of the
world.—G. B. S.


Yet this he does ©


HomiLy XIX.]


passage. What does he say then? And
whence does he show that their fall was not
irremediable, nor their rejection final? He
argues from the Gentiles, saying as follows :
“Through their fall salvation is come unto
the Gentiles, for to provoke them to jealousy.”
This language is not his own only, but in
the Gospels too the parables mean this. For
He who made a marriage feast for His Son,
when the guests would not come, called those
in the highways. (Matt. xxii. 9.) And He
who planted the Vineyard, when the husband-
men ‘slew the Heir, let out His Vineyard to
others. (ib. xxi. 38, etc.) And without any
parable, He Himself said, “I am not sent but
unto the lost sheep of the House of Israel.”
(ib. xv. 24.) And to the Syrophcenician
woman, when she persevered, He said some-
what further besides. “It is not meet,” He
says, “‘to take the children’s bread, and cast
it to the dogs.” (ib. xv. 26.) And Paul to
those of the Jews that raised a sedition, “It
was necessary that the word of God should
first have been spoken unto you : but seeing ye
judge yourselves unworthy, lo, we turn unto
the Gentiles.” (Acts xiii. 46.) And through-
out it is clear that the natural course of things
was this, that they should be the first to come
in, and then those of the Gentiles; but since
they disbelieved, the order was reversed ; and
their unbelief and fall caused these to be
brought in first. Hence it is that he says,
“through their fall salvation is come to the
Gentiles, for to provoke them to jealousy.”
But if he mentions what the course of things
issued in, as if the chief design of Providence,
do not feel surprised. For he wishes to sol-
ace their down-stricken souls, and his mean-
ing is about this. Jesus came to them; they
did not receive Him, though He did countless
miracles, but crucified Him. Hence He drew
the Gentiles to Him, that the honor they had,
by cutting them to the heart for their insensi-
bility might at least out of a moroseness
against others persuade them to come over.
For they ought to have been first admitted,
and then we. And this was why he said,
“For it is the power of God unto salvation
unto every one that believeth; to the Jew
first, and also to the Gentile.” (Rom. i. 16.)
But as they had started off, we the last became
first. See then how great honors he gathers
for them even from this. One that he says,
we were then called, when they were not will-
ing; a second that he says, the reason of our
being called was not that we only might be
saved, but that they also, growing jealous at
our salvation, might become better. What
does he say then? that if it were not for the
Jews’ sake, we should not have been called


PMiE; EPISTLE TO. THE ROMANS. 489


and saved at all? We should not before them,
but in the regular order. Wherefore also
when He was speaking to the disciples, He
did not say barely, “Go to the lost sheep of
the House of Israel” (Matt. x. 6), but, “Go
rather to the sheep,” to show that to those
parts also they must come after these. And
Paul again saith not, “It was necessary that
the word of God should have been spoken
unto you,” but “should first have been spoken
unto you”’ (Acts xiii, 46), to show that in the
second place it must be to us also. And this
was both done and said, that they might not
be able, shameless though they were, to pre-
tend that they were overlooked, and that was
why they did not believe. This then was why
Christ, though he knew all things before, yet
came to them first.

Ver. 12. “ Now if the fall of them be the
riches of the world, and the diminishing of
them the riches of the Gentiles, how much
more their fulness ?”

Here he is speaking to gratify them. For
even if these had fallen a thousand times, the
Gentiles would not have been saved unless
they had shown faith. As the Jews likewise
would not have perished unless they had been
unbelieving and disputatious. But as I said,
he is solacing them now they are laid low, giv-
ing them so much the more ground to be con-
fident of their salvation if they altered. For
if when they stumbled, he says, so many en-
joyed salvation, and when they were cast out
so many were called, just consider what wil}
be the case when they return. But he does
not put it thus, When they return. Now he
does not say “ how much more their” return,
or their altering, or their well-doing, but
“how much more their fulness,” that is, when
they are all about coming in. And this he
said to show that then also grace and God’s gift
will do the larger part, or almost the whole.

Ver. 13, 14. “‘ For I speak to you Gentiles ;
inasmuch as I am the Apostle of the Gentiles,
I magnify mine office ; if by any means I may
provoke to emulation them which are my
flesh, and might save some of them.”

Again he endeavors much to get himself
clear of untoward suspicion. And he seems
to be blaming the Gentiles, and to be hum-
bling their conceits, yet he gives a gentle prov-
ocation to the Jew also. And indeed he
goes round about seeking to veil and allay
this great ruin of theirs. But he finds no
means of doing it, owing to the nature of the
facts. For from what he had _ said, they
|deserved but the greater condemnation, when
| those who were far short of them had taken
|the good things prepared for them. This is
iwhy then he passes from the Jews to those of


-


490


the Gentiles, and puts in between his dis-
course the part about them, as wishing to
show that he is saying all these things in
order to instruct them to be reasonable. For
I praise you, he means, for these two reasons ;
one, because I am necessitated to do so as
‘being your commissioned minister ; the other,
that through you I may save others. And he
does not say, my brethren, my kinsmen ; but,
““my flesh.” And next, when pointing out
their disputatious spirit, he does not say, “ if
by any means I may” persuade, but, “ pro-
voke to jealousy and save;” and here again
not all, but, ““some of them.” So hard were
they! And even amid his rebuke he shows
again the Gentiles honored, for they are
‘causes of their salvation, and not in the same
way. For they became purveyors of blessings
to them through unbelief, but these to the
Jews by faith. Hence the estate of the Gen-
tiles seems to be at once equal and superior.
For what wilt thou say, O Jew? that if we
had not been cast out, he would not have
been called so soon? This the man of the
Gentiles may say too, If I had not been
saved, thou wouldest not have been moved
to jealousy. But if thou wouldest know
wherein we have the advantage, I save
thee by believing, but it is by stumbling that
thou hast afforded us an access before thyself.
Then perceiving again that he had touched
them to the quick, resuming his former argu-
ment, he says,

Ver. 15. “For if the casting away of them
be the reconciling of the world, what shall the
receiving of them be but life from the dead ?”’

Yet this again condemns them, since, while
others gained by their sins, they did not profit
by other men’s well doings. But if he asserts
that to be their doing which necessarily hap-
pened, be not surprised: since (as I have said
several times) it is to humble these, and to
exhort the ether, that he throws his address
into this form. For as I said before, if the
Jews had been cast away a thousand times
over, and the Gentiles had not shown faith,
they would never have been saved. But he
stands by the feeble party, and gives assist-
ance to the distressed one. But see also
even in his favors to them, how he solaces
them in words only. ‘For if the casting
away of them be the reconciling of the
world,” (and what is this to the Jews ?) “ what
shall the receiving of them be but life from
the dead?” Yet even this was no boon to
them, unless they had been received. But
what he means is to this effect. If in anger
with them He gave other men so great gifts,
when He is reconciled to them what will He
not give? But as the resurrection of the


THE WORKS (OF ST. CHRYSOSTaa—


[HomILy XIX.


dead was not by the receiving of them, so
neither now is our salvation through them.
But they were cast out owing to their own
folly, but it is by faith that we are saved, and
by grace from above. But of all this nothing
can be of service to them, unless they show
the requisite faith. Yet doing as he is wont,
he goes on to another encomium, which is not
really one, but which only seems to be, so imi-
tating the wisest physicians, who give their
patients as much consolation as the nature of
the sickness allows them. And what is it
that he says ?

Ver. 16. “For if the first-fruits be holy, the
lump also is holy; and if the root be holy, so
are the branches ; ”’

So calling in this passage by the names of
the first-fruit and root Abraham, and Isaac,
and Jacob, the prophets, the patriarchs, all
who were of note in the Old Testament; and
the branches, those from them who believed.
Then since the fact met him that many had
disbelieved, observe how he undermines
(broréuverar, SEe P. 345) it again, and says,

Ver. 17. “‘ And if some of the branches be
broken off.”

And yet above thou didst say that the more
part perished, and a few were saved only.
How came it then that speaking of those that
perished, thou hast used a “some,” which is
indicative of fewness? It is not, he replies,
in opposition to myself, but out of a desire to
court and recover those that are distressed.
Observe how in the whole of the passage one
finds him working at this object, the wish to
solace them. And if you deny it, many con-
tradictions will follow. But let me beg you to
notice his wisdom, how while he seems to be
speaking for them, and devising a solace for
them, he aims a secret blow at them, and
shows that they are devoid of all excuse, even
from the “root,” from the “ first-fruit.” For
consider the badness of the branches, which,
when they have a sweet root, still do not
imitate it; and the faultiness of the lump,
when it is not altered even by the first-fruit.
“And if some of the branches were broken
off.” However, the greater part were broken
off. Yet, as I said, he wishes to comfort
them. And this is why it is not in his own
person, but in theirs, that he brings in the
words used, and even in this gives a secret
stroke at them, and shows them to have fallen
from being Abraham’s kinsmen. (Matt. iii. 9.)
For what he was desirous of saying was, that
they had nothing in common with them.
(John viii. 39.) For if the root be holy, and
these be not holy, then these are far away
from the root. Then under the appearance of
solacing the Jews, he again by his accusation


Homi1y XIX.]


THE, EPISTLE TO. THE, ROMANS,


491


smiteth them of the Gentiles. For after say-
ing, ‘And if some of the branches were
broken off,” he proceeds.

“ And thou being a wild olive wert grafted

am.”
For the less esteem the man of the Gentiles
is of, the more the Jew is vexed at seeing him
enjoy his goods. And to the other, the dis-
grace of the little esteem he was of, is noth-
ing to the honor of the change. And con-
sider his skilfulness. He does not say, “ thou
wert” planted “in,” but “thou wert grafted
in,” by this again cutting the Jew to the heart,
as showing that the Gentile man was stand-
ing in his own tree, and himself lying on the
ground. Wherefore he does not stop even
here, nor after he had spoken of grafting in
does he leave off (and yet in this he declared
the whole matter), but still he dwells over the
prosperous state of the Gentile, and enlarges
upon his fair fame in the words, “ And with
them partakest of the root and fatness of the
olive tree.” And he seems indeed to have
viewed him in the light of an addition. But
he shows that he was no whit the worse on that
account, but in possession of everything, that
the branch which had come up out of the root
had. Lest then on hearing the words, “ and
thou wert grafted in,” thou shouldest suppose
him to be lacking when compared with the
natural branch, see how he makes him equal
to it by saying, that ‘with them thou par-
takest of the root and fatness of the olive:”
that is, hast been put into the same noble
rank, the same nature. Then in rebuking
him, and saying,

Ver. 18. “ Boast not against the branches.”

He seems indeed to be comforting the Jew,
but points out his vileness and extreme dis-
honor. And this is why he says not, “boast
not,” but, “boast not against,” do not boast
against them so as to sunder them. For it is
into their place that ye have been set, and
their goods that ye enjoy. Do you observe
how he seems to be rebuking the one, while
he is sharp upon the other?

“But if thou boast,” he says, “thou bearest
not the root, but the root thee.”

Now what is this to the branches that are
cut off? Nothing. For, as I said before,
while seeming to devise a sort of weak
shadow of consolation, and in the very midst
of his aiming at the Gentile, he gives them a
mortal blow; for by saying, ‘boast not
against them,” and, “if thou boast, thou bear-
est not the root,” he has shown the Jew that


the things done deserved boasting of, even if |


it was not right to boast, thus at once rousing
him and provoking him to faith, and smiting
at him, in the attitude of an advocate, and


pointing out to him the punishment he was
undergoing, and that other men had posses-
sion of what were their goods.

Ver. 1g. “Thou wilt say then,” he goes on,
“The branches were broken off that I might
be grafted in.”

Again he establishes, by way of objection,
the opposite to the former position, to show
that what he said before, he had not said as
directly belonging to the subject, but to draw
them to him. For it was no longer by their
fall that salvation came to the Gentiles, nor
was it their fall that was the riches of the
world. Nor was it by this that we were
saved, because they had fallen, but the re-
verse. And he shows that the providence in
regard to the Gentiles was a main object,
even though he seems to put what he says
into another form. And the whole passage
is a tissue of objections, in which he clears
himself of the suspicion of hatred, and makes
his language such as will be acceptable.

Ver... 20... “ Well." he praises what toes
said, then he alarms them again by saying,
“Because of unbelief they were broken off,
and thou art grafted in? by faith.”

So here another encomium, and for the
other party an accusation. But he again lays
their pride low by proceeding to say, “be not
high-minded, but fear.” For the thing is not
matter of nature, but of belief and unbelief.
And he seems to be again bridling the Gen-
tile, but he is teaching the Jew that it is not
right to cling to a natural kinsmanship.
Hence he goes on with, “Be not high-
minded,” and he does not say, but be humble,
but, fear, For haughtiness genders a con-
tempt and listlessness. Then as he is going
into all the sorrows of their calamity, in order
to make the statement less offensive, he states
it in the way of a rebuke given to the other as
follows :

Ver. 21. “‘ For if God spared not the natu-
ral branches,’ and then he does not say,
neither will He spare thee,” but “take heed,
lest He also spare not thee.” So paring
(ixoreuvduevoc) away the distasteful from his
statement, representing the believer as in the
struggle, he at once draws the others to him,
and humbles these also.

Ver. 22. “ Behold therefore the goodness
and severity of God: on them which fell,
severity ; but toward thee, goodness, if thou
continue in His goodness: otherwise thou
also shalt be cut off.”

And he does not say, Behold thy well doing,
behold thy labors, but, ‘‘ Behold the goodness


1 So all Mss. but one, but we need not suppose a various
reading in the text, as there is no authority for it: rec. t.
standest.


492 THE WORKS OF


ST. CHRYSOSMORE [Homity XIX.


of God” toward man, to show that the whole
comes of grace from above, and to make us
tremble. For this reason for boasting should
make thee to fear: since the Lord (dearérnc)
hath been good unto thee, do thou therefore
fear. For the blessings do not abide by thee
unmovable if thou turnest listless, as neither
do the evils with them, if they alter; ‘ For
thou also,” he says, “unless thou continue in
the faith, wilt be cut off.”

Ver. 23. “And they also, if they abide not
in unbelief, shall be grafted in.”

For it was not God that cut them off,
but they have broken themselves off and
fallen, and he did well to say have’ broken
themselves off. For He hath never yet so
(Sav. conj. Ms. corr. ovroc) cast them off,
though they have sinned so much and so
often. You see what a great thing a man’s
free choice is, how great the efficacy of the
mind is. For none of these things is immu-
table, neither thy good nor his evil. You see
too how he raises up even him in his despond-
ency, and humbles the other in his confi-
dence; and do not thou be faint at hearing
of severity, nor thou be confident at hearing
of goodness. The reason why He cut thee’
off in severity was, that thou mightest long to
come back. The reason why He showed
goodness to thee was, that thou mightest con-
tinue in (he does not say the faith, but) His


goodness, that is, if thou do things worthy of |
For there is need of |


God’s love toward man.
something more than faith. You see how he
suffers, neither these to lie low, nor those to
be elated, but he also provokes them to
jealousy, by giving through them a power to
the Jew to be set again in this one’s place,
as he also had first taken the other’s ground.
And the Gentile he put in fear by the Jews,
and what had happened to them, lest they
should feel elated over it. But the Jew he
tries to encourage by what had been afforded
to the Greek. For thou also, he says, wilt be
cut off if thou growest listless, (for the Jew
was cut off), and he will be grafted in if he
be earnest, for thou also wast grafted in.
But it is very judicious in him to direct all he
says to the Gentile, as he is always in the
habit of doing, correcting the feeble by re-
buking the stronger. This he does in the end
of this Epistle too, when he is speaking of the
observance of meats. Then, he grounds this
on what had already happened, not upon what
was to come only. And this was more likely
to persuade his hearer. And as he means to


1 efexAag@noav. In earlier Greek this use of the passive .be-
longs to the second aorist, but in later times it extends to the
first.


2 Most Mss. ‘cut thee not off,’’ which is perhaps the better |


reading. See on the last verse.


enter on consecutiveness of reasonings, such
as could not be spoken against, he first uses
a demonstration drawn from the power of
God. For if they were cut off, and cast aside,
and others took precedence of them in what
was theirs, still even now despair not..

“For God is able,” he says, “to graft them
in again,” since He doeth things beyond ex-
pectation. But if thou wishest for things to
be in order, and reasons to be consecutive,
you have from yourselves a demonstration
which more than meets your wants.

Ver. 24. “For if thou wert cut out of the
olive tree, which is wild by nature, and were
grafted contrary to nature into a good olive
tree, how much more shall these, which be
the natural branches, be grafted® into their
own olive tree.”

If then faith was able to do what was con-
trary to nature, much more will it that which
is according to nature. For if this person,
who was cut off from those by nature his
fathers,* came contrary to nature unto Abra-
ham, much more wilt thou be able to recover
thine own. For the Gentile’s evil lot is ac-
cording to nature (he being by nature a wild
olive), and the good contrary to nature (it
being contrary to nature for him to be grafted
into Abraham), but thy lot on the contrary is
the good by nature. For it is not upon
another root, as the Gentile, but on thine own
that thou art to be fixed if thou art minded to
come back. What then dost thou deserve,
when after the Gentile had been able to do
what was contrary to nature, thou art not able
to do that which is according to nature, but
hast given up even this? Then as he had
said “contrary to nature,” and, ‘“‘ wert grafted
in,” that you may not suppose the Jew to have
the advantage, he again corrects this by say-
ing that he also is grafted in. “ How much
more shall these,” says he, “which be the
natural branches be grafted into their own
olive-tree?”” And again, “God is able to
graft them in.” And before this he says, that
if they “ abide not still in unbelief, they shall
be also grafted in.” And when you hear that
he keeps speaking of “according to nature,”
and “contrary to nature,” do not suppose that
he means the nature that is unchangeable, but
he tells us in these words of the probable and
the consecutive, and on the other hand of the
improbable. For the good things and the
bad are not such as® are by nature, but by


3 There is no authority for the reading of the old edd.,
‘these, if according to nature they be grafted.”

4 Ms. ‘‘ from these that were his by nature by others.”

5 Ben. and several Mss. dvoixa for dvcet. Savile’s reading
would be a general position which is not so much to the pur-
| pose, such as that of St. Augustin, z#dlam esse naturam male.
| This reading however will also bear that meaning.


Homity XIX.]


temper and determination alone. And con-
sider also how inoffensive he is. For after
saying that thou also wilt be cut off, if thou
dost not abide in the faith, and these will be
grafted in, if they ‘“ abide not still in unbelief,”
he leaves that of harsh aspect, and insists on
that of kindlier sound, and in it he ends,
putting great hopes before the Jews if they
were minded not to abide so. Wherefore he
goes on to say,

Ver. 25. “For I would not, brethren, that
ye should be ignorant of this mystery, lest ye
should be wise in your own conceits.”

Meaning by mystery here, that which is
unknown and unutterable, and hath much of
wonder and much of what one should not
expect about it. As in another passage too
he says, “ Behold, I tell you a mystery. We
shall not all sleep, but we shall all be
eaaneed:” (a iCor.) xv.51.) What then is
the mystery?

“That blindness in part hath happened
unto Israel.’’ Here again he levels a blow at
the Jew, while seeming to take down the Gen-
tile. But his meaning is nearly this, and he
had said it before, that the unbelief is not uni-
versal, but only “in part.” As when he says,
“But if any hath caused grief, he hath not
grieved me, but in part” (2 Cor. ii. 5): And,
so here too he says what he had said above,
““God hath not cast off His people whom He
foreknew” (Rom. xi. 2): and again, ‘‘ What
then? Have they stumbled that they should
fall? God forbid” (ib. 11): This then he
says here also; that it is not the whole people
that is pulled up, but many have already be-
lieved, and more are likely to believe. Then
as he had promised a great thing, he adduces
the prophet in evidence, speaking as follows.
Now it is not for the fact of a blindness
having happened that he quotes the passage
(for every one could see that), but that they
shall believe and be saved, he brings Isaiah to
witness, who crieth aloud and saith,

Ver. 26. ‘“‘ There shall come out of Sion the
Deliverer, and shall turn away ungodliness
from Jacob.” (Is. lix. 20.)

Then to give the mark that fixes its sense
to salvation, to prevent any one from drawing
it aside and attaching it to times gone by, he
says,

Ver. 27. “For this is my covenant unto
them,’ when I shall take away their sins.”

Not when they are circumcised, not when
they sacrifice, not when they do the other
deeds of the Law, but when they attain to the
forgiveness of sins. If then this hath been


1 So LXX. except in whe, etc., which the sequel implies.
Sas esos Gesqere


THE EPISTLE. TO (DHE: ROMANS:


493


promised, but has never yet happened in their
case, nor have they ever enjoyed the remission
of sins by baptism, certainly it will come to
pass. Hence he proceeds,

Ver. 29. “ For the gifts and calling of God
are without repentance.”

And even this is not all he says to solace
them, for he uses what had already come
about. And what came in of consequence,
that he states as chiefly intended, putting it in
these words,

Ver. 28. ‘As concerning the Gospel, they
are enemies for your sakes: but as touching
the election, they are beloved for the fathers’
sakes.”

That the Gentile then might not be puffed
up, and say, ““I am standing, do not tell me
of what would have been, but what has been,”
he uses this consideration to bring him down,
and says, “As concerning the Gospel, they
are enemies for your sakes.” For when you
were called they became more captious.
Nevertheless God hath not even now cut short
the calling of you, but He waiteth for all the
Gentiles that are to believe to come in, and
then they also shall come. Then he does
them another kind favor, by saying, ‘‘ As
touching election, they are beloved for the
fathers sakes.” And what is this? for where-
in they are enemies, punishment is theirs: but
wherein they are beloved, the virtue of their
ancestors has no influence on them, if they do
not believe. Nevertheless, as I said, he
ceaseth not to solace them with words, that he
may bring them over. Wherefore by way
of fresh proof for his former assertion, he
says,

Ver. 30-32. “ For as ye in times past have
not believed God, yet have now obtained
mercy through their unbelief; even so have
these also now not believed, that through your
mercy they may also obtain mercy. For God
hath concluded them all in unbelief, that He
might have mercy upon all.”

He shows here that those of the Gentiles
were called first. Then, as they would not come,
the Jews were elected, and the same result oc-
curred again. For when the Jews would not
believe, again the Gentiles were brought over.
And he does not stop here, nor does he draw
the whole to a conclusion at their rejection,
but at their having mercy shown them again.
See how much he gives to those of the Gen-
tiles, as much as he did to the Jews before.
For when ye, he would say, ‘in times past
did not obey,” being of the Gentiles, then the
Jews came in. Again, when these did not
obey, ye have come. However, they will not
perish forever. ‘‘ For God hath concluded
them all in unbelief,” that is, hath convinced


494


them, hath shown them disobedient; not that
they may remain in disobedience, but that He
may save the one by the captiousness of the
other, these by those and those by these.
Now consider; ye were disobedient, and they
were saved. Again, they have been disobe-
dient, and ye have been saved. Yet ye have
not been so saved as to be put away again, as
the Jews were, but so as to draw them over
through jealousy while ye abide.

Ver. 33. “Oh, the depth of the riches, both
of the wisdom and knowledge of God! How
unsearchable are His judgments!”

Here after going back to former times, and
looking back to God’s original dispensation of
things whereby the world hath existed up to
the present time, and having considered what
special provision He had made for all occur-
rences, he is stricken with awe, and cries
aloud, so making his hearers feel confident
that certainly that will come to pass which he
saith. For he would not have cried aloud and
been awe-struck, unless this was quite sure to
come to pass. That it is a depth then, he
knows: but how great, he knows not. For
the language is that of a person wondering,
not of one that knew the whole. But admiring
and being awe-struck at the goodliness, so far
forth as in him lay, he heralds it forth by two
intensitive words, riches and depth, and then is
awestruck at His having had both the will and
the power to do all this, and by opposites
effecting opposites. ‘“ How unsearchable are
His judgments.” For they are- not only im-
possible to be comprehended, but even to be
searched. ‘And His ways past finding out; ”
that is, His dispensations for these also are not
only impossible to be known, but even to be
sought into. For even I, he means, have not
found out the whole, but a little part, not all.
For He alone knoweth His own clearly.
Wherefore he proceeds :

Ver. 34, 35. “ For who hath known the
mind of the Lord? or who hath been His
counsellor? Or whohath first given to Him,
and it shall be recompensed unto him
again?”

What he means is nearly this: that though
He is so wise, yet He has not His Wisdom
from any other, but is Himself the Fountain
of good things. And though He hath done
so. ‘ereat ithings, and made, gusiiso- Wereat
presents, yet it was not by borrowing from
any other that He gave them, but by making
them spring forth from Himself; nor as
owing any a return for having received from
him, but as always being Himself the first to
do the benefits; for this is achief mark of
riches, to overflow abundantly, and yet need
no aid. Wherefore he proceeds to say, “ For


THE WORKS QF (ST. CAHRYSOStaie:


[Hominy XIX.


of Him, and through Him, and to Him,
are all things.” Himself devised, Himself
created, Himself worketh together (Vulg.
OVvyKparel, Mss. ovykporei). For He is rich, and
needeth not to receive from another. And
wise, and needeth no counsellor. Why speak
Iofacounsellor? Toknow the things of Him
is no one able, save Himself alone, the
Rich and Wise One. For it is proof of much
riches that He should make them of the
Gentiles thus well supplied; and of much
wisdom that He should constitute the infe-
riors of the Jews their teachers. Then as
he was awe-struck he offers up thanksgiving
also in the word, ‘‘ To Whom be glory forever.
Amen.

For when he tells of any great and unutter-
able thing of this kind, he ends in wonder
with a doxology. And this he does in regard
to the Son also. For in that passage also he
went on to the very same thing that he does.
here. ‘‘Of whom is Christ according to the
flesh, Who is over all God blessed forever.
Amen. (Rom. ix. 5.)

Him then let us also imitate, and let us
glorify God in all things, by a heedful way
of life, and let us not feel confidence in the
virtues of our ancestry, knowing the example
that has been made of the Jews. For this
is not, certainly it is not, the relationship
of Christians, for theirs is the kinsmanship of
the Spirit. So the Scythian becometh Abra-
ham’s son : and his son on the cther hand more
of an alien to him than the Scythian. Letus
not then feel confidence in the well-doings of
our fathers (most Mss. “of others’), but if
you have a parent who is a marvel even,
fancy not that this will be enough to save
you, or to get you honor and glory, unless
you have the relationship of character to
him. So too if you have a bad one, do
not think that you will be condemned on this
account, or be put to shame if at least you
order your own doings aright. For what can
be less honorable than the Gentiles? still in
faith they soon became related to the Saints.
Or what more nearly connected than the Jews?
Yet still by unbelief they were made aliens.
For. that relationship is of nature and
necessity, after which we are all relations.
For of Adam we all sprung, and none can
be more a relation than another, both as
regards Adam and as regards Noah, and as
regards the earth, the common mother of
all. But the relationship worthy of honors,
is that which does distinguish us from the
wicked. For it is not possible for all to be
relations in this way, but those of the same
character only. Nor do wecall them brothers
who come of the same labor with ourselves, but


=


ey


¥


HomiLy XIX.]


ERE -EBISTLE "FO | DHEY ROMANS.


495


those who display the same zeal. In this
way Christ giveth men the name of children
of God, and so on the other hand children of
the devil, and so too children of disobedience,
of hell, and of perdition likewise. So
Timothy was Paul’s son from goodness and
was called “mine own son”? (1 Tim. i. 2):
but of his sister’s son we do not know even
the name. And yet the one was by nature
related to him, and still that availed him not.
But the other being both by nature and
country far removed from him (as being
a native of Lystra), still became most nearly
related. Let us then also become the sons
of the Saints, or rather let us become even
God’s sons. For that it is possible to become
sons of God, hear what he says, “Be ye
therefore perfect, as your father which is in
Heaven.” (Matt. v. 48.) This is why. we
call Him Father in prayer, and that not only
to remind ourselves of the grace, but also
of virtue, that we may not do aught unworthy
of such a relationship. And how it may
be said is it possible to be ason of God?
by being free from all passions, and showing
gentleness to them that affront and wrong
us. For thy Father is so to them that blas-
pheme Him. Wherefore, though He says
various things at various times, yet in no case
does He say that ye may be like your Father,
but when He says, “Pray for them that
despitefully use you, do good to them that
hate you” (ib. v. 44), then He brings in
this as the reward. For there is nothing that
brings us so near to God, and makes us so
like Him, as this well-doing. Therefore Paul
also, when he says, “ Be ve followers of God ”
(Eph. v. 1), means them to be so in this
respect. For we have need of all good deeds,
chiefly however of love to man and gentleness,
since we need so much of His love to man
ourselves. For we commit many transgres-
sions every day. Wherefore also we have
need to show much mercy. But much and
little is not measured by the quantity of things
given, but by the amount of the givers’ means.
Let not then the rich be high-minded, nor
the poor dejected as giving so little, for the
latter often gives more than the former.
We must not then make ourselves miserable
because we are poor, since it makes alms-
giving the easier for us. For he that has
got much together is seized with haughtiness,
as well as a greater affection to that (or “lust


1 Field reads, So also Timothy was called Paul’s son from
goodness.


beyond that”) he has. But he that hath but
a little is quit of either of these domineering
passions: hence he finds more occasions
for doing well. For this man will go cheer-
fully into a prison-house, and will visit the
sick, and will give a cup of cold water. But
the other will not take upon him any office
of this sort, as pampered up (oAeyuaivor,
by his riches. Be not then out of heart
at thy poverty. For thy poverty makes
thy traffic for heaven the easier to
thee. And if thou have nothing, but have
a compassionating soul, even this will be
laidup as a reward for thee. Hence too Paul
bade us ‘weep with them that weep” (Rom,
Xli. 15), and exhorted us to be to prisoners
as though bound with them. (Heb. xiii. 3.).
For it is not to them that weep only that
it yieldeth some solace that there be many
that compassionate them, but to them who
are in other afflicting circumstances. For
there are cases where conversation has as.
much power to recover him that is cast down
as money. For this then God exhorts us
to give money to them that ask, not merely
with a view to relieve their poverty, but that He
may teach us to compassionate the misfortunes
of our neighbors. For this also the covetous
man is odious, in that he not only disregards
men in a beggared state, but because he
gets himself trained (a%eigerac) for cruelty and
great inhumanity. And so he that, for their
sakes, thinks little of money, is even on this
account an object of love, that he is merciful
and kind to man. And Christ, when He
blesseth the merciful, blesseth and praiseth
not those only that give the alms of money,
but those also who have the will to do so.
Let us then be so inclinable to mercy, and
all other blessings will follow, for he that hath
a spirit of love and mercy, if he have money,
will give it away, or if he see any in distress,
will weep and bewail it; if he fall in with a
person wronged, will stand up for him; if
he sees one spitefully entreated, will reach
out his hand to him. For as he has that
treasure-house of blessings, a loving and
merciful soul, he will make it a fountain for
all his brethren’s needs, and will enjoy all
the rewards that are laid up with God (Field
with 4 Mss. 796). That we then may
attain to these, let us of all things frame our
souls accordingly. For so, while in this
world, we shall do good deeds without num-
ber, and shall enjoy the crowns to come.
To which may we all attain by the grace and
love toward man, etc.


496


THE WORKS; OF ' ST. (CHRYSOS#em


[HomiLty XX.


HOMELY:. XX:


ROM. XII. 1


“T beseech you therefore, brethren, by the mercies of | throws them aside.


God, that ye present your bodies a living sacrifice,
holy, acceptable unto God, which is your reason-
able service.”


AFTER discoursing at large upon the love of
God toward man, and pointing out His un-
speakable concern for us, and unutterable
goodness, which cannot even be searched into,
he next puts it forward with a view of persuad-
ing those who have received the benefit to
exhibit a conversation worthy of the gift.
And though he is so great and good a person,
yet he does not decline beseeching them, and
that not for any enjoyment he was likely to
get himself, but for that they would have to
gain. And why wonder that he does not de-
cline beseeching, where he is even putting
God’s mercies before them? For since, he
means, it is from this you have those number-
less blessings, from the mercies of God, rever-
ence them, be moved to compassion by them.
For they themselves take the attitude of sup-


pliants, that you would show no conduct un- |


worthy of them. I entreat you then, he
means, by the very things through which ye
were saved. As if any one who wished to
make a person, who had had great kindnesses
done him, show regard, was to bring him the
benefactor himself as a suppliant. And what
dost thou beseech? let me hear. ‘“ That ye
would present your bodies a living sacrifice,
holy, acceptable unto God, which is your rea-
sonable service.” For when he had said sac-
rifice, to prevent any from thinking he bade
them kill themselves, he forthwith added
(Greek order) “living.” Then to distinguish
it from the Jewish, he calls it “ holy, accept-
able to God, your reasonable? service.” For
theirs was a material one, and not very accept-
able either.* Since He saith, ‘Who hath
required this at your hands?” (Isa. i. 12.)
And in sundry other passages He clearly


1 Reasonable is here used for what has been termed super-
sensuous, as 1n the Syriac, and later Latin, see p. 408.

* Evidently Chrys. understands by AoyeRny here rational
as opposed to material service such as the Jews offered in
animal sacrifices. Others have understood of it of spiritual
service as opposed to the superstitious service of the heathen
(Calvin). Others find in it a contrast with the irrational
animals (gaa adoya.) offered in sacrifice (Theodoret, Grotius).
The first view is preferable. Christianus omnia recte
reputat, et ex beneficio Det miserentis colligit offictum suum,
says Bengel.—G. B. S.


For it was not this, but
this with the other, that He looked to have
presented. Wherefore he saith, “The sacri-
fice of praise shall glorify Me.” And again,
“JT will praise the name of my God with a
song, and this shall please him better than a
bullock that putteth forth horns and hoofs.”’
(Ps:): 1, 234 xix. gap) Ao
another place He rejects it, and says, “ Shall
I eat the flesh of bulls, or drink goat’s blood?”
(ib. 13) and proceeds with, “ Offer unto
God a sacrifice of praise, and pay thy vows
unto the Most High.” (Gb. 14.) So Paul
also here bids us “ present our bodies a living
sacrifice.” And how is the body, it may be
said, to become a sacrifice? Let the eye look
upon no evil thing, and it hath become a sac-
rifice; let thy tongue speak nothing filthy,
and it hath become an offering; let thine
hand do no lawless deed, and it hath become
a whole burnt offering. Or rather this is not
enough, but we must have good works also:
let the hand do alms, the mouth bless them
that cross one, and the hearing find leisure
evermore for lections of Scripture.? For sac-
rifice allows of no unclean thing: sacrifice is a
first-fruit of the other actions. Let us then from
our hands, and feet, and mouth, and all other
members, yield a first-fruit unto God. Sucha
sacrifice is well pleasing, as that of the Jews
was even unclean, for, “their sacrifices,” it
says, ‘are unto them as the bread of mourn-
ing.” (Hos. ix. 4.) ‘Not ‘so oufs. “Bhat pre
sented the thing sacrificed dead: this maketh
the thing sacrificed to be living. For when
we have mortified our members, then we shall
be able to live. For the law of this sacrifice
is new, and so the sort of fire is a marvellous
one. For it needeth no wood or matter under
it; but our fire liveths of itself, and doth not
burn up the victim, but rather quickeneth it.
This was the sacrifice that God sought of old.
Wherefore the Prophet saith, “ The sacrifice
of God is a broken spirit.” (Ps. li. 17.) And
the three Children offer this when they say,


2 Gelats \akpoagecty. “ divine
hearings.’”’ The place where those stood who were not yet
admitted to Communion, but heard the Scriptures read, was
called the axpoacts or hearing; here the act of hearing is
meant.

3 2 or 3 Mss.


See Suicer in axpodaomat. lit.


*‘boileth ’’ which Heyse prefers.


497


Homity XX.] LHE /EPISTLE: TOv. THE ROMANS.
“At this time there is neither prince, or|come to us from above, fire from above, and


prophet, or leader, or burnt offering, or place
to sacrifice before Thee, and to find mercy.
Nevertheless, in a contrite heart and an
humble spirit let us be accepted.” (Song of
3 Ch. 15, 16.) And observe how great the
exactness wherewith he useth each word. For
he does not say, offer (woujoare Ex. xxix. 39.
LXX.) your bodies as a sacrifice, but “ pre-
sent” (xapaoricate see below) them, as if he
had said, never more have any interest in
them. Ye have given them up to another.
For even they that furnish (same word) the
war-horses have no_ further interest
in them. And thou too hast _ presented
thy members for the war against the devil,
and for that dread battle-array. Do not
let them down to selfish appliances. And he
shows another thing also from this, that one
must make them approved, if one means to
present them. For it is not to any mortal
being that we present them, but to God, the
King of the universe; not to war only, but to
have seated thereon the King Himself. For
He doth not refuse even to be seated upon
our members, but even greatly desireth it.
And what no king who is but our fellow-
servant would choose to do, that the Lord of
Angels chooseth. Since then it is both to be


presented (i. e. as for a King’s use) and is a
sacrifice, rid it of every spot, since if it have a
spot, it will no longer be a sacrifice. For
neither can the eye that looks lecherously be
sacrificed, nor the hand be presented that is
grasping and rapacious, nor the feet that go
lame and go to play-houses, nor the belly that
is the slave of self-indulgence, and kindleth
lusts after pleasures, nor the heart that hath
rage in it, and harlots’ love, nor the tongue
that uttereth filthy things. Hence we must
spy out the spots on our body upon every side.
For if they that offered the sacrifices of old
were bid to look on every side, and were not
permitted to offer an animal “ that hath any-
thing superfluous or lacking, or is scurvy, or
scabbed ” (Lev. xxii. 22, 23), much more must
we, who offer not senseless animals, but our-
selves, exhibit more strictness, and be pure in
all respects, that we also may be able to say as
did Paul, “I am now ready to be offered, and
the time of my departure is at hand.” (2 Tim.
iv. 6.) For he was purer than any sacrifice,
and so he. speaks of himself as “ ready to be
offered.” But this will be brought about if
we kill the old man, if we mortify our mem-
bers that are upon the earth, if we crucify the
world unto ourselves. In this way we shall
not need the knife any more, nor altar, nor |
fire, or rather we shall want all these, but not |
made with the hands, but all of them will)
32


knife also, and our altar will the breadth
of Heaven be. For if when Elijah offered the
visible sacrifice, a flame, that came down from
above consumed the whole water, wood, and
stones, much more will this be done upon
thee. And if thou hast aught in thee relaxed
and secular, and yet offerest the sacrifice with
a good intention, the fire of the Spirit will
come down, and both wear away that world-
liness, and perfect (so Field: Mss. “ carry up’’)
the whole sacrifice. But what is “ reasonable
(Aoyixy) service?” It means spiritual ministry,
conversation according to Christ. As then he
that ministereth in the house of God, and
officiateth, of whatever sort he may be, then
collects himself (cvsréAjerax Ezech. xliv. 19),
and becomes more dignified; so we ought to
be minded all our whole life as serving and
ministering. And this will be so, if every day
you bring Him sacrifices (3 Mss. “ thyself as a
sacrifice’’), and become the priest of thine own
body, and of the virtue of thy soul; as, for ex-
ample, when you offer soberness, when alms-
giving, when goodness and forbearance. For
in doing this thou offerest ‘‘a reasonable
service ” (or worship, Aarpeiav), that is, one with-
out aught that is bodily, gross, visible. Hav-
ing then raised the hearer by the names be-
stowed, and having shown that each man is a
priest of his own flesh by his conversation, he
mentions also the way whereby we may com-
pass all this. What then is the way?

Ver. 2. “And be not fashioned? after
this world; but be ye transformed by the re-
newing of your mind.”

For the fashion of this world is grovelling
and worthless, and but for a time, neither hath
ought of loftiness, or lastingness, or straight-
forwardness, but is wholly perverted. If then
thou wouldest walk upright (or aright épéa),
figure not thyself after the fashion of this life
present. For in it there is nought abiding or
stable. And this is why he calls it a fashion
(cyjua); and so in another passage, “ the fash-
ion of this world passeth away.” (1 Cor. vii.
31.) For it hath no durability or fixedness,
but all in it is but for a season; and so he
calls it this age (or world, Gr. aidv), hereby to
indicate its liableness to misfortune, and by
the word fashion its unsubstantialness. For
speak of riches, or of glory, or beauty of per-
son, or of luxury, or of whatever other of its
seemingly great things you will, it is a fashion
only, not reality, a show and a mask, not any


1 geuvdtepos, which implies reverence as well as dignity.
The word before probably refers also todress. See Ex. xxvili.
43. but in this case the outward act so truly represents the in-
ward, that it is difficult to separate them.

2 A. V. conformed to. The translation is altered to express
the distinction noticed in the comment.


498
abiding substance (izdcracic), But “be not
thou fashioned after this, but be transformed,”
he says, “by the renewing of your mind.”
He says not change the fashion, but “be
transformed ” (werauopeov), to show that the
world’s ways are a fashion, but virtue’s not a
fashion, but a kind of real form, with a nat-
ural beauty of its own, lacking not the trick-
eries and fashions of outward things, which no
sooner appear than they go to nought. For
all these things, even before they come to
light, are dissolving. If then thou throwest
the fashion aside, thou wilt speedily come to
the form.* For nothing is more strengthless
than vice, nothing so easily wears old. Then
since it is likely that being men they would
sin every day, he consoles ‘his hearer by say-
ing, “ renew ‘thyself * from day to day. This
is what we do with houses, we keep constantly
repairing them as they wear old, and so do
thou unto thyself. Hast thou sinned to-day?


hast thou made thy soul old? despair not, de- |
spond not, but renew it by repentance, and |


tears (Hilary on Ps. cxix.), and confession,


and by doing of good things. And _ never
fail of doing ‘this. And how are we to do
this ?


“That ye may prove (things more expedient
(dvagépovra), and know 2) what is that good, and
acceptable, and perfect will of God.”

Either he means by this, be renewed, that ye
may learn what is more expedient for you, and
what the will of God. Or rather, that ye can
get so renewed if ye learn the things expedi-
ent, and what God may will. For if thou see
this, and know how to distinguish the nature
of things, thou art in possession of the whole
way of virtue. And who, it may be said, is
ignorant of what is expedient, and what is the
will of God? ‘They that are flurried with the
things of this world, they that deem riches an
enviable thing, they that make light of pov-
erty, they that follow after power, they that
are gaping after outward glory, they that think
themselves great men when they raise fine
houses, and buy costly sepulchres, and keep
herds of slaves, and carry a great swarm of
eunuchs about with them; these know not
what is expedient for them, or what the will of
God is. For both of these are but one thing.
For God willeth what things are expedient for


1 wopdyn. See Phil. ii. 6, 7, 8, and St. Chrysostom on the pas-
sage, Hom. vi. pp. 363, sqq. O.

* The two words, here rendered: ‘be fashioned” and ‘‘be
transformed ’”’ differ as the terms (oxnpa and sop) which un-
derlie them differ. ‘‘ The term “opdy, form, strictly denotes,
not an external pose suitable for imitation, like oxjma, attitude.
but an organic form, the natural product of a principle of
life which manifests itself thus.” Godet. ‘‘Be not con-
formed, but be transformed ”’ (A. V.) marks well the dis-
tinction.—G. B. S.

2 See the note of Matthize on the place. Nearly all Mss. have
and know; it seems a slip of memory; see Rom. ii. 18.


THE WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[HomILy XX.


us, and what God willeth, that is also expedi-
ent for us. What then are the things which
God willeth? to live in poverty, in lowliness
of mind, in contempt of glory; in continency,
not in self-indulgence; in tribulation, not in
ease; in sorrow, not in dissipation and laugh-
ter; in all the other points whereon He hath
given us laws. But the generality do even
think these things of ill omen; so far are
they from thinking them expedient, and the
will of God. This then is why they never
can come near even to the labors for virtue’s
sake. For they that do not know so much
even as what virtue may be, but reverence
vice in its place, and take unto their bed the
harlot instead of the modest wife, how are
they to be able to stand aloof from the present
world? Wherefore we ought above all to
have a correct estimate of things, and even if
we do not follow after virtue, to praise virtue,
and even if we do not avoid vice, to stigmatize
vice, that so far we may have our judgments un-
corrupted. For so as we advance on our road,
we shall be able to lay hold on the realities.
This then is why he also bids you be renewed,
“that ye may prove what is the will of God.”
But here he seems to me to be attacking the
Jews too, who cling to the Law. For the old
dispensation was a will of God, yet not the
ultimate purpose, but allowed owing to their
feebleness. But that which is a perfect one,
and well-pleasing, is the new conversation.
So too when he called it “‘a reasonable ser-
vice,” it was to set it in contrast with that
other (v. note p. 496) that he gave it such a
name. :

Ver. 3. “For I say, through the grace
given unto me, to every man that is among
you, not to think of himself more highly
than he ought to think, but to think soberly,
according as God hath dealt to every man the
measure of faith.”

After saying above, “ I beseech you by the
mercies,’ here he says again, “ by the grace.”
Observe the teacher’s lowliness of mind,
observe a spirit quite subdued! He means
to say that he is in no respect worthy to be
trusted in such an exhortation and counsel.
But at one time he takes the mercies of God
along with him, at another His grace. It is
not my word, he would say, that I am speak-
ing, but one from God. And he does not say,
For I say unto you by the wisdom of God, or,
for I say unto you by the Law given of
God, but, “by the grace,”’ so reminding them
continually of the benefits done them, so as


3 oiwvigovrar, v. Jung. ad J. Poll. v. 163. Dem. adv. Aristog.
1. (794, 5), it means to make a sign of detestation on meeting
anything counted unlucky.


HoMILy XX.]


to make them more submissive, and to show
that even on this account, they were under an
obligation to obey what is here said, “To
every man that is among you.” Not to this
person and to that merely, but to the governor
and to the governed, to the slave and to the
free, to the unlearned and to the wise, to the
woman and to the man, to the young and to
the old. For the Law is common to all as
being the Lord’s. And by this he likewise
makes his language inoffensive, setting the
lessons he gives to all, even to such as do not
come under them, that those who do come
under them may with more willingness accept
such a reproof and correction. And what
dost thou say? Let me hear. “ Not to think
more highly than he ought to think.” Here
he is bringing before us the mother of good
deeds, which is lowliness of mind, in imita-
tion of his own Master. For as He, when
He went up into the mountain, and was
going to give a tissue of moral precepts,
took this for his first beginning, and made
this the foundation, in the words, “ Blessed
mom tae peer in ‘Sspirit” (Matt: v. 3); ‘so
Paul too, as he has now passed from the
doctrinal parts to those of a more practical
kind, has taught us virtue in general terms,
by requiring of us the admirable sacrifice ;
and being on the point of giving a more
particular portrait of it, he begins from low-
liness of mind as from the head, and tells us,
“not to think more highly of one’s self than
one ought to think,” (for this is His will),
(many Mss. om. for etc.), “but to think
soberly.” But what he means is about this.
We have received wisdom not that we should
use it to make us haughty, but to make
us sober-minded. And he does not say in
order to be lowly in mind, but in order to
sobriety, meaning by sobriety (cwopocivy) here
not that virtue which contrasts with lewdness,
nor the being free from intemperance, but
being sober and healthful in mind. And the
Greek name of it means keeping the mind
safe.* To show then that he who is not thus
modest (werpidfovra), cannot be sober either,
that is, cannot be staid and _ healthful minded
(because such an one is bewildered, and out
of his wits, and is more crazed than any mad-
man), he calls lowliness of mind, soberness of
mind.

“According as God hath dealt to every
man the measure of faith.” For since having
gifts given them had made many unreasonably
elated, both with these and with the Corin-
thians, see how he lays open the cause of the
disease, and gradually removes it. For after
saying that we should think soberly, he pro-


1 gwcgoucay THv dpovynowy, Aristot. Erk. vi.


THECEPISI LE, TO THE ROMANS:


|


499


ceeds, “according as God hath dealt to every
man the measure of faith,” meaning here the
gift by faith: and by using the word “ dealt,”
he soJaces him who had the less, and humbles
him who had the greater share. For if God
dealt it, and it is no achievement of thine,
why think highly of thyself? But if any one
says that faith here does not mean the gift,
this would only the more show that he was
humbling the vain boasters. For if that
which is the cause of the gift (so Field with
most Mss.: Vulg. “If the faith by which
miracles are wrought is the cause of the
gift”), that faith by which miracles are
wrought, be itself from God, on what ground
dost thou think highly of thyself? If He had
not come, or been incarnate, then the things
of faith would not have fared well either.
And it is from hence that all the good things
take their rise. But if it is He that giveth it,
He knoweth how He dealeth it. For He
made all, and taketh like care of all. And as
His giving came of His love towards man, so
doth the quantity which He giveth. For was
He Who had shown His goodness in regard
to the main point, which is the giving of the
gift, likely to neglect thee in regard to the
measure? For had He wished to do thee dis-
honor, then He had not given them at all.
But if to save thee and to honor thee was
what He had in view (and for this He came
and distributed such great blessings), why art
thou confounded and disturbed, and abusest
thy wisdom to foolishness, making thyself
more disgraceful than one who is by nature
so? For being foolish by nature is no ground
of complaint. But being foolish through wis-
dom, is at once bereaving one’s self of excuse,
and running into greater punishment.

Such then are those, who pride themselves
upon their wisdom, and fall into the excess of
recklessness.” For recklessness of all things
makes a person a fool. Wherefore the
Prophet calls the barbarian by this name.
But “the fool,” he says, “ shall speak folly.’
(Is. xxxil. 6.) But that you may see the
folly of him from his own words, hear what
he says, ‘Above the stars of heaven will I
place my throne, and I will be like the Most
High.” (ib. xiv. 14.) “I will take hold of
the world as a nest, and as eggs that are left
will I take them away.” (ib. x. 14.) Now
what can be more foolish than these words?
And every instance of haughty language
immediately draws on itself this reproach.
And if I were to set before you every expres-
sion of them that are reckless, you would not


2 This word has been sometimes translated haughtiness, but
means something more; usually the recklessness of despair,
but sometimes that of pride.


500


THE: WORKS OF (ST. ‘CHER YSOS tear


[HomiLy XX.


be able to distinguish whether the words are
those of a reckless man or a fool. So entirely
the same is this failing and that. And an-
other of a strange nation says again, “I am
God and not man” (Ezech. xxviii. 2); and
another again, Can God save you, or deliver
you out of my hand?” (Dan. iii. 15.) And
the Egyptian too, “I know not the Lord,
meither will 1: let. Israel. go.” (Ex. v. 2.)
And the foolish body in the Psalmist is of this
character, who hath “said in his heart,
heteis novGod, «Ps; xiv...) And (Cain,
‘Am I my brother’s keeper?” (Gen. iv. 9.)
Can you now distinguish whether the words
are those of the reckless or those of the fool?
For recklessness going out of due bounds,
and being a departure from reason (whence
its name recklessness, azévoc), maketh men
both fools and vainglorious. For likewise,
“the beginning of wisdom is the fear of the
Lord” (Prov. ix. 10), so then the beginning
of folly is surely not knowing the Lord. If
then knowing be wisdom, and not knowing
Him folly, and this ignorance come of haugh-
tiness (izepyoavia), (for the beginning of
haughtiness is the not knowing of the Lord),
then is haughtiness the extreme of folly.
Such was Nabal, if not to Godward, at least
toward man, having become senseless from
his recklessness. But he afterwards died of
fear. For when any falleth from the measure
of wisdom, he becomes at once a coward and
bold (Apacvderdoi Ar. £7. iii.), his soul having
been made feeble. For as the body when it
loseth its proper tone having become out of
condition, is a prey to any disease, thus too
the soul when it hath lost its greatness of
nature and lowly-mindedness, having gotten
any feeble habit (#w), becomes fearful, as
well as bold and unreasonable, and loses its
powers of self-consciousness. And he that
has lost these, how is he to know things
above himself? For as he that is seized with
a frenzy, when he has so lost them, knoweth
not even what is right before him; and the
eye, when it is dimmed, darkeneth all the
other members; so doth it happen with this
recklessness. Wherefore these are more
miserable than the mad, or than those silly by
nature. For like them they stir laughter, and
like them they are ill-tempered. And they
are out of their wits as the others are, but
they are not pitied as they are. And they
are beside themselves, as are these, but they
are not excused, as are these, but are hated
only. And while they have the failings of
either, they are bereaved of the excuse of
either, being ridiculous not owing to their
words only, but to their whole appearance
also. For why, pray, dost thou stiffen up thy


neck? or why walk on tiptoe? why knit up
thy brows? why stick thy breast out? Thou
canst not make one hair white or black,
(Matt. v. 36) and thou goest with as lofty
gait as if thou couldest command everything.
No doubt thou wouldest like to have wings,
and not go upon the earth at all! No doubt
thou wouldest wish to be a prodigy! For
hast thou not made thyself prodigious now,
when thou art a man and ttriest to fly? or
rather flying from within, and bloated in
every limb? What shall I call thee to quit
thee of thy recklessness? Shall I call thee
ashes, and dust, and smoke, and pother? I
have described thy worthlessness to be sure,
but still I have not laid hold of the exact
image I wanted. For I want to put their
bloatedness before me, and all its emptiness.
What image am I to find then which will suit
with all this? To me it seems to be like tow
in a blaze. For it seems to swell when
lighted, and to lift itself up; but when it is
submitted to a slight touch of the hand, it all
tumbles down, and turns out to be more
worthless than the veriest ashes. Of this sort
are the souls of these men; that empty
inflatedness of theirs even the commonest
attack may humble and bring down. For he
that behaves recklessly must of necessity be a
throughly feeble person, since the height he
has is not a sound one, but even as bubbles
are easily burst, so are these men easily
undone. But if thou dost not believe, give
me a bold reckless fellow, and you will find
him more cowardly than a hare even at the
most trivial circumstance. For as the flame
that rises from dry sticks is no sooner lighted
than it becomes dust, but stiff logs do not by
their nature easily kindle up, and then keep
up their flame a long time burning; so souls
that be stern and firm are not easily kindled
or extinguished ; but these men undergo both
of these in a single moment. Since then we
know this, let us practise humble-mindedness.
For there is nothing so powerful as it, since
it is stronger even than a rock and harder
than adamant, and places us in a safety
greater than that of towers and cities and
walls, being too high for any of the artillery of
the devil. As then recklessness makes men
an easy prey even to ordinary occurrences,
being, as I was saying, easier broken than
a bubble, and rent more speedily than a
spider’s web, and more quickly dissolved than
a smoke ; that we then may be walking upon
the strong rock, let us leave that and take to
this. For thus in this life present we shall
find rest, and shall in the world to come have
every blessing, by the grace and love toward
man, etc.


Homity XXI.]


THE EPISTLE ‘TO ‘THE ROMANS.


501


HOMILY SX 1,


ROMS SLT es 5.


“For as we have many members in one body, and all
members have not the same office; so we, being
many, are one body in Christ, and every one mem-
bers one of another.”


Acain he uses the same ensample as he
does to the Corinthians, and that to allay the
same passion. For great is the power of the
medicine, and the force of this illustration
for the correcting of this disease of haughti-
ness. Why (he means) dost thou think highly
of thyself? Or why again does another
utterly despise himself? Are we not all one
body, both great and small? When then we
are in the total number but one, and members
one of another, why dost thou by thy haughti-
ness separate thyself? Why dost thou put
thy brother to shame? For as he is a mem-
ber of thee, so art thou also of him. And it
is on this score that your claims to honor are
so equal. For he has stated two things that
might take down their haughty spirit: one
that we are members one of another, not the
small of the great only, but also the great of
the small; and another, that we are all one
body. Or rather there are three points, since
he shows that the gift was one of grace.
“Therefore be not high-minded.” For it was
given thee of God; thou didst not take it,
nor find it even. Hence too, when he touches
upon the gifts, he does not say that one
received more, and another less, but what?
different. For his words are, “having then
gifts,” not less and greater, but, “differing.”
And what if thou art not appointed to the
same Office, still the body is the same. And
beginning with gifts, he ends with a good
deed (4 Mss. pl.); and so after mentioning
prophecy, and ministry, and the like, he con-
cludes with mercy, diligence, and succor.
Since then it was likely that some would be
virtuous, yet not have prophecy, he shows how
that this too is a gift, and a much greater one
than the other (as he shows in the Epistle
to the Corinthians), and so much the greater,
as that one has a reward, the other is devoid
of a recompense. For the whole is matter of
gift and grace. Wherefore he saith,

Ver. 6. “ Having then gifts differing ac-
cording to the grace of God that is given
unto us, whether prophecy, let us prophesy
according to the proportion of faith.”


| liberty to add new or heterogeneous elements.
| &uaxovia (7) and é&dacxnwy seem to refer to the two offices
| of the church deacons and presbyters, although others hold


Since then he had sufficiently comforted
them, he wishes also to make them vie with
each other,’ and labor more in earnest, by
showing that it is themselves that give the
grounds for their receiving more or less. For
he says indeed that it is given by God (as
when he says, “‘ according as God hath dealt
to every man the measure of faith;” and
again, “according to the grace given unto
us’’) (Rom. xii. 3), that he may subdue the
haughty. But he says also that the begin-
nings lie with themselves, to rouse the listless.
And this he does in the Epistle to the Corinthi-
ans also, to produce both theseemotions. For
when he saith, “ covet earnestly the gifts,” (1
Coy. xii. 31), he shows that they were them-
selves the cause of the differences in what was
given. But when he says, “‘ Now all these things
worketh one and the selfsame Spirit, dividing
to every man severally as he will” (ib. 11),
he is proving that those who have received it
ought not to be elated, so using every way
open to him to allay their disorder. And this
he does here also. And again, to rouse those
who have fallen drowsy, he says, ‘“ Whether
prophecy, let us prophesy according to the
proportion of faith.’ For though it is a


| grace, yet it is not poured forth at random,


but framing its measure according to the re-
cipients, it letteth as much flow as it may find
the vessel of faith that is brought to be capa-
ble of.*

Ver. 7. “Or ministry, let us wait on our
ministering.”

Here he names a comprehensive thing,
For the Apostleship even is called a ministry,
and every spiritual work is a ministry. This
is indeed a name of a peculiar office (viz. the


1 Or feel they need an effort €vaywviovs. See on Rom. Xi. 21

+ 340.

* Prophecy 1s to be kata thy avadoyiav ths motews (6). In
the view of some (as Meyer) the man’s own faith 1s meant.
He should not exceed in his speaking the limits of his faith.
Others (as Philippi) take **faith’’ in the objective sense asa
body of doctrine and find the idea here which was later asso-


| ciated with the expression ama/ogia fidez: the word mors


will not bear this meaning and the individual’s own faith
seems too narrow a criterion of prophecy. It seems better to
understand the expression as meaning that the prophet is to
regulate his utterance by the character and contents of the
faith of the church; that he should in his prophetic utterances
keep to the line of the Church's trust and hope and not feel at
The terms


the view (of Chrys.) that the words are merely general.—
¥ Be 5:


$02


THE, WORKS} OF (Si. CHR¥YSOST OR:


[HomiLy XXI.


diaconate); however, it is used in a general
sense. ‘Or he that teacheth, on teaching.”
See with what indifference he places them,
the little first and the great afterwards, again
giving us the same lesson, not to be puffed up
or elated.

Ver. 8. “Or he that exhorteth, on exhorta-
tion.”’

And this is a species of teaching too. For
“if ye have any word of exhortation,” it says,
“speak unto the people.” (Acts xill. 15.)
Then to show that it is no great good to fol-
low after virtue unless this is done with the
proper rule, he proceeds,

“He that giveth ” (weradsdoie, imparteth), “ let
him do it with simplicity.” For it is not
enough to give, but we must do it with munifi-
cence also, for this constantly answereth to
the name of simplicity. Since even the vir-
gins had oil, still, since they had not enough,
they were cast out from everything. “He
that defendeth” (A. V. ruleth, zpoicrduevoc,)
“with diligence ;” for it is not enough to do
undertake the defence.’ “He that showeth
mercy, with cheerfulness.” For it is not
enough to show mercy, but it behooves us to do
it with a largeness and an ungrudging spirit,
or rather not with an ungrudging, but even
with a cheerful and rejoicing one, for not
grudging does not amount to rejoicing. And
this same point, when he is writing to the
Corinthians also, he insisted very strongly
upon. For to rouse them to such largeness
he said, “‘ He that soweth sparingly shall reap
also sparingly, and he which soweth bounti-
fully shall reap also bountifully. (2 Cor. ix.
6.) But to correct their temper he added,
“ Not grudgingly or of necessity.” (ib. 7.)
For both the shower of mercy ought to have,
both ungrudgingness and pleasure. And why
dost thou bemoan thyself of giving alms?
(Aristot. £72. WV. ii. 3 and iv.1.) Why dost
thou grieve at showing mercy, and lose the
advantage of the good deed? For if thou
erievest thou dost not do mercy, but art


cruel and inhuman. For if thou grievest,
how shalt thou be able to raise up him
that is in sorrow? For it is much if he


suspects no ill, even, when thou art giving
with joyfulness. For since nothing seems to
men such a disgrace as to be receiving from
others, unless by an exceedingly cheerful look
thou removest the suspicion, and showest that
thou art receiving rather than giving, thou
wilt even cast down the receiver rather than
raise him up. ‘This is why he says, ‘“ He that


1 Near the end of Hom. 19, we have kav adtxovupevw mepttvxn
mpootyaetar, which proves that he takes the word in the sense
here given. ‘‘Unless,’’ added by Ben. and 2 Mss. ‘‘he do it
with diligence and zeal.”’


showeth mercy, with cheerfulness.” For who
that is receiving a kingdom, is of sad counte-
nance? Who that is receiving pardon for his
sins continueth of dejected look? Mind not
then the expenditure of the money; but the
increase that comes of that expenditure. For
if he that soweth rejoiceth though sowing with
uncertainty of return, much more should he
do so that farms the Heaven, For in this
way, even though thou give but little, thou
wilt be giving much; even as how much
soever thou givest with a sad countenance,
thou wilt have made thy much a little. Thus
the widow outweighed many talents by the
two mites, for her spirit was large. And how
is it possible, it may be said, for one that
dwells with poverty in the extreme, and
empties forth his all, to do this with a ready
mind? Ask the widow, and thou wilt hear
the way, and wilt know that it is not poverty?
that makes narrow circumstances, but the
temper of a man that effects both this and its
opposite. For it is possible even in poverty
to be munificent (weyatsyuyov), and in riches to
be niggardly. Hence in giving he looks for
simplicity, and in showing mercy for cheerful-
ness, and in patronizing for diligence. For it
is not with money only that he wishes us to
render every assistance to those in want, but
both with words, and deeds, and in person,
and in every other way. And after mention-
ing the chief kind of aiding (xpooraciav), that
which lies in teaching, namely, and that of ex-
horting (for this is a more necessary kind, in
that it nurtures the soul), he proceeds to that
by way of money, and all other means; then
to show how these may be practised aright,
he bringeth in the mother of them, love.

Ver. 9. For, “ Let love be without dissimu-
lation,” he says,

If thou hast this, thou wilt not perceive the
loss of thy money, the labor of thy person, the
toil of thy words, thy trouble, and thy minis-
tering, but thou wilt bear all courageously,
whether it be with person, or money, or word,
or any other thing whatsover, that thou art to
assist thy neighbor. As then he doth not ask
for giving only, but that with simplicity, nor
aiding, but that with diligence, nor alms, but
that with cheerfulness; so even love too he
requires not alone, but that without dissimula-
tion. Since this is what love is. And if a
man have this, everything else follows. For
he that showeth mercy does so with cheerful-
ness (for he is giving to himself): and he that
aideth, aideth with diligence ; for it is for him-
self he is aiding: and he that imparteth doth
this with largeness; for he is bestowing it on


2 revia here seems distinguished from mrTwxeta, as in the
Plutus.


HomiILy XXI.]


THE, EBISTEE- TO; THEATROMANS:


593


himself. Then since there is a love even for
ill things, such as is that of the intemperate,
that of those who are of one mind for money,
and for plunder’s sake, and for revels and
drinking clubs, he clears it of all these, by
saying, ‘“Abhor (azosrvyoivrec) that which is
evil.” And he does not speak of refraining
from it, but of hating it, and not merely hating
it, but hating it exceedingly. For this word
1azdis often of intensive force with him, as
where he speaks of ‘earnest expectation,”
looking out for,’ 3 (complete) ‘‘ redemption.” 4
For since many who do not evil things still
have a desire after them, therefore he says,
** Abhor.” For what he wants is to purify the
thought, and that we should have a mighty
enmity, hatred and war against vice. For do
not fancy, he means, because I said, “ Love
one another,” that I mean you to go so far as
to codperate even in bad actions with one
another ; for the law that I am laying down is
just the reverse. Since it would have you an
alien not from the action only, but even from
the inclination towards vice; and not merely
an alien from this same inclination, but to
have an excessive aversion and hatred of it
too. And he is not content with only this,
but he also brings in the practice of virtue.
“* Cleave to that which is good.”

He does not speak of doing only, but of
being disposed too. For this the command to
“‘cleave to” it indicates. So God, when He
knit the man to the woman, said, “ For he
Shall cleave to his wife.” (Gen. ii. 24.) Then
he mentions reasons why we ought to love
one another.

Ver. 10. “Be kindly affectioned one to
another with brotherly love.”

Ye are brethren, he means, and have come
of the same pangs. Hence even on this head
you ought to love one another. And _ this
Moses said to those who were quarrelling in
Egypt, “Ye are brethren, why do ye wrong
one to another?” (Exod. ii. 13.) When
then he is speaking of those without, he says,
“Tf it be possible, as much as in you lieth,
live peaceably with all men.” (Rom. xii. 18.)
But when he is speaking of his own, he says,
““ Be kindly affectioned one to another with
brotherly love.” For in the other case he
requires abstinence from quarrelling, and
hatred, and aversion: but here loving too, and
not merely loving, but the loving of relatives.
For not only must one’s “ love be without dis-
simulation,” but intense also, and warm, and
glowing. Because, to what purpose would


Viz. in composition,

amoxapadoxia, Rom. viii. 19.

amexdeXouevot, Rom. viii. 23.

amoAvTpwats, Rom. viii. 23, see ad Joc. Hom. Xiv. p. 445.


bower


you love without fraud, and not love with
warmth? Whence he says, “kindly affectioned
one towards another, that is, be friends, and
warm ones too. Do not wait to be loved by
another, but leap at it thyself, and be the first
to begin it. For so wilt thou reap the wages
of his love also. Having mentioned the
reason then why we ought to love one another,
he tells us also the way in which the affection
may grow unchangeable. Whence he pro-
ceeds, “In honor preferring one another.”
For this is the way that affection is produced,
and also when produced abideth. And there
is nothing which makes friends so much, as
the earnest endeavor to overcome one’s neigh-
bor in honoring him.* For what he had men-
tioned before comes of love, and love of
honor, as honor does too of love. Then that
we may not honor only, he looks for something
besides, when he says,

Ver. 11. “ Not backward in zeal.””®

For this also gendereth love when with
honor we also show a readiness to protect: as
there is nothing that makes men beloved so
much as honor and forethought. For to love
is not enough, but there must be this also:
or rather this also comes of loving, as also
loving has its warmth from this, and they are
confirmative one of another. For there are
many that love in mind, yet reach not forth
the hand. And this is why he uses every
means to build up love. And how are we
to become “ not backward in zeal?”

“Fervent in spirit.” See how in every in-
stance he aims after higher degrees; for he
does not say “ give” only, but “with large-


ness;” nor “rule,” but do it “with dili-
gence ;” nor “show mercy,” but do it ‘ with


cheerfulness ;”
another ;” nor
dissimulation ;
things, but “ hate ”


nor “honor,” but ‘ prefer one
“love,” but do it “ without
” nor refrain from ‘evil’

g them; nor hold to “ what
is, good,” but. “cleave? (f0 t;, Mon lawers
but to do it ‘“‘ with brotherly affection ;” nor
be zealous, but be so without backwardness ;
nor have the “ Spirit,” but have it “ fervent,”
that is, that ye may be warm and awakened.
For if thou hast those things aforesaid, thou
wilt draw the Spirit to thee. “And if This abide
with thee, It will likewise make thee good for
those purposes, and all things will “be easy
from the Spirit and the love, while thou art
made to glow from both sides. Dost thou not
see the bulls (Hannibal. ap. Liv. xxii. 16)


* Chrys. evidently takes mponyovmevoe (10) in the sense of
excelling, others understand the word temporally and render
anticipating. The word (Aapax/.) is better taken as in our
vss. preferring, 1. €. ‘going before, as guides, namely, with
Bae eens which incites others to follow,” (Meyer). —


SAY. R. V.
slothful.


not slothful in business ; In diligence not


504


: |
that carry a flame upon their back, how no-


body is able to withstand them? So thou
also wilt be more than the devil can sustain,
if thou takest both these flames. ‘“ Serving
the Lord.’ * For it is possible to serve God
in all these ways ; in that whatever thou doest
to thy brother passes on to thy Master, and
as having been Himself benefited, He will
reckon thy reward accordingly. See to what
height he has raised the spirit of the man
that worketh these things! Then to show
how the flame of the Spirit might be kindled,
he says,

Ver. 12. “Rejoicing in hope, patient in
tribulation, continuing instant in prayer.”

For all these things are fuel for that fire.
For when he had required the expenditure of
money and the labor of the person, and ruling,
and zeal, and teaching, and other laborious
occupations, he again supplies the wrestler with
love, with the Spirit, through hope. For
there is nothing which makes the soul so
courageous and venturesome for anything as
a good hope. Then even before the good
things hoped for, he gives another reward
again. Forsince hope is of things to come,
he says, ‘‘ patient in tribulation.” And before
the things to come, in this life present thou
wilt gain a great good (see on Rom. v. 4, p.
397) from tribulation, that of becoming hardy
and tried. And after this he affords them
another help, when he _ says, ‘‘continu-
ing instant in prayer.” When therefore love
maketh things easy, and the Spirit assisteth,
and hope lighteneth, and tribulation maketh
thee tried and apt for bearing everything
nobly, and thou hast along with these another
very great weapon, to wit, “ prayer” and the
aidances that come of prayer, what further
grievousness can there be in what he is enjoin-
ing? Surely none. You see how in every
way he gives the wrestler firm footing and
shows that the injunctions are perfectly easy.
Consider again how he vindicates almsgiving,
or rather not almsgiving absolutely, but that
to the saints. For above when he says, “he
that showeth mercy with cheerfulness,” he
makes us open-handed to everybody. Here,
however, it is in behalf of the faithful that he
is speaking. And so he proceeds to say,”

Ver. 13. “Sharing | with “they “necessity
(ypeiacc, al. wveiacc, Memories) of the saints.”

He does not say, Bestow upon, but “ share


* Here the Mss. and vss. vary between tw xupiw and tw
kaip@ (v.11). The latter text gives the idea of serving the
time or adapting one’s self to the opportunity and is adopted
by many (as Meyer, Godet) on the ground that the precept:
serving the Lord is too general to be in point here among
these specific exhortations. The Mss. evidence for 7@ xupiw,
however, is too strong to be overthrown by a consideration
A subjective (x, B, A, E, L, P, It. Syr. vs. D. F. G.).—G. B.


THE ‘WORKS OF ST. “CHRYSOS Fem


[HomiLy XXI.


with the necessity! of the saints,” to show
that they receive more than they give, that it
is a matter of merchandise, because it is a
community. Do you bring in money? They
bring you in boldness toward God. “ Given
to (Gr. pursuing) hospitality.” He does not
say doing it, but “given” to it, so to instruct
us not to wait for those that shall ask it, and
see when they will come to us, but to run to
them, and be given to finding? them.

Thus did Lot, thus Abraham. For he
spent the whole day upon it, waiting for this
goodly prey, and when he saw it, leaped upon
it, and ran to meet them, and worshipped upon
the ground, and said, “ My Lord, if now I
have found favor in Thy sight, pass not away
from Thy ‘sérvant.”? (Gen. xviii. 32), Nop
as we do, if we happen to see a stranger or a
poor man, knitting our brows, and not deign-
ing even to speak to them. And if after
thousands of entreaties we are softened, and
bid the servant give them a trifle, we think we .
have quite done our duty. But he did not so,
but assumed the fashion of a suppliant anda
servant, though he did not know who he was
going to take under his roof. But we, who
have clear information that it is Christ Whom
we take in, do not grow gentle even for this.
But he both beseeches, and entreats, and falls
on his knees to them, yet we insult those that
come to us. And he indeed did all by him-
self and his wife, whereas we do it not even
by our attendants. But if you have a mind to
see the table that he set before them, there
too you will see great bounteousness, but the
bounteousness came not from. excess of
wealth, but of the riches of a ready will. Yet
how many rich persons were there not then?
Still none did anything of the kind. How
many widows were there in Israel? Yet none
showed hospitality to Elijah. How many
wealthy persons again were there not in
Elisha’s day? But the Shunamite alone gath-
ered in the fruits of hospitality ; as did Abraham
also,?> whom beside his largeness and ready
mind it is just especially to admire, on this
ground, that when he had no knowledge who
they were that had come, yet he so acted.
Do not thou then be curious either: since for
Christ thou dost receive him. And if thou art
always so scrupulous, many a time wilt thou
pass by a man of esteem, and lose thy reward
from him. And yet he that receiveth one that
is not of esteem, hath no fault found with him,


1 St. Chrysostom (on 2 Tim. i. 16, p. 189 O. T.) adopts and
argues on the reading, mvetacs, for which there is some author-
ity. See Brit. Crit. No. LI. pp. 80, 81.

2 catad.wxevv. lit. hunt them down.

3 So Field: the passage is corruptin the MSS. Vulg. “ As
did Abraham also then with largeness and ready mind. And
on this ground he deserves one’s admiration most, that when,”
etc.

°


HomiLy XX1.]


THEVEPIST ER “TO°- THE’ ROMANS,


595


but is even rewarded. For “he that receiveth
a prophet in the name of a prophet, shall
receive a prophet’s reward.” (Matt. x. 41.)
But he who out of this ill-timed scrupulousness
passeth one that should be admired, shall even
suffer punishment. Do not then busy thyself
with men’s lives and doings. For this is the
very extreme of niggardliness, for one loaf to
be exact about a man’s entire life. For if this
person be a murderer, if a robber, or what
not, does he therefore seem to thee not to
deserve a loaf and a few pence? And yet
thy Master causeth even the sun to rise upon
him! And dost thou judge him unworthy of
food even for a day? I will put another case
to you besides. Now even if you were pos-
itively certain that he were laden with count-
less iniquities, not even then wouldest thou
have an excuse for depriving him of this day’s
sustenance. For thou art the servant of Him
Who said, “ Ye know not what spirit ye are
of.” (Luke ix. 55.) Thou art servant to Him
Who healed those that stoned Him, or rather
Who was crucified for them. And do not tell
me that he killed another, for even if he were
going to kill thee thyself, even then thou
shouldest not neglecthim when starving.
For thou art a disciple of Him Who desired
the salvation even of them that crucified Him,
Who said upon the Cross itself, ‘“ Father, for-
give them, for they know not what they do.”
(Luke xxiii. 34.) Thou art the servant of Him
Who healed him that smote Him, Who upon


the Cross itself crowned the man who had |


scorned Him. And what ‘can equal this?
For both the robbers at first scorned Him.
Still to one of these He opened Paradise.1
And He bewails those who were upon the
point of killing Him, and is troubled and con-
founded at seeing the traitor, not because He
was going to be crucified, but because he was
lost. He was troubled then as having fore-
knowledge of the hanging, and the punishment
after the “hanging. And though He knew his
wickedness, He bore with him? to the last
hour, and thrust not away the traitor, but even
kissed him. Thy Master kisseth, and with
His lips receiveth him who was on the very
point of shedding His precious Blood. And
dost thou count the poor not worthy even of
a loaf, and reverencest not the Law which
Christ laid down? Now by this He shows
that we ought not to turn aside, not only from
the poor, but not even from those that would
lead us away to death. Do not tell me then,
that so and so hath done me grievous mis-
chief, but just consider what Christ did near
the Cross itself, wishing to amend by His


1 Some MSS. add, ‘‘ first of all men.”’
2 Or ‘“‘ dealt kindly with him.”’


kiss the traitor by whom He was on the point
of being betrayed. And see with how much
power to shame him. For He says, “ Judas,
betrayest thou the Son of Man witha kiss?”
(ib. xxii. 48.) Who is there He would not
have softened ? who is there that this address
would not have made yielding ? What beast ?
what adamant? yet not that wretched man,
Do not then say, that such an one murdered
such an one, and that is why I turn aside
from him. For even if he were upon the point
of thrusting a sword down into thee, and to
plunge his hand into thy neck itself, kiss this
very right hand! since even Christ kissed that
mouth which wrought His death! And there-
fore do not thou either hate, but bewail and
pity him that plotteth against thee. For such
an one deserveth pity at our hands, and tears.
For we are the servants of Him Who kissed
even the traitor (I will not leave off dwelling
over that continually), and spoke words unto
him more gentle than the kiss. For He did
not even say, O thou foul and _ villanous
traitor, is this the sort of recompense thou
returnest us for so great a benefit? But in
what words? “Judas ;” using his own name,
which is more like a person bemoaning, and re-
calling him, than one wroth at him. And he
does not say, thy Teacher, thy Master, and
Benefactor, but, “the Son of Man.” For
though He were neither Teacher nor Master,
yet is it with One Who is so gently, so un-
feignedly affected towards thee, as even to
kiss thee at the time of betrayal, and that
when a kiss too was the signal for the be-
trayal; is it with Him that thou playest the
traitor’s part? Blessed art Thou, O Lord!
What lowliness of mind, what forbearance
hast Thou given us ensamples of! And to
him He so behaved. But to those who came
with staves and swords to Him, was it not so
too? Whatcan be more gentle than the words
spoken to them? For when He had power to
demolish them all in an instant, He did noth-
ing of the kind, but as expostulating (évrper-
mie), addressed them in the w ords, ‘‘ Why are
ye come out as against a thief with swords
and staves?” (Matt. xxvi. 55.) And having
cast them down backwards (John xviii. 6),
as they continued insensible, He of His own
accord gave Himself up next, and forbore
while He saw them putting manacles upon
His holy hands, while He had the power at
once to confound all things, and overthrow
them. But dost thou even after this deal
fiercely with the poor? And even were he
guilty of ten thousand sins, want and famine


/were enough to soften down a soul ever so


thou standest brutalized, and
Yet they never


blunted. But
imitating the rage of lions.


. 500


taste of dead bodies. But thou, while thou
seest him a very corpse (rerapiyevuévov lit. salter,
or, a mummy) for distresses, yet leapest
upon him now that he is down, and tearest
his body by thine insults, and gatherest storm
after storm, and makest him as he is fleeing
to the haven for refuge to split upon a rock,
and bringest a shipwreck about more distress-
ing than those in the sea. And how wilt thou
say to God, Have mercy upon me, and ask of
Him remission of sins, when thou art insolent
to one who hath done no sin, and callest him
to account for this hunger and great necessity,
and throwest all the brute beasts into the
shade by thy cruelty. For they indeed by
the compulsion of their belly lay hold of the
food needful for them. But thou, when noth-
ing either thrusts thee on or compels thee,
devourest thy brother, bitest, and tearest him,
if not with thy teeth, yet with words that bite
more cuttingly. _ How then wilt thou receive
the sacred Host (zpoogopav), when thou hast
empurpled thy tongue in human gore? how
give the kiss of peace, with mouth gorged with
war? Nay, how enjoy every common nourish-


THE WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[HomiLy XXII.


ment, when thou art gathering so much
venom? ‘Thou dost not relieve the poverty,
why make it even more grinding? thou dost
not lift up him that is fallen, why throw him
down also? thou dost not remove despond-
ency, why even increase it? thou givest no
money, why use insulting words besides?
Hast thou not heard what punishment they
suffer that feed not the poor? to what ven-
geance they are condemned? For He says,
‘* Depart to the fire prepared for the devil and
his angels.” (Matt. xxv. 41.) If then they
that feed not are so condemned, what punish-
ment are they to suffer, who besides not feed-
ing, even insult? What punishment shall
they undergo? what hell? That we kindle
not so great evils against ourselves, whiles we
have it in our power, let us correct this evil
complaint also, and puta bridle on the tongue.
And let us be so far from insulting, as
even to invite them, both by words and actions,
that by laying up much mercy for ourselves,
we may obtain the blessings promised us.
Which God grant that we may all attain unto
by the grace and love towards man, etc.


Pt@ MEL) ole


ROM. XII. 14,


“« Bless them which persecute you ; bless, and curse not.”


AFTER teaching them how they ought to be
minded towards one another, and after joining
the members closely into one, he next pro-
ceeds to lead them forth to the battle without,
which he makes easier as from this point.
For as he who hath not managed things well
with those of his own side, will find more


difficulty in arranging affairs with strangers, |


so he, that has practised himself duly among
these, will with the more ease have the advan-
tage of those without also. Hence then Paul
also as he goes on in his journey, after the one
places the other, and says, “ Bless them that
persecute you.” He did not say, be not spite-
ful or revengeful, but required something far
better. For that a man that was wise might
do, but this is quite an angel’s part. And
after saying “ bless,’”’ he proceeds, ‘‘ and curse
not,” lest we should do both the one and the
other, and not the former only. For they that
persecute us are purveyors of a reward to us.
But if thou art sober-minded, there will be
another reward after that one, which thou
wilt gain thyself. For he will yield thee that


for persecution, but thou wilt yield thyself the
one from the blessing of another, in that thou
bringest forth a very great sign of love to
Christ. For as he that curseth his persecutor,
showeth that he is not much pleased at suffer-
ing this for Christ, thus he that blesseth
showeth the greatness of his love. Do not
then abuse him, that thou thyself mayest gain
the greater reward, and mayest teach him that
the thing is matter of inclination, not of
necessity, of holiday and feast, not of calamity
or dejection. For this cause Christ Himself
said, ‘‘ Rejoice when men speak all manner of
evil against you falsely.” (Matt. v. 11.)
Hence too it was that the Apostles returned
with joy not from having been evil spoken of
only, but also at having been scourged. (Acts
v. 40, 41.) For besides what I have men-
tioned, there will be another gain, and that no
small one, that you will make, both the abash-
ing of your adversaries hereby, and instructing
of them by your actions that you are travelling
to another life; for if he see thee joyous, and
elevated, (xrepoiuevov) from suffering ill, he will
see clearly from the actions that thou hast
other hopes greater than those of this life. So


HomiLy XXII.|


THE EPISTLE TO THE.ROMANS.


507


that if thou dost not so, but weepest and
lamentest, how is he to be able to learn from
that that thou art tarrying for any other life?
And besides this, thou wilt compass yet another
thing. For provided he see thee not vexed at
the affronts done thee, but even blessing him,
he will leave harassing thee. See then how
much that is good comes from this, both a
greater reward for thyself and a less tempta-
tion, and he will forbear persecuting thee, and
God too will be glorified: and to him that is
in error thy endurance will be instruction in
godliness. For this reason it was not those
that insult us only, but even those that perse-
cute us and deal despitefully with us, that he
bade us requite with the contrary. And now
he orders them to bless, but as he goes on, he
exhorts them to do them good in deeds also.

Ver. 15. ‘‘ Rejoice with them that do rejoice,
and weep with them that weep.”

Since it is possible to bless and not to
curse, and yet not to do this out of love, he
wishes us to be penetrated with the warmth of
friendship throughout. And this is why he
goes on in these words, that we are not only
to bless, but even feel compassion for their
pains and sufferings, whenever we happen to
see them fallen into trouble. Yes, it will be
said, but to join in the sorrows of mourners
one can see why he ordered them, but why
ever did he command them the other thing,
when it is no such great matter? Aye, but
that requires more of a high Christian temper,
to rejoice with them that do rejoice, than to
weep with them that weep. For this nature
itself fulfils perfectly: and there is none so
hard-hearted as not to weep over him that is
in calamity: but the other requires a very
noble soul, so as not only to keep from envy-
ing, but even to feel pleasure with the person
who is in esteem. And this is why he placed
it first. For there is nothing that ties love so
firmly as sharing both joy and pain one with
another. Do not then, because thou art far
from difficulties thyself, remain aloof from
sympathizing too. For when thy neighbor is
ill-treated, thou oughtest to make the calam-
ity thine own. ‘Take share then in his tears,
that thou mayest lighten his low spirits. Take
share in his joy, that thou mayest make the
joy strike deep root, and fix the love firmly,
and be of service to thyself rather than to
him in so doing, by thy weeping rendering
thyself merciful, and by thy feeling his pleas-
ure, purging thyself of envy and grudging.


And let me draw your attention to Paul’s|
For he does not say, Put}


considerateness.
an end to the calamity, lest thou shouldest


Say in many cases (or perchance roAAd«c) that |


it is impossible: but he has enjoined the
easier task, and that which thou hast in thy
power. For even if thou art not able to
remove the evil, yet contribute tears, and thou
wilt take the worst half away. And if thou be
not able to increase a man’s prosperity, con-
tribute joy, and thou wilt have made a great
addition to it. Therefore it is not abstaining
from envy only, but what is a much greater
thing that he exhorts us to, namely, joining in
the pleasure. For this is a much greater
thing than not envying.

Ver. 16. “Be of the same mind one
towards another. Mind not high things, but
condescend to men of low estate.”

Here again he insists much upon lowliness
of mind, the subject he had started this ex-
hortation with. For there was a probability
of their being full of high-mindedness, both
on account of their city (see p. 343), and from
sundry other causes; he therefore keeps draw-
ing off (iocipe:, 2 Mss. iropirre:) the morbid
matter, and lowers the inflammation. For
there is nothing that makes such schisms in
the Churches as vanity does. And what does
he mean by, “Be of the same mind one
towards another?” Has a poor man come
into thy house? Be like him in thy bearing,
do not put on any unusual pompous air on
account of thy riches. There is no rich and
poor in Christ. Be not then ashamed of him
because of his external dress, but receive him
because of his inward faith. And if thou
seest him in sorrow, do not disdain to comfort
him, nor if thou see him in prosperity, feel
abashed at sharing his pleasure, and being
gladdened with him, but be of the same mind
in his case, that thou wouldest be of in thine
own. For it says, “ Be of the same mind one
towards another.” For instance, if thou
thinkest thyself a great man, therefore think
him so likewise. Dost thou suspect that he is
mean and little? Well then, pass this same
sentence upon thyself, and cast aside all


unevenness. And how is this to be? By thy
casting aside that reckless temper. Where-
fore he proceeds: ‘Mind not high things,
but condescend to men of low estate.” That


is, bring thyself down to their humble condi-
tion, associate with them, walk with them, do
not be humbled in mind only, but help them
also, and reach forth thy hand to them, not
by means of others, but in thine own person,
as a father taking care of a child, as the head
taking care of the body. As he says in
another place, “being bound with them that
are in -bonds,”’ -' (Heb, zit. (3: .Buat tere
he means by those of low estate not
merely the lowly-minded, but those of a low


508


rank, and which one is apt to think scorn
OL

“Be not wise in your own conceits.” This
is, do not think that you can do for your-
selves. Because the Scripture saith in
another place besides, ‘‘Woe to them that are
wise in their own eyes, and prudent in their own
Bisit. | (isi'v. 22.) And by ‘this again, he
secretly draws off recklessness, and “reduces
conceit and turgidity. For there is nothing
that so elates men and makes them feel differ.
ent from other people, as the notion that they
can do by themselves. Whence also God
hath placed us in need one of another, and


though thou be wise thou wilt be in need of
another: but if thou think that thou art not in


need of him, thou wilt be the most foolish and
feeble of men. For aman of this sort bares
himself of all succor, and in whatever error he
may run into, will not have the advantage
either of correction or of pardon, and will
provoke God by his recklessness, and will run
into many errors. For it is the case, aye, and
often too, that a wise man does not perceive
what is needful, and a man of less shrewdness
hits upon somewhat that is applicable. And
this happened with Moses and his father-in-
law, and with Saul and his servant, and with
Isaac and Rebecca. Do not then suppose
that you are lowered by needing another man.
For this exalts you the more, this makes you
the stronger, and the brighter too, and the
more secure.

Ver. 17. “ Recompense to no man evil for
evil.”

For if thou findest fault with another who
plots against thee, why dost thou make thyself
liable to this accusation? If he did amiss,
how comest thou not to shun imitating him?
And observe how he puts no difference here,
but lays down one law for all. For he does
not Say,\°" recompense mot;-evil’’? to) the
believer, but to ‘“‘no man,” be he heathen, be
he contaminated, or what not. ‘ Provide
things honest in the sight of all men.”

Ver. 18. “If it be possible, as much as
lieth in you, live peaceably with all men.”

This is that: “let your light shine before
men” (Matt. v. 16), not that we are to live
for vanity, but that we are not to give those


* toils Tameivois is best taken here as mexuter (Meyer,
De Wette, R. V.) corresponding in this respect to ta vnAa.
Meyer renders and interprets thus: “ dene drawn onward by
the lowly; 1. e. instead of following the impulse to high
things, rather yielding to that which is humble, to the claims
and tasks which are presented to you by the humbler rela-
tions of life, entering into this impulse towards the lower
strata and spheres of life which lays claim to you, and follow-
ing it. The tarecva ought to have for the Christian a force
of attraction in virtue of which he yields himself to
fellowship with them and allows himself to be guided by
them in the determination of his conduct.’’ Those who
understand tamevots as masculine are divided between the
meanings: of low vank and of humble ai Chrys.’
interpretation combines both ideas.—G. B.


THE WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOS#Oa.


fHomity XXII.


who have a mind for it a handle against us.
Whence he says also in another place, ‘“ Give
none offence, neither to the Jews, nor to the
Gentiles, nor to the Church of God.” (1 Cor.
x. 32.) And in what follows he limits his
meaning well, by saying, “If it be possible.”’
For there are cases in which it is not possible,
as, for instance, when we have to argue about
religion, or to contend for those who are
wronged. And why be surprised if this be
not universally possible in the case of other
persons, when even in the case of man and
wife he broke through the rule? “But if the
unbelieving depart, Tet him depart.” (1 Cor.
vil. 15.) And his meaning is nearly as
follows: Do thine own part, and to none give
occasion of war or fighting, neither to Jew nor
Gentile. But if you see the cause of religion
suffering anywhere, do not prize concord
above truth, but make a noble stand even to
death. And even then be not at war in soul,
be not averse in temper, but fight with ms
things only. For this is the import of ‘
much as in you lieth, be at peace with all
men.” But if the other will not be at peace,
do not thou fill thy soul with tempest, but in
mind be friendly (giAoc, several Mss. guAdcogoc)
as I said before, without giving up the truth
on any occasion.

Ver. 19. ‘‘ Dearly beloved, avenge not your-
selves, but rather give place unto wrath. For
it is written, Vengeance is mine; I will repay,
saith the Lord.”

Unto what wrath? To the wrath of God.
Now since what the injured man desires most
to see is, himself having the pleasure of
revenge, this very thing he gives him in full
measure, that if thou dost not avenge thyself,
he means, God will be thy avenger. Leave it
then to Him to follow up thy wrongs. For
this is the force of “give place unto wrath.”
Then to give further comfort, he brings the
quotation forward also, and after winning him
more throughly to himself in this way, he
demands more Christian heroism (Gsroodéecis)
of him, and says:

Ver.'20, 21. “It thine; enemy hunger, feed
him ; if he thirst, give him to drink; for in so
doing thou shalt heap coals of fire upon his
head. Be not overcome of evil, but overcome
evil with good.”

Why, he means, am I telling you that you
must keep peace ? for I even insist upon your
doing kindness. For he says, “give him to
eat, end give him to drink.” Then as the
command he gave was a very difficult and a
great one, he proceeds: “for in so doing thou
shalt heap coals of fire upon his head.” And
this he said both to humble the one by fear,
and to make the other more ready-minded


Homity XXII]


through hope of a recompense.!_ For he that
is wronged, when he is feeble, is not so much
taken with any goods of his own as with the
vengeance upon the person who has pained
him. For there nothing so sweet as to see an
enemy chastised. What he is longing for,
then, that he gives him first, and when he has
let the venom go, then he again gives advice
of a higher tone, saying, “ Be not ov ercome of
evil.” For he knew that if the enemy were a
very brute, he would not continue an enemy
when he had been fed.2 And if the man
injured be of ever so little* a soul, still when
feeding him and giving him to drink, he will
not himself even have any farther craving for
his punishment. Hence, out of confidence in
the result of the action, he does not simply
threaten, but even dwells largely upon the
vengeance. For he did not say, “ thou shalt
take vengeance,” but, “thou shalt heap coals
Of fire upon his head.”* Then he further
declares him victor, by saying, “be not over-
come of evil, but overcome evil with good.”
And he gives a kind of gentle hint, that one
is not to do it with that intention, since cher-
ishing a grudge still would be “being over-
come of evil.” But he did not say it at once,
as he did not find it advisable yet.* But
when he had disburdened the man of his
anger, then he proceeded to say, “ overcome
evil with good.” Since this would be a
victory. For the combatant is rather then
the conqueror, not when he brings himself
under to take the blows, but when he with-
draws himself, and makes his antagonist
waste his strength upon the air. And in this
way he will not be struck himself, and will
also exhaust the whole of the other’s strength.
And this takes place in regard to affronts
also. For when you do affronts in return,


7 av7Tiddcews. It means a recompense upon the other.
2 Most Mss. omit **he would not..... fed.’

3 wxpowuxos. Ed. Ben. quotes St. Bas. Z/. 74 and St. Ath. t.
i. p. 142 a and 152 f. Hist. tracts pp. 41 and marg., 55, to show
that this word may be used in the sense of ‘ malicious.” It
sometimes means “‘ niggardly,’ ’ both being characteristics of a
little mind. v. p. 106 and 373.

* The meaning which is here attached to the (expression:
thou shalt heap coals of fire upon his head, viz. : thou shalt
bring the divine vengeance upon him, is very improbable.
Such a consideration could not be urged as a motive of Chris-
tian love. Augustin well says: “How does any one love
the man to whom he gives food and drink for the very pur-
pose of heaping coals of fire upon his head, if ‘coals of fire’
in this place signify some heavy punishment?’’ The mean-
ing is: thou shalt by returning good for evil. bring the evil-
doer to shame and remorse. This course will be the dictate
of Christian love because it will tend to reveal the man’s
wrong-doing to himself, induce repentance for it and lead
him to forsake it. The repentance of Saul is an example
(1 Sam. xxiv. 17), ‘‘ And Saul lifted up his voice and wept.
And he said: thou art more righteous than I: for thou hast
rendered unto me good, whereas I have rendered unto thee
evil.’’—G. B. S.

4 It may be objected that St. Paul was not speaking toa
person in a rage, but generally to all. However, it is plain
that the admonition is meant for those who want it.
there are many people who justify themselves in bearing mal-
ice, so as to require such management even in a general admo-
nition.


THE EPISTLE! TO: THE ROMANS:


And |


509


you have the worse, not as overcome (so 1
Ms. vwiyfeic, Sav. rtas) by a man, but what
is far more disgraceful, by the slavish passion
of anger. But if you are silent, then you will
conquer, and erect a trophy without a fight,
and will have thousands to crown you, and to
condemn the slander of falsehood. For he
that replies, seems to be speaking in return as
if stung. And he that is stung, gives reason
to suspect that he is conscious of being guilty
of what is said of him. But if you laugh at it,
by your laughing you do away with the sen-
tence against you. And if you would have a
clear proof of what has been said, ask the
enemy himself, when he is most vexed? when
you are heated, and insult him in return? or
when you laugh at him as he insults you?
and you will be told the last rather. For he
too is not so much pleased with not being
insulted in return, as he is vexed because his
abuse was not able to gain any hold upon you.
Did you never see men in a passion, how they
make no great account of their own wounds,
but rush on with much violence, and are
worse than very wild boars for seeking the
hurt of their neighbor, and look to this alone,
and are more given to this than to being on
their guard against getting harmed? When
therefore thou deprivest him of that he
desires most, thou bereavest him of every-
thing, by holding him thus cheap, and show-
ing him to be easy to be despised, and a child
rather than a man; and thou indeed hast
gained the reputation of a wise man, and him
dost thou invest with the character of a
noisome beast. This too let us do when we
are struck, and when we wish to strike, let us
abstain from striking again. But, would you
give a mortal blow? “Turn to him the other
cheek also” (Matt. v. 39), and thou wilt
smite him with countless wounds. For they
that applaud, and wonder at thee, are more
annoying to him than men to stone him would
be; and before them, his conscience will
condemn him, and will exact the greatest
punishment of him, and so he will go off with
a confused look as if he had been treated with
the utmost rigor. And if it is the estimation
of the multitude that you look for, this too
you will have in larger share. And in a
general way we have a kind of sympathy with
those who are the sufferers; but when we
also see that they do not strike (several Mss.
resist, avrurizrovrac) in return, but even give
themselves up to it, we not only pity them,
but even feel admiration for them.

Here then I find reason to lament, that we
who might have things present, if we listened
to Christ’s Law as we should, and also attain
to things to come, are cast out of both by not


510 THE WORKS OF


paying attention to what has been told us, but
giving ourselves to unwarranted philosophi-
sing about them. For He has given us laws
upon all these points for our good, and has
shown us what makes us have a good name,
what brings us to disgrace. And if it was
likely to have proved His disciples ridiculous,
He would not have enjoined this. But since
this makes them the most notable of men,
namely, the not speaking ill, when we have ill
spoken of us; the not doing ill when we have
ill done us; this was His reason for enjoining
it. But if this be so, much more the speaking
of good when we have ill spoken of us, and
the praising of those that insult us, and the
doing good to those that plot against us, will
make us so, This then was why He gave
these laws. For He is careful for His own
disciples, and knowing well what it is that
maketh little or great. If then He both
careth and knoweth, why dost thou quarrel
with Him, and wish to go another road? For
conquering by doing ill is one of the devil’s
laws. Hence in the Olympic games which
were celebrated to him! it is so that all the
competitors conquer. But in Christ’s race
this is not the rule about the prize, for, on the
contrary, the law is for the person smitten,
and not for the person smiting, to be crowned.
For such is the character of His race, it has
all its regulations the other way; so that it is
not in the victory only, but also in the way of
the victory, that the marvel is the greater.
Now when things which on the other side are
signs of a victory, on this side he showeth to
be productive of defeat, this is the power of
God, this the race of Heaven, this the theatre
of Angels. I know that ye are warmed thor-
oughly now, and are become as soft as any
wax, but when ye have gone hence ye will
spew it all out. This is why I sorrow, that
what we are speaking of, we do not show in
our actions, and this too though we should be
greatest gainers thereby. For if we let our
moderation be seen, we shall be invincible to
any man; and there is nobody either great or
small, who will have the power of doing us


1 The Fathers generally believed the devils were connected
with idol-worship. See Tertullian de Sfectac. p. 202 O. T. St.
Augustin de Czv. Dez, i. 32, etc. Clem. Ad. Protr. c. 3.


ST. CHRYSOSHOM.


[HomiLy XXII}


any hurt. For if any one abuseth thee, he has —
not hurt thee at all, but himself severely.
And if again he wrong thee, the harm will be
with the person who does the wrong. Did —
you never notice that even in the courts of —
law those who have had wrong done them are
honored, and stand and speak out with entire
freedom, but those who have done the wrong,
are bowed down with shame and fear? And
why do I talk of evil-speaking (Sav. conj. and
5 Mss. xaxyyopiav) and of wrong? For were he
even to whet his sword against thee, and to
stain his right hand in thy life-blood (cig viv
zamov, AS Pp. 505), it is not thee that he hath
done any harm to, but himself that he hath
butchered. And he will witness what I say
who was first taken off thus by a brother’s
hand. For he went away to the haven with-
out a billow, having gained a glory that dieth
not away; but the other lived a life worse
than any death, groaning, and trembling, and
in his body bearing about the accusation of
what he had done. Let us not follow after
this then, but that. For he that hath ill done
him, has not an evil that taketh up its con-
stant abode with him, since he is not the
parent of it; but as he received it from
others, he makes it good by his patient endur-
ance. But he that doeth ill, hath the well of
the mischief in himself. Was not Joseph in
prison, but the harlot that plotted against him
in a fine and splendid house? Which then
wouldest thou wish to have been? And let
me not hear yet of the requital, but examine
the things that had taken place by themselves.
For in this way thou wilt rate Joseph’s prison
infinitely above the house with the harlot in
it. For if you were to see the souls of them
both, you would find the one full of enlarge-
ment and boldness, but that of the Egyptian
woman. in straitness, shame, dejection, confu-
sion, and great despondency. And yet she
seemed to conquer; but this was no real vic-
tory. Knowing all this then, let us fit our-
selves for bearing ills, even that we may be
freed from bearing ills, and may attain to the
blessings to come. Which that we may all
attain to, God grant, by the grace and love
toward man, etc.


ag


HomiLy XXIII]


THE EPISTLE TO THE “ROMANS.


511


RORY, DT


ROM.


“Let every soul be subject unto the higher powers.”


OF this subject he makes much account in
other epistles also, setting subjects under
their rulers as household servants are under
their masters. And this he does to show that
it was not for the subversion of the common-
wealth that Christ introduced His laws, but
for the better ordering of it, and to teach men
not to be taking up unnecessary and unprofit-
able wars. For the plots that are formed
against us for the truth’s sake are sufficient,
and we have no need to be adding tempta-
tions superfluous and unprofitable. And ob-
serve too how well-timed his entering upon
this subject is. For when he had demanded
that great spirit of heroism, and made men fit
to deal either with friends or foes, and ren-
dered them serviceable alike to the prosper-
ous and those in adversity and need, and in
fact to all, and had planted a conversation
worthy of angels, and had discharged anger,
and taken down recklessness, and had in
every way made their mind even, he then
introduces his exhortation upon these matters
also. For if it be right to requite those that
injure us with the opposite, much more is it
our duty to obey those that are benefactors to
us, But this he states toward the end of his
exhortation, and hitherto does not enter on
these reasonings which I mention, but those
only that enjoin one to do this as a matter of
debt. And to show that these regulations are
for all, even for priests, and monks, and not
for men of secular occupations only, he hath
made this plan at the outset, by saying as
follows: “let every soul be subject unto the
higher powers,” if thou be an Apostle even,
or an Evangelist, or a Prophet, or anything
whatsoever, inasmuch as this subjection is
not subversive of religion. And he does not
say merely “obey,” but ‘be subject.” And


the first claim such an enactment has upon us, |


and the reasoning that suiteth the faithful, is,
that all this is of God’s appointment.

“For there is no power,” he says, “ but of
God.”

What say you? it may be said; is every
ruler then elected by God? This I do not
say, he answers. Nor am I now speaking


God.


GH) 8 ap


about individual rulers, but about the thing in
itself. For that there should be rulers, and
some rule and others be ruled, and that all
things should not just be carried on in one
confusion, the people swaying like waves in
this direction and that; this, I say, is the
work of God’s wisdom. Hence he does not
say, “for there is no ruler but of God;” but
it is the thing he speaks of, and says, ‘there
is no power but of God.* And the powers
that be, are ordained of God.” Thus when a
certain wise man saith, “It is by the Lord
that a man is matched with a woman” (Prov.
xix. 14, LXX.), he means this, God made mar-
riage, and not that it is He that joineth
together every man that cometh to be with a
woman. For we see many that come to be
with one another for evil, even by the law of
marriage, and this we should not ascribe to
But as He said Himself, ‘* He which
made them at the beginning, made them male
and female, and said, For this cause shall a
man leave father and mother, and shall cleave


to his wife, and they twain shall be one flesh.”
(Matt. xix. 4, §/;/Gent: iv 24.) “and thists
what that wise man meant to explain. For
since equality of honor does many times lead
to fightings, He hath made many governments
and forms of subjection ; as that, for instance,
of man and wife, that of son and father, that
of old men and young, that of bond and free,
that of ruler and ruled, that of master and
discip!e. And why are you surprised in the
case of mankind, when even in the body He
hath done the same thing? For even here
He hath not made all parts of equal honor,


* The distinction which Chrys. carries through his interpre
tation of this passage on human government, between author-
ity 7% abstracto and im concreto belongs rather to a philosoph-
ical treatment of the subject than to an exposition of the
apostle’s language. The use of general terms like éfovo.a
and ovova cannot have been designed to leave room for con-
crete exceptions since the apostle blends general and spe-
cific terms throughout the passage [apyovtes (3) @eov dtaxovos
(4)].. The question of obeying unjust rulers and supporting the
‘“powers ’’ in unjust measures, the apostle does not raise.
He is stating a general principle and he says nothing of excep-
tions. His language does not exclude the possibility ot
exceptions when the reign of rulers becomes clearly subver-
sive of moral order and opposed to the principles of the
divine government.—G. B.S

1 See xr Cor. vii. 21; Col. ili. 22; x Tim. vi. 2.’ Slavery is
clearly recognized as a lawful state of life, appointed by Prov-
idence, and in Col. iv. 1, is shown to have a typical meaning ;
this does not necessarily imply the common opinion of the
| Greeks (Ar. Pol. i. 1), that there is a natural distinction of
' men into the free and the slavish


Eig


THE WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homity XXIII.


but He hath made one less and another
greater, and some of the limbs hath He made
to rule and some to be ruled. And among
the unreasoning creatures one may notice this
same principle, as amongst bees, amongst
cranes, amongst herds of wild cattle. And
even the sea itself is not without this goodly
subordination ; for there too many of the clans
are ranged under one among the fishes, and
are led thus as an army, and make long
expeditions from home. For anarchy, be
where it may, is an evil, and a cause of con-
fusion. After having said then whence gov-
ernments come, he proceeds, “ Whosoever
therefore resisteth the power, resisteth the ordi-
nance of God.’ See what he has led the sub-
ject on to, and how fearful he makes it, and
how he shows this to be a matter of debt.
For lest the believers should say, You are
making us very cheap and despicable, when
you put us, who are to enjoy the Kingdom of
Heaven, under subjection to rulers, he shows
that it is not to rulers, but to God again that
he makes them subject in doing this. For it
is to Him, that he who subjects himself to
authorities is obedient. Yet he does not say
this—for instance that it is God to Whom a
man who listens to authorities is obedient—
but he uses the opposite case to awe them,
and gives it a more precise form by saying,
that he who listeneth not thereto is fighting
with God, Who framed these laws. And this
he is in all cases at pains to show, that it is
not by way of favor that we obey them, but
by way of debt. For in this way he was more
likely to draw the governors who were unbe-
lievers to religion, and the believers to
obedience. For there was quite a common
report in those days (Tert. Ap. 1, 31, 32),
which maligned the Apostles, as guilty of a
sedition and revolutionary scheme, and as
aiming in all they did and said at the subver-
sion of the received institutions. When then
you show our common Master giving this in
charge to all His, you will at once stop the
mouths of those that malign us as _ revolution-
ists, and with great boldness will speak for the
doctrines of truth. Be not then ashamed, he
says, at such subjection. For God hath laid
down this law, and is a strong Avenger of
them if they be despised. For it is no com-
mon punishment that He will exact of thee, if
thou disobey, but the very greatest ; and noth-
ing will exempt thee, that thou canst say to
the contrary, but both of men thou shalt
undergo the most severe vengeance, and there
shall be no one to defend thee, and thou wilt
also provoke God the more. And all this he
intimates when he says,

“ And they that resist shall receive.to them-


selves damnation.” Then to show the gain of
the thing after the fear, he uses reasons too to
persuade them as follows:

Ver. 3. “ For rulers are not a terror to good
works, but to the evil.”

For when he has given a deep wound, and
stricken them down, he again uses gentler
treatment, like a wise physician, who applies
soothing medicines, and he comforts them,
and says, why be afraid? why shudder? For
does he punish a person that is doing well ?
Or is he terrible to a person who lives in the
practice of virtue? Wherefore also he pro-
ceeds, “ Wilt thou then not be afraid of the
power? Do that which is good, and thou
shalt have praise of the same.” You see how
he has made him friends (ckeiwcev) with the
ruler, by showing that he even praises him
from his throne. You see how he has made
wrath unmeaning.

Ver. 4. ‘“‘ For he is the minister of God to
thee for good.”

So far is he from terrifying thee, he says,
that he even praises thee: so far from being
a hindrance to thee, that he even works with
thee. When then thou hast his praise and
his succor, how is it that thou art not in sub-
jection to him? For he maketh virtue easier
for thee in other ways also, by chastising the
wicked, by benefiting-and honoring?’ the good,
and by working together with the will of God.
Whence too he has even given him the name
of “‘ Minister.”2 And consider: I give you
counsel to be sober-minded, and he, by the
laws, speaks the same language. I exhort
you not to be rapacious and grasping. And
he sits in judgment in such cases, andl so is a
worker together with us, and an assistant to
us, and has been commissioned by God for
this end? Hence there are both reasons for
reverencing him, both because he was com-
missioned by God, and because it was for such
an object. ‘“ But if thou do that which is evil,
be afraid.” It is not then the ruler that mak-
eth the fear, but our own wickedness.

“For he beareth not the sword in vain.”
You see how he hath furnished him with arms,
and set him on guard like a soldier, for a
terror to those that commit sin. “For he is
the minister of God to execute wrath, a re-


ed


4 Most Mss. omit ‘‘and honoring.”

2 Or Deacon; the Coronation Service illustrates the sacred
view of the kingly office ; as by the use of the Dalmatic (sect.
x.), which belongs also to Deacons; see Palmer, Or. Zzt. ap-
pend. sect. iv.

3 Compare Butler, Azalogy 1,2, and Arist. 7%. v. 1. ““ The
law commands to do the acts of a brave man, such as not quit-
ting one’s post, not flying, not throwing away one’s arms.
And those of a sober man, as not to commit adultery, or to in-
sult any one. And those of a meek person, as not to strike,
not to defame; and so with other virtues and vices,...”
Where he means that the law cannot enforce the character
but can demand the acts, and is so far drawing man towards
what is suitable to his nature. Butler shows that this isa
part of God’s moral government.


HomILy XXIII]


venger upon him that doeth evil.”” Now lest
you should start off at hearing again of punish-
ment, and vengeance, and a sword, he says
again that itis God’s law he is carrying out.
For what if he does not know it himself? yet
it is God that hath so shaped things (oirwe
érorwoev). If then, whether in punishing, or in
honoring, he be a Minister, in avenging
virtue’s cause, in driving vice away, as God
willeth, why be captious against him, when he
is the cause of so many good doings, and
paves the way for thine too? since there are
many who first practised virtue through the
fear of God. For there are a duller sort,
whom things to come have not such a hold
upon as things present. He then who by fear
and rewards gives the soul of the majority a
preparatory turn towards its becoming more
suited for the word of doctrine, is with good
reason called “ the Minister of God.”

Ver. 5. ‘Wherefore ye must needs be sub-
ject, not only for wrath but also for conscience
sake.”

What is the meaning of, “not only for
wrath?” It means not only because thou dost
resist God by not being subject, nor only
because thou art procuring great evils for thy-
self, both from God and the rulers, but also
because he is a benefactor to thee in things of
the greatest importance, as he procures peace
to thee, and the blessings of civil institutions.
For there are countless blessings to states
through these authorities; and if you were to
remove them, all things would go to ruin, and
neither city nor country, nor private nor pub-
lic buildings, nor anything else would stand,
but all the world will be turned upside down,
while the more powerful devour the weaker.
And so even if some wrath were not to follow
man’s disobedience, even on this ground thou
oughtest to be subject, that thou mayest not
seem devoid of conscience and feeling towards
the benefactor.

Ver. 6. “ For, for this cause pay ye tribute
also; for they are God’s ministers, attending
continually on this very thing.”

Without going one by one into the benefits
done to states by the rulers, as that of good
order and peace, the other services, as regard-
ing the soldiery, and those over the public)
business, he shows the whole of this by a sin-
gle case. For that thou art benefited by him,
he means, thou bearest witness thyself, by
paying him a salary. Observe the wisdom
and judgment of the blessed Paul. For that
which seemed to be. burdensome and annoying |
—the system of imposts—this he turns into a
proof of their care for men. What is the rea-
son, he means, that we pay tribute to a king?
It is not as providing for us? And yet we}


22
IO


THE EPISTLE TO THE ROMANS.


513


should not have paid it unless we had known
in the first instance that we were gainers from
this superintendence. Yet it was for this
that from of old all men came to an agreement
that governors should be maintained by us,
because to the neglect of their own affairs,
they take charge of the public,! and on this
they spend their whole leisure, whereby our
goods also are kept safe. After saying then
what the external goods are, he again averts
to the former line of argument (for in this
way he was more likely to attract the believer
to him), and he shows again that this is God’s
decree, and on it he makes his advice rest
finally, in these words, “they are God’s min-
isters.” Then to show the pains they take,
and their hard life, he proceeds,

“Waiting continually upon this very thing.”

For this is their life, this their business,
that thou mayest enjoy peace. Wherefore in
another Epistle, he bids them not only be
subject, but also “pray’’ in their behalf.
And as showing there too that the advantage
was common to all, he adds, “that we may
lead a quiet and peaceable life in all things.” *
(1 Tim. ii. 1, 2.) For it is in no smail degree
that they contribute to the settled state of the
present life, by keeping guard, beating off
enemies, hindering those who are for sedition
in the cities, putting an end to differences
among any. For do not tell me of some one
who makes an ill use of the thing, but look to
the good order that is in the institution itself,
and you ‘will see the great wisdom of Him
who enacted this law from the first.

Ver. 7, 8. “Render therefore to all their
dues; tribute to whom tribute, custom to
whom custom, fear to whom fear, honor to
whom honor. Owe (or ye owe) no man any-
thing, but to love one another.”

He still keeps upon the same line, bidding
them pay them not money only, but honor
and fear. And how is it when he said above,
“Wilt thou not be afraid of the power? do
that which is good;” that he here says “ ren-
der fear?” He does it meaning exceeding
honor, and not the fear which comes from a
bad conscience, which he alluded to before.
And it is not “ give,” that he says, but “ren
der” (or “ give back,” azédore), and then adds
to it, the “dues.” For it is not a favor that
you confer by so doing, since the thing is


1 Arist. £¢h. viii. 8, ‘“* The political union of men seems to
have been first formed for advantage, and for this it is up-
held.” See Po/. i. 2, where he says of it, that “it is formed
that men may live, but is (in the nature of things) that they
may live well.’

2 St. Augustin de Civ. Dez, xix. 17, writes, ‘‘ But the heav-
enly city, or rather that part of it which sojourneth in this mor-
tal state, and liveth by faith, must likewise make use of this
kind of peace, till that mortality, for which such peace is
needful, pass away.’” And xix. 26, he quotes 1 Tim. ti. 2, and
Jer. xxix. 7, to the same purpose.


‘~\
514


THE WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[HomMILy XXIII.


matter of due. And if you do it not, you will
be punished as obstinate. Do not suppose
that you are lowering yourself, and detracting
from the dignity of your own philosophy, if
you rise up at the presence of a ruler, or if
you uncover your head. For if he laid these
laws down at that time, when the rulers were
Gentiles, much more ought this to be done
with them now they are believers. But if you
mean to say, that you are entrusted with
greater privileges, be informed that this is not
thy time. For thou art a stranger and a so-
journer. A time will be when thou shalt ap-
pear brighter than all. Now thy “life is hid
with Christ in God. When Christ shall ap-
pear, then shall ye also appear with Him in
glory.” (Col. iii. 3, 4.) Seek not then in this
life of accidents thy change, but even if thou
hast to be with fear in a ruler’s presence,
do not think that this is unworthy thy
noble birth. For so God willeth, that the
ruler who has his place marked? by
Him, should have his own power. And
when he who is conscious of no evil in
himself, stands with fear in the judge’s pres-
ence, much more will he who doth evil things
be affrighted, and thou in this way wilt be the
more respected. For it is not from honoring
that the lowering of self comes but from dis-
honoring him. And the ruler will treat thee
with greater respect, and he will glorify thy
Master owing to this, even if he be an unbe-
liever. ‘Owe? no man anything, but to love
one another.” Again he has recourse to the
mother of good deeds, and the instructress of
the things spoken of, who is also productive
of every virtue, and says that this is a debt
also, not however such as the tribute or the
custom, but a continuous one. For he does
not wish it ever to be paid off, or rather he
would have it always rendered, yet never fully
so, but to be always owing. For this is the


character of the debt, that one keeps giving.


and owing always. Having said then how
he ought to love, he also shows the gain of it,
saying,

“For he that loveth another hath fulfilled
the Law.”

And do not, pray, consider even this a
favor ; for this too is a debt. For thou owest
love to thy brother, through thy spiritual rela-
tionship. And not for this only, but also
because “‘we are members one of another.”
And if love leave us, the whole body is rent
in pieces. Love therefore thy brother. For
if from his friendship thou gainest so much as


1 tumwéeis, See P. 513, OUTwWs ETUTwWaEV. The sense appears to
be, ‘‘ whose precise character in every form of government
Himself determines.”

2 Or ‘tye owe,”’ it may seem that this is his sense, from
** thou owest,”’ but he would have it look the other way.


to fulfil the whole Law, thou owest him love
as being benefited by him.

Ver. g. ‘For this, Thou shalt not commit
adultery, Thou shalt not kill, Thou shalt not
steal, Thou shalt not bear false witness,3 and
any other commandment, is briefly compre-
hended in this saying, Thou shalt love thy
neighbor as thyself.”

He does not say merely it is fulfilled, but
“it is briefly comprehended,! that is, the
whole work of the commandments is concisely
and in a few words completed. For the be-
ginning and the end of virtue is love. This
it has for its root, this for its groundwork, this
for its summit. If then it be both beginning
and fulfilment, what is there equal to it? But
he does not seek love merely, but intense
love. For he does not say merely “love thy
neighbor,’ but, ‘as thyself.”” Hence also
Christ said® that “the Law and the Prophets
hang upon” it. And in making two kinds of
love, see how He has raised this! For after
saying that the first commandment is, “ Thou
shalt love the Lord thy God,’ He added a
second;® and He did not stay, but added,
“like unto it; Thou shalt love thy neighbor
as thyself.” What can be equal to this love
to man, or this gentleness? That when we
were at infinite distance from Him, He brings
the love to us into comparison with that
toward Himself, and says that that “‘is like
unto this.” Hence then, to put the measures
of either as nearly the same, of the one He
says, “with all thy heart, and with all thy
soul,” but of this towards one’s neighbor, He
says, “as thyself.” But Paul said, that when
this did not exist even the other was of no
great profit to us. As then we, when we are
fond of any one, say, if you love him, then you
love me; so He also to show this saith, “is
like unto it;” and to Peter, “If thou lovest
Me, feed My sheep.” (John xxi. 16.)

Ver. 10. “Love worketh no ill to his
neighbor, therefore love is the fulfilling of the
Law.”

Observe how it has both virtues, abstinence
from evils (for it ‘ worketh no ill,” he says),
and the working of good deeds. “For it is,”
he says, “the fulfilling (or filling up) of the
Law;” not bringing before us instruction
only on moral duties in a coneise form, but
making the accomplishment of them easy also.
For that we should become acquainted with

3 St. Chrysostom omits ‘‘Thou shalt not covet.” Many
Mss. of the New Testament omit ‘‘ Thou shalt not bear false
witness,” but all known Mss. of St. Chrysostom have it, as
well as the printed copies.

4 avaxepadaovTar, see p. 472, note 3.

5 Matt. xxii. 39. St. Hilary on the place notices that the
second could not be called like unto it, were it not that our


Neighbor means Christ, i. e. as present in His members.
6 So most Mss. while the old edd. read ‘added, and the


second—”’


wes


HomILy XXII1.]


THE Eee “O. Vite Rope.


515


things profitable to us was not all that he was
careful for (which is the Law’s care), but also
with a view to the doing of them it brought
us great assistance ; accomplishing not some
part of the commandments, but the whole sum
of virtue in us. Let us then love one another,
since in this way we shall also love God,! Who
loveth us. For in the case of men, if you love
a man’s beloved, he that loveth him is conten-
tious at it. But here He deemeth thee wor-
thy to share His love, and hateth thee when
thou sharest not. For man’s love is laden
with envy and grudging ;? but God’s is free
from all passion, whence also He seeketh for
those to share His love. For He says, love
thou with Me, and then thyself also will I
love the more. You see the words of a vehe-
ment lover! If thou love My beloved, then
will I also reckon Myself to be greatly beloved
of thee. For He vehemently desireth our
salvation, and this He showed from of old.
Now hear what He saith when He was form-
ing the man, “Let Us make man in Our
Image :” and again, ‘“‘ Let Us? make an help
meet for him. It is not good for him to be
gone: (Gen, i. 26.) And when ,he had
transgressed, He rebuked him, observe how
gently ;* and He does not say, Wretch! thou
very wretch ! after receiving so great benefits,
hast thou after all trusted to the devil? and
left thy Benefactor, to take up with the evil
spirit? But what saith He? ‘Who told
thee that thou art naked, unless thou hast
eaten of the Tree, from which alone I com-
manded thee not to eat?” (ib. ili. rz.) As if
a father were to say to a child, who was or-
dered not to touch a sword, and then diso-
beyed and got wounded, ‘“ How camest thou
wounded? Thou camest so by not listening
to me.” You see they are the words of a
friend rather than a master, of a friend de-
spised, and not even then forsaking. Let us
then imitate Him, and when we rebuke, let
us preserve this moderation. For even the
woman He also rebuketh again with the same
gentleness. Or rather what He said was not
so much rebuke as admonition and correction,
and security against the future. This is why
He saith nothing® to the serpent. For he
was the designer of the mischiefs, and had it
not in his power to put off the accusation on
any one else, wherefore He punished him
severely: and even here He did not come to


1 Ms. ‘‘ be beloved of God,’’ which makes a fair sense with
the context.

2 Plato, Phedr. p. 217, B. 6 d@dvos Ew Oetov xopov iorarar,
aoe standeth without the Divine circle. ,

3 Gen. ii. 18. This plural is in the LXX., not in the Hebrew.
See in Gen. c. ii. Hom. xiv.

4 On the Fall, see Hom. xvii. in Gen.

5 Nothing before or beside his sentence. Nothing of admo-
nition. See Ben.


a pause, but made the earth also to share in
the curse. But if He cast them out of para-
dise, and condemned them to labor, even for
this we ought to adore and reverence Him the
most. For since self-indulgence issues in
listlessness, He trenches upon the pleasure by
building a fort of pain against listlessness,
that we may return to the love of Him. And
what of Cain’s case? Doth he not meet with
the same gentleness? For being by him also
insulted, He doth not reproach (same word as
insult) in return, but entreats (or comforts)
him, and says, “Why is thy countenance
fallen?’’ (Gen. iv. 6.) And yet what he had
done allowed of no excuse whatever. And
this the younger brother shows. But still even
then He doth not rebuke him: but what saith
He? ‘Hast thou sinned: keep peace;” “do
so no more.” ‘To thee shall his turning be,
and thou shalt rule over him’’® (ib. 7, LXX.),
meaning his brother. “‘ For if thou art afraid,
lest for this sacrifice,” He means, “I should
deprive thee of the preéminence of the first-
born, be of good cheer, for the entire com-
mand over him do I put intothy hands. Only
be thou better, and love him that hath done
thee no wrong; for I have an interest in you
both. And what maketh Me most glad is,
that ye be not at variance one with another.”
For as a devoted mother, so doth God do and
plan everything to keep one from being torn
from another ; but that you may get a clearer
view, by an example, of my meaning, call to
your mind, pray, Rebecca in her trouble, and
running about everywhere, when the elder
son was at enmity with the younger. For if
she loved Jacob, still she did not feel averse
to Esau. And therefore she said, Lest by any
means “I be deprived of both of you, my
children, in one day.” (ib. xxvii. 45.) There-
fore also God upon that occasion said, “ Thou
hast sinned: be at peace: unto thee shall his
turning be” (ib. iv. 7), so repressing the
murder beforehand, and aiming at the peace
of them both. But when he had murdered
him, He did not even then bring His care for
him to a close, but again answers the fratricide
in gentle terms, saying, ‘‘ Where is thy brother
Abel?” that even now, if he would, he might
make a full confession. But he struggled in
defence of his former misdeeds, with a greater
and sadder shamelessness. But even then
God doth not leave him, but again speaks the
language of an iujured and despised lover,
and says, ‘The voice of thy brother’s blood
crieth unto Me.” (Gen. iv. 10.) And again
He rebukes the earth with the murderer, turn-
ing His wrath off to it, and saying, “‘ Cursed


6 See Hom. xix. in Gen. St. Cyr. Al. Glaph. lib. i. § 2, p.


! 20 B. takes this as said to Abel.


516


THE: WORKS (OF (Si. sCHRY SCsiiere


|Homity XXIII.


be the earth, which opened her mouth to
receive thy brother’s blood” (ib. ii.); and
doing like those who lament (avaxatoivrac), as
David also did when Saul was fallen. For he
made an address to the mountains which re-
ceived him as he died, in the words, “ Ye
mountains of Gilboa, let there fall on you
neither rain nor dew, because there were the
shields of the mighty cast away.” (2 Sam i.
21.) And thus God also, as though singing
some solitary dirge (uovwiav), saith, ‘The
voice of thy brother’s blood crieth unto Me;
and now art thou cursed from the earth,
which hath opened her mouth to receive thy
brother’s blood from thy hand.” And this
He said to humble his fiery passion, and to
persuade him to love him at least now he was
gone. Hast thou extinguished his life? He
would say; why dost thou not now extinguish
the hatred also? But what doth He do? He
loveth both the one and the other, since He
made them both. What then?? doth (4 Mss.
will) He let the murderer go unpunished ?
Nay, he would but have grown worse. Will
He punish him then? Nay, He hath more
tenderness than a father. See then how He
at once punisheth and also displays, even in
this, His love. Or rather, He doth not so
much as punish, but only corrects. For He
doth not kill him, but only fetters him with
trembling, that he may divest himself of the
crime, that so at least he may come back to a
natural tenderness for the other, and that so
at last he may make a truce with him now he
hath gone; for He were fain he should not go
away to the other world in enmity with him
that was deceased. This is the way wherein
they that love, when in doing acts of kindness
they meet with no love in return, are led on
to be vehement and to threaten, not with their
will indeed, but led by their love to do this:
that at least in this way they may win over
those that scorn them. Yet affection of this
sort is one of compulsion, and still this even
solaces them, through the vehemency of their
love. And so punishment itself comes from
affection, since unless pained at being hated,
they would not choose to punish either. Now
observe, how this is what Paul says to the
Corinthians. For “who is he” (says he)
“that maketh me glad, but the same which is
made sorry by me?” (2 Cor. ii. 2.) And so
when he is going to the full extent of punish-
ment, then he shows his love. Thus the
Egyptian woman too, from her vehement love,
as vehemently punished Joseph: and _ she


1 Alluding to the orévwv wat tpéuwy of the LXX., v. 12.


indeed did so for mischief, the love being un-
chaste ; but God for good, since the love was
worthy of Him who loved. This is why He
does not refuse even to condescend to grosser
words, and to speak the names of human _ pas-
sions, and to call Himself jealous. For “I
am a jealous God” (Ex. xx. 5), He saith, that
you may learn the intenseness of the love.
Let us then love Him as He would have us:
for He sets great store thereby. And if we
turn away, He keepeth inviting us, and if we
will not be converted, He chasteneth us
through His affection, not through a wish to
exact punishment of us, And see what He
saith in Ezekiel to the city that was beloved,
yet had despised Him. “TI will bring thy
lovers against thee, and will deliver thee into
their hands, and they shall stone thee, and
shall slay thee, and My jealousy shall be
taken away from thee, and I will rest, and I
will not trouble Myself any more.” (From
Ezek. xvi. 37-42.) What more than this
could a vehement lover have said, when de-
spised by his beloved, and after all again
ardently loving her? For God doeth every-
thing that He may be loved by us, and owing
to this He spared not even His Son. But we
are unbending, and savage. Yet let us be-
come gentle at last, and love God as we ought
to love Him, that we may with pleasure enjoy
virtue. For if any that hath a beloved wife
does not perceive any of the vexations that
come day by day, He that loveth with this
divine and pure love, only consider what great
pleasure he will have.to enjoy! For this is,
indeed it is, the kingdom of Heaven; this is
fruition of good things, and pleasure, and
cheerfulness, and joy, and blessedness. Or
rather, say as many things as I may, I shall
still be unable to give you any such represen-
tation of it as should be, but the trial of it
alone can give a knowledge of this goodly
thing. Wherefore also the Prophet saith,
“ Delight thyself in the Lord” (Ps. xxxvii. 4),
and, “Taste and see that the Lord is gra-
cious.” (Ib. xxxiv..8.) 2 Let us then bere
suaded, and indulge ourselves in His love.
For in this way we shall both see His King-
dom even from out of this life, and shall be
living the life of Angels, and while we abide
on earth, we shall be in as goodly a condition
as they that dwell in heaven; and after our
departing hence, shall stand the brightest of
beings by the judgment-seat of Christ, and
shall enjoy that glory unutterable, which may
we all attain unto, by the grace and love
toward man of our Lord Jesus Christ. For to
Him is the glory forever, Amen.


HomILy XXIV.]


THE EPISTLE TO THE ROMANS.


HOMILY “AXLYV:


ROM. XIII. 11.


“ And that, knowing the time, that now it is high time
to awake out of sleep.”


StncE he had given them what commands
were fitting, he again thrusts. them on to the
performance of good works, in consideration
of what was pressing upon them. For the
time of judgment, he means, is at the doors.
So too he wrote to the Corinthians also,
“The remaining time is short.” (1 Cor. vil.
29.) And to the Hebrews again, “ For yet a
little while, and He that shall come will
come, and will not tarry.” (Heb. x. 37.)
But in those cases it was to cheer those in
trouble, and to solace the toils of their closely
successive temptations, that he said those


things: but in the passage before us he does


it to rouse those that are asleep, this language
being useful to us for both the purposes: and
what is that which he says, “ Now it is high
time to awake out of sleep?” Itis, that near
is the Resurrection, near the awful Judgment,
and the day that burneth as a furnace, near,


Henceforward then we must be free from our.


listlessness; ‘‘ for now is our salvation nearer
than when we believed.’*


son of our present life is wasting away, and
that of the life to come waxes nearer. If
then thou be prepared, and hast done all
whatsoever He hath commanded, the day is


salvation to thee (3 Mss. and Cat. cwrnpia cor) 5 |


but if the contrary, not so. For the present


however, it is not upon alarming grounds that |
he exhorts them, but upon kindly ones, thus |


also to untie them from their fellow-feeling


for the things of this present world. Then)
since it was not unlikely, that in the begin- |


ning of their early endeavors they would be


most earnest, in that their desire was then at)


its full vigor, but that as the time went on,


SE EEE


1 x Cor. vii. 29. The stopping only is altered, as in Hom.
xix. on the Hebrews (Matthiz) p. 225 ed. Field.

* ‘Hyav is better taken with éyyvtepov: ‘* For now is sal-
vation nearer Zo us than when we believed.’’ (So R. V.)
Both the position of the words and the requirements of
emphasis favor this construction. Chrys. is essentially cor-
rect in referring 7 owtypia here to the last things. The refer-


ence is to the Messianic salvation which is to be ushered in by }


the Parousia of the Lord from heaven. The period which
shall intervene between the time of writing and the advent
of Christ is designated as ‘‘ night’ (12), but the ** day’’ which
the Messianic owtnpia shall usher in is near(jyyexev).—G. B. S.


You see how he.
puts the Resurrection now close by them.
For as the time advances, he means, the sea- |


the whole of their earnestness would wither
down to nothing; he says that they ought
however to be doing the reverse, not to get
relaxed as time went on, but to be the more
full of vigor. For the nearer the King may
be at hand, the more ought they to get them-
selves in readiness; the nearer the prize is,
_the more wide awake ought they to be for the
contest, since even the racers do this, when
'they are upon the end of the course, and
towards the receiving of the prize, then they
rouse themselves up the more. This is why
he said, “ Now is our salvation nearer than
when we believed.”

Ver. 12. “ The night is far spent, the day is
at hand.”

If then this is upon ending, and the latter
is drawing near, let us henceforth do what
‘belongs to the latter, not to the former. For
this is what is done in the things of this life.
And when we see the night pressing on
towards the morning, and hear the swallow
twittering, we each of us awake our neighbor,
although it be night still. But so soon as it
is actually departing, we hasten one another,
and say, It is day now! and we all set about
the works of the day, dressing, and leaving
our dreams, and shaking our sleep thoroughly
off, that the day may find us ready, and we
may not have to begin getting up, and stretch-
ing ourselves, when the sunlight is up. What
then we do in that case, that let us do here also.
Let us put off imaginings, let us get clear of
the dreams of this life present, let us lay aside
its deep slumber, and be clad in virtue for


garments. For it is to point out all this that
he says,
“Tet us therefore cast off the works of


darkness, and let us put on the armor of
light.”

Yes, for the day is calling us to battle-
|array, and to the fight. Yet fear not at hear-
|ing of array and arms. For in the case of
‘the visible suit of armor, to put it on isa
heavy and abhorred task. But here it is
desirable, and worth being prayed for. For
it is of Light the arms are! Hence they will
| set thee forth brighter than the sunbeam, and
giving out a great glistening, and they place
thee in security: for they are arms, and glit-


518 DEB WOR Kes os


tering do they make thee: for arms of light
are they! What then, is there no necessity
for thee to fight? yea, needful is it to fight,
yet not to be distressed and toil. For it is
not in fact war, but a solemn dance and feast-
day, such is the nature of the arms, such the
power of the Commander. And as the bride-
groom goes forth with joyous looks from his
cham ber, so doth he too who is defended with
these arms. For he is at once soldier and
bridegroom. But when he says, “the day is
at hand,” he does not even allow it to be but
near, but puts it even now beside us. For he
says,

“Let us walk becomingly,” (A. V. honestly,
in this sense) “as in the day.” For day it
already is. And what most people insist
upon very much in their exhortations, that he
also uses to draw them on, the sense of the
becoming. For they had a great regard to
the esteem of the multitude.t. And he does
not say, walk ye, but let us walk, so making
the exhortation free from anything grating,
and the reproof gentle.

“Not in rioting and drunkenness.” Not
that he would forbid drinking, but the doing
it immoderately; not the enjoying of wine,
but doing it to excess (werd rapowiac). AS
also the next thing he states likewise with the
same measure, in the words,

“Not in chambering and wantonness;”’
for here also he does not prohibit the inter-
course of the sexes, but committing forni-
cation. “Not in strife and envying.” It is
the deadly kind of passions then that he is
for extinguishing, lust, namely, and anger.
Wherefore it is not themselves only, but even
the sources of them that he removes. For
there is nothing that so kindles lust, and in-
flames wrath, as drunkenness, and sitting long
at the wine. Wherefore after first saying,
“not in rioting and drunkenness,” then he
proceeded with, “not in chambering and
wantonness, not in strife and envying.” And
even here he does not pause, but after strip-
ping us of these evil garments, hear how he
proceeds to ornament us, when he says,

Ver. 14. But putiye, on the Lord? jesus
Christ.;

He no longer speaks of works, but he
rouses them to greater things. For when he
was speaking of vice, he mentioned the works
of it: but when of virtue, he speaks not of
works, but of arms, to show that virtue put-
teth him that is possessed of it into complete
safety, and complete brightness. And even
here he does not pause, but leading his dis-


1 St. Augustin de Civ. Dez, v. 13-15, discusses this motive,
and the temporal good that comes of it, as to the Roman state ;
quoting Matt. vi. 2.


ST. GHRYSOST ame:


[Homity XXIV.


course on to what was greater, a thing far
more awestriking; he gives us the Lord Him-
self for a garment, the King Himself: for he
that is clad with Him, hath absolutely all
virtue.* But in saying, “ Put ye on,” he bids
us be girt about with Him upon every-side. As
in another place he says, ‘‘ But if Christ be in
you.” (Rom. vill. 10.) And again, “That
Christ may dwell in the inner man.” (Eph.

ili. 16. 17, al, punct.) For He would have our
aa to be a dwelling for Himself, and Himself
to be laid round about us as a garment, that
He may be unto us all things both from
within and from without. For He is our
fulness ; for He is “the fulness of Him that
filleth all in all” (ib. i. 23): and the Way,
and the Husband, and the Bridegroom ;—for
‘““T have espoused you as a chaste virgin to
one. husband,”, (2° Cor. &xi.2); and) aeraas,
and drink, and meat, and life ;—for he says,
“*T live, yet not I, but Christ liveth-iny meas
(Gal. ii. 20) and Apostle, and High-Priest,
and Teacher, and Father, and Brother, and
Joint-heir, and sharer of the tomb and
Cross ;—for it says, ‘‘ We were buried together
with Him,” and “ planted together in the
likeness of His Death” (Rom. vi. 4, 5): and
a Suppliant ;—‘‘ For we are ambassadors in
Christ's stead”) (2) (Gor...) 2c) ane uaiem
“ Advocate to the Father;”—for “ He also
maketh,” it: says, -“"Simtercession, ion wise
(Rom. vill. 34) and house and inhabitant ;—
for He says, “‘ He that abideth in Me and I in
Him ”’ (John xv.'5): and a Prien: for. ae
are My friends ” Gb. 14): and a Foundation,
and Corner-stone. And we are His members
and His heritage, and building, and branches,
and fellow-workers. For what is there that He
is not minded to be to us, when He makes us
cleave and fit onto Him in every way? And
this is a sign of one loving exceedingly. Be
persuaded then, and rousing thee from sleep,
put Him on, and when thou hast done so,
give thy flesh up to His bridle. For this is
what he intimates in saying,

“And make not provision for the flesh, to
fulfil the lusts thereof.” For as he does not
forbid drinking, but drinking to excess, not
marrying, but doing wantonness; so too he
does not forbid making provision for the flesh
either, but doing so with a view “to fulfil the
lusts thereof,” as, for instance, by going be-
yond necessaries. For that he does bid make
provision for it, hear from what he says to
Timothy, “‘ Use a little wine for thy stom-


* In one of the apostle’s favorite figures, that of putting off,
or on, as clothing, he states again the essential qualities of the
Christian life. The Christian iseven now to belong to that
sphere of light into whose full glory he shall shortly be
raised. The culminating thought is: ‘“‘put on Christ.’
Chrys.’ application of the Shostle s exhortation is one of his
most eloquent passages.—G. B. S.


HoMILY XXIV.]


ach’s sake, and thine often infirmities.”
(1 Tim. v. 23.) So here too he is for taking
care of it, but for health, and not wantonness.
For this would cease to be making provision
for it, when you were lighting up the flame,
when you were making the furnace powerful.
But that you may form a clearer notion what
“‘making provision ” for it “to fulfil the lusts
thereof” is, and may shun such a provision,
just call to mind the drunken, the gluttonous,
those that pride themselves in dress, those
that are effeminate, them that.live a soft and
relaxed life, and you will see what is meant.
For they do everything not that they may be
healthy, but that they may be wanton and
kindle desire. But do thou, who hast put on
Christ, prune away all those things, and seek
for one thing only, to have thy flesh in health.
And to this degree do make provision for it,
and not any further, but spend all thy industry
on the care of spiritual things. For then you
will be able to rouse yourself out of this sleep,
without being weighed down with these mani-
fold desires. For the present life is a sleep,
and the things in it are no way different from
dreams. And as they that are asleep often
speak and see things other than healthful, so
do we also, or rather we see much worse
even. For he that doeth anything disgraceful
or says the like in a dream,’ when he is rid
of his sleep, is rid of his disgrace, also, and
is not to be punished. But in “this case it is
not so, but the shame, and also the punish-
ment, are immortal. Again, they that grow
rich in a dream, when it is day are convicted
of having been rich to no purpose. But in
this case even before the day the conviction
often comes upon them, and before they
depart to the other life, those dreams have
flown away.

Let us then shake off this evil sleep, for if
the day find us sleeping, a deathless death
will succeed, and before that day we shall be
open to the attacks of all the enemies that are
of this world, both men and devils: and if
they be minded to undo us, there is nobody
to hinder them. For if there were many
watching, then the danger would not be so
great; since however, one perhaps there is, or
two, who have lighted a candle, and would be
as it were watching in the depth of night,
while men were sleeping ; therefore now we
have need of much sleeplessness, much
guardedness, to prevent our falling into the
most irremediable evils. Doth it not now
seem to be broad daylight? do we not think
that all men are awake and sober? yet still


1 On this see St. Augustin, Cov/. x. 30, p. 205 O. T. de Gen. ad
dit. x. 12, xii. 15. St. Greg. Aor. viii. § 42 Sq. pp. 449, 450 O. T.
Cassian. Collat.


tHE. BFISTLE TO THE ROMANS.


519


|


(and perhaps you will smile at what I say,
still say it I will) we seem all of us like men
sleeping and snoring in the depth of night.
And if indeed an incorporeal being could be
seen, I would show you how most men are
snoring, and the devil breaking through walls,
and butchering us as we lie, and stealing
away the goods within, doing everything fear-
lessly, as if in profound darkness. Or rather,
even if it be impossible to see this with our
eyes, let us sketch it out in words, and con-
sider how many have been weighed down by
evil desires, how many held down by the sore
evil of wantonness, and have quenched the
light of the Spirit. Hence it comes that they
see one thing instead of another, hear one
thing instead of another, and take no notice
of any of the things here told them. Or if I
am mistaken in saying so, and thou art awake,
tell me what has been doing here this day, if
thou hast not been hearing this as a dream.
I am indeed aware that some can tell me
(and I do not mean this of all); but do thou
who comest under what has been said, who
hast come here to no purpose, tell me what
Prophet, what Apostle hath been discoursing
to us to-day? and on what subjects? And
thou wouldest not have it in thy power to tell
me. For thou hast been talking a great deal
here, just as in a dream, without hearing the
realities. And this I would have said to the
women too, as there is a great deal of sleep-
ing amongst them. And would it were sleep!
For he that is asleep says nothing either good
or bad. But he that is awake as ye are puts
forth many a word even for mischief on his
own head, telling his interest, casting up his
creditor accounts, calling to memory some
barefaced bargaining, planting the thorns
thick in his own soul, and not letting the seed
make even ever so little advance. But rouse
thyself, and pull these thorns up by the roots,
and shake the drunkenness off: for this is the
cause of the sleep. But by drunkenness I
mean, not that from wine only, but from
worldly thoughts, and with them that from
wine also. (See p. 443.) And this advice? I
am giving not to the rich only, but the poor
too, and chiefly those that club together for
social parties. For this is not really indul-
gence or relaxation, but punishment and ven-
geance. For indulgence lies not in speaking
filthy things, but in talking solemnly, in being
filled, not being ready*to burst. But if thou
thinkest this is pleasure, show me the pleasure
by the evening! Thou canst not! And


|hitherto J say nothing of the mischiefs it leads


2 This is a good illustration of Aristotle’s remark, that
‘“‘ general discourses on moral matters are pretty well useless,
while particular ones are more like the truth.” £74. ii. 7.


520


FHE WORKS OF. ST. CHRYSOSTaE


JHomiILy XXIV.


to, but at present have only been speaking to
you of the pleasure that withers away so
quickly. For the party is no sooner broken
up, than all that went for mirth is flown away.
But when I come to mention the spewing, and
the headaches, and the numberless disorders,
and the soul’s captivity, what have you to say
to all this? Have we any business, because
we are poor, to behave ourselves unseemly
too? And in saying this I do not forbid your
meeting together, or taking your suppers at a
common table, but to prevent your behaving
unseemly, and as wishing indulgence to be
really indulgence, and not a punishment, nor
a vengeance, or drunkenness and revelling.
Let the Gentiles (é/yvec) see that Christians
know best how to indulge, and to indulge in
an orderly way. For it says, “ Rejoice in the
Lord with trembling.” (Ps. ii. 11.) But how
then can one rejoice? Why, by saying
hymns, making prayers, introducing psalms in
the place of those low songs. Thus will
Christ also be at our table, and will fill the
whole feast with blessing, when thou prayest,
when thou singest spiritual songs, when thou
invitest the poor to partake of what is set be-
fore thee, when thou settest much orderliness
and temperance over the feast. So thou wilt
make the party a Church,! by hymning, in the
room of ill-timed shouts and cheers, the Mas-
ter of all things. And tell me not, that an-
other custom has come to prevail, but correct
what is thus amiss. ‘“* For whether ye eat,” it
says, “or whether ye drink, or whatsoever ye
do, dovallito the elory, of God”) (a Corsa
31.) For from banquets of that sort you have
evil desires, and impurities, and wives come
to be in disrepute, and harlots in honor
among you. Hence come the upsetting of
families and evils unnumbered, and all things
are turned upside down, and ye have left the
pure fountain, and run to the conduit of mire.
For that an harlot’s body is mire, I do not en-
quire of any one else but of thine own self that
wallowest in the mire, if thou dost not feel
ashamed of thyself, if thou dost not think thy-
self unclean after the sin is over. Wherefore
I beseech you flee fornication, and the mother
of it, drunkenness. Why sow where reaping
is impossible, or rather even if thou dost reap,
the fruit brings thee great shame? For even
if a child be born, it at once disgraces thyself,
and has itself had injustice done it in being
born through thee illegitimate and base. And
if thou leave it never so much money, both
the son of an harlot, and that of a servant-
maid, is disreputable at home, disreputable in
the city, disreputable in a court of law: dis-


1 Ora et tbt templum est, D. Bernard.


reputable too wilt thou be also, both in thy
lifetime, and when dead. For if thou have
departed even, the memorials of thy unseemli-
ness abide. Why then bring disgrace upon
all these? Why sow where the ground makes
it its care to destroy the fruit ? where there are
many efforts at abortion? where there is mur-
der before the birth? for even the harlot thou
dost not let continue a mere harlot, but
makest her a murderess also. You see how
drunkenness leads to whoredom, whoredom to
adultery, adultery to murder; or rather to a
something even worse than murder. For I
have no name to give it, since it does not take
off the thing born, but prevent its being
born.* Why then dost thou abuse the gift of
God, and fight with His laws, and follow after
what is a curse as if a blessing, and make the
chamber of procreation a chamber for murder,
and arm the woman that was given for child-
bearing unto slaughter? For with a view to
drawing more money by being agreeable and
an object of longing to her lovers, even this
she is not backward to do, so heaping upon
thy head a great pile of fire. For even if the
daring deed be hers, yet the causing of it is
thine. Hence too come _ idolatries, since
many, with a view to become acceptable,

devise incantations, and libations, and love-
potions, and countless other plans. Yet still
after such great unseemliness, after slaughters,
after idolatries, the thing seems to manv to
belong to things indifferent, aye, and to many
that have wives too. Whence the mingle
(gopuric) Of mischief is the greater. For
sorceries * are applied not to the womb that is
prostituted, but to the injured wife, and there
are plottings without number, and invocations
of devils, and necromancies, and daily wars,
and truceless fightings, and home-cherished
jealousies. Wherefore also Paul, after saying,
‘not in chamberings and wantonness,”’ pro-
ceeds, “ not in strife and envying,’ as know-
ing the wars that result therefrom; the
upsetting of families, the wrongs done to
legitimate children, the other ills unnumbered.
That we may then escape from all these, let
us put on Christ, and be with Him continually.
For this is what putting Him on is; never be-
ing without Him, having Him evermore vis-
ible in us, through our sanctification, through
our moderation. So we say of friends, such
an one is wrapped up (évedécaro) in such an-
other, meaning their great love, and keeping
together incessantly. For he that is wrapped
up in anything, seems to be that which he is.
wrapped in. Let then Christ be seen in every


2? See Arist. Polét. vii. Tertull. Afol.i. 9, p. 22 O. T. and


note r.
3 Or poisonings.


HoMILy XXV.]|


part of us. And how is He to be seen? If
thou doest His deeds. And what did He do?
“The Son ‘of Man,” He says, “hath not
where to lay His head.” (Luke ix. 58.) This
do thou also aim after! He needed the use
of food, and He fared upon barley loaves.
He had occasion to travel, and there were no
horses or beast of burden anywhere, but He
walked so far as even to be weary. He had
need of sleep, and He lay “asleep upon the
pillow in the fore (xpiuvn, here mpapac) part of
the ship.” (Mark iv. 38.) There was occasion
for sitting down to meat, and He bade them lie
down upon the grass. And His garments were
cheap; and often He stayed alone, with no
train after Him. And what He did on the
Cross, and what amidst the insults, and all,
in a word, that He did, do thou learn by heart
(katauafiv) and imitate. And so wilt thou
have put on Christ, if thou “make no provi-
sion for the flesh to fulfil the lusts thereof.”
For the thing has no real pleasure, since these
lusts gender again others more keen, and thou
wilt never find satisfaction, but wilt only make
thee one great torment. For as one who is in
a continual thirst, even if he have ten thou-
sand fountains hard by him, gets no good from
this, as he is not able to extinguish the dis-
order, so is he that liveth continually in lusts.
But if thou keep to what is necessary, thou


BD vs os iy 0 PR Oa BG


ROMANS. 521


wilt never come to have this fear, but all
those things will go away, as well drunkenness
as wantonness. Eat then only so much as to
break thy hunger, have only so much upon
thee as to be sheltered, and do not curiously


deck thy flesh with clothing, lest thou ruin it,


For thou wilt make it more delicate, and wilt
do injury to its healthfulness, by unnerving it
with so much softness. That thou mayest
have it then a meet vehicle for the soul, that
the helmsman may be securely seated over
the rudder, and the soldier handle his arms
with ease, thou must make all parts to be
fitly framed together. Forit is not the having
much, but requiring little, that keeps us from
being injured. For the one man is afraid
even if he is not wronged: this other, even if
he be wronged, is in better case than those
that have not been wronged, and even for this
very thing is in the better spirits. Let the
object of our search be then, not how we can
keep any one from using us spitefully, but
how even if he wish to do it, he may be with-
out the power. And this there is no other
source whence to obtain, save by keeping to
necessaries, and not coveting anything more.
For in this way we shall be able to enjoy our-
selves here, and shall attain to the good


things to come, by the grace and love toward


iman, etc.


ewer OV.


ROM. ASEVE, I,,-2-


“ Him that is weak in the faith receive ye, but not to
doubtful disputations. For one believeth that he
may eat all things; another, who is weak, eateth
herbs.”


I am aware that to most what is here said
is a difficulty. And therefore I must first
give the subject of the whole of this passage,
and what he wishes to correct in writing this.
What does he wish to correct then? There
were many of the Jews which believed, who
adhered of conscience to the Law, and after
their believing, still kept to the observance of
meats, as not having courage yet to quit the
service of the Law entirely. Then that they
might not be observed if they kept from
swine’s flesh only, they abstained in conse-
quence from all flesh, and ate herbs only, that
what they were doing might have more the


appearance of a fast than of observance of the |


1 Lying on the bare ground was a common part of ascet-
icism.


|Law.* Others again were farther advanced,
(reAecérepxx) and kept up no. one thing
of the kind, who became to those, who did
keep them, distressing and offensive, by re-


* Chrys. adopts the view which was common in antiquity
as to who the ‘*‘ weak’’ here mentioned were. He regards
them as judaizing Christians who were over-zealous for the
Mosaic law and even went beyond its explicit requirements to
abstain from swine’s flesh and abstained trom meat altogether.
Another class of interpreters have supposed that the scru-
ples of the ‘‘ weak’’ concerning meat had the same ground
as in 1 Cor. viii. and x., viz., the fear of eating flesh and
drinking wine that had been used in the heathen sacrificial
worship (So Riickert, Philippi, Neander). The chief objection
to the former view is that they could not have derjved their
doctrine of entire abstinence from meat and wine from the
Mosaic law, which prohibits only the flesh of certain unclean
animals, and does not prohibit wine at all except in particular
cases. The difficulty with the second view is that the whole
passage has no allusion to heathen sacrifices, which could
hardly have been the case if they had been the ground of the
rai (5 On the contrary in v. 14 Paul in correcting these
ascetic notions declares his conviction that nothing is ** un-
clean 0/ ¢tsed//,"’ showing that their view was that flesh and
wine possessed 72 themselves some power of pollution. The
difficulties connected with these explanations have led many
recent scholars to different explanations. Baur regarded the
‘““weak ’’ as Ebionitic Christians, but the Ebionites abstained
from flesh as inherently sinful and it would seem that if this
had been the opinion of the ‘* weak’’ that Paul could hardly


522 THE WOR


proaching them, accusing them, driving them
to despondency. ‘Therefore the blessed Paul,
out of fear lest, from a wish to be right about
a trifle, they should overthrow the whole, and
from a wish to bring them to indifferency
about what they ate, should put them in a
fair way for deserting the faith, and out of a
zeal to put everything right at once, before
the ‘fit opportunity was come, should do
mischief on vital points, so by this continual
rebuking setting them adrift from their
agreement in (éuodoyiac eic) Christ, and so they
should remain not righted in either respect :
observe what great judgment he uses and how
he concerns himself with both interests with
his customary wisdom. For neither does he
venture to say to those who rebuke, Ye are
‘doing amiss, that he may not seem to be con-
firming the ‘other in their observances; nor
again, Ye are doing right, lest he should
make them the more vehement accusers: but
he makes his rebuke to square with each.
And in appearance he is rebuking the
stronger, but he pours forth all he has to say!
against the other in his address to these.
For the kind of correction most likely to be
less grating is, when a person addresses some
one else, while he is striking a blow at a
different person, since this does not permit
the person rebuked to fly into a passion, and
introduces the medicine of correction unper-
ceived. See now with what judgment he does
this, and how well-timed he is with it. For
after saying, ‘make not provision for the
flesh to fulfil the iusts thereof,’ then he
proceeds to the discussion of these points,
that he might not seem to be speaking in
defence of those who were the rebukers, and
were for eating of anything. For the weaker
part ever requires more forethought. Where-
fore he aims his blow against the strong,
immediately saying as follows, “‘ Him that is
weak in the faith.” You see one blow
immediately given to him. -For by calling
him weak (dactsvoivra), he points out that he is
have treated it so mildly. Since the Ebionites date from
about 70 A. D., these ascetics at Rome could have been
Ebionitic only in the sense of having the germs of subsequent
Ebionism. An opinion similar to this has been advocated by
Ritschl, Meyer and Mangold. In their view the root of this
asceticism was Essenic. There was certainly a Judeo-Chris-
tian minority in the Roman church. The ideas of the Essenes
were widely disseminated among the Jews at the time. It is
natural to suppose that among the Roman Jews there were
Essenes Or those of Essenic tendencies who upon their
conversion would associate their rigorous asceticism with the
Christian doctrine of the subjugation of the flesh. This view
best meets the requirements of the passage. The Essenes
abstained wholly from wine and practised a supra-legal
regimen in regard to food. They would have no occasion to
array themselves against the apostle’s doctrine and he there-
fore treats their scruples not ina polemic but in a cautious
and conciliatory spirit.—G. B. S.

1 xevor, i. €. so as not to have to say anything against them
directly. St. Chrysostom turns the passage in that way more
than Theodoret. See on v. 4, which Theod. applies directly


against the Judaizers. His general remarks on the rhetoric of
the passage are independent | of this question.


KS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM:


[HomMILY XXV.


not healthy (4appweror),
“receive,” and point out again that he
requires much attention. And this is a sign
of extreme debility. “Not to doubtful dis-
putations.” * See, he has laid on a third
stripe. For here he makes it appear that his
error is of such a nature, that even those who
do not transgress in the same manner, and
who nevertheless admit him to their affection,
and are earnestly bent upon curing him, are
at doubt.2, You see how in appearance he is
conversing with these, but is rebuking others
secretly and without giving offence. Then by
placing them beside each other, one he gives
encomiums, the other accusations. For he
goes on to say, “‘ One believeth that he may eat
all things,” commending him on the score of
his faith. ‘‘ Another who is weak, eateth
herbs,” disparaging this one again, on the
score of his weakness. Then since the blow
he had given was deadly (ka:piav, used hyper-
bolically), he comforts him again in these
words,

Ver. 3. “ Let not him that eateth, despise
him that eateth not.”

He ‘does ‘not ‘say, let, him. alenes aan
does he say, do not blame him, nor yet,
do not set him right; but do not reproach
him, do not ‘despise’ him, to show they
were doing a thing perfectly ridiculous. But
of this he speaks in other words. ‘Let not
him which eateth not, judge him that eateth.”
For as the more advanced made light of
these, as of little faith, and falsely healed,
and spurious, and still Judaizers, so they too
judged these as law-breakers, or as given to


Then he adds next,


* Verse 2 counsels receiving to Christian fellowship those
affected by these ascetic scruples but mi eis dtaxpicers Siadoyio-
pov. These words have. been variously rendered: (1) ‘** not
to doubtful disputations ” (A, V., R. V.); (2) ‘‘ for decisions
of doubts” (marg. R. V.); (3) not to judgings of thoughts”
(Meyer); ‘‘ not to discussions of opinions ” (Godet). It is
clear that fe apostle exhorts the church against allowing the
scruples in question to be matter of debate and division but
whether he means to place a limitation upon the church’s
duty to receive the weak brethren or whether he exhorts
them to refrain from making the opinions of the weak a mat-
ter of discussion and judgment, is a question still unsettled.
The following consideration deserve attention in the deci-
sion of the question (1) Paul treats the ‘‘ weak” throughout
with great forbearance and tenderness. (2) The church is
the party exhorted. (3) It is probably that the dcaxpicets
dtadoyiopuwv refer to actions or judgments which the church
would be in danger of exercising toward the weak. (4) It is
likely that the question of eating meats or herbs only (v. 2) is
a specimen of the dvadAoyouor referred to. (5) Ataxpious
means an act of ee aes things that differ, i. e. a logi-
cal or moral judgment. he question remains whether
dvadoytouos means a doubt, or a thought, an opinion. The
latter is the primary meaning and seems preferable here.
Then the meaning would be: receive these persons to fellow-
ship and abstain from criticisms and judgments upon their con-
scientious opinions. The translation of our Eng. vs. ‘* not to
doubtful disputations” is as ambiguous as the original phrase
is in Greek. and is, therefore, a faithful rendering in respect of
ambiguity. These translators seem to take Svaxpioets aS mean-
ing “doubts nae meaning which that word cannot be shown
to bear.—G. B. S.

2 He seems to mean, ‘‘are at doubt whether they may ac-
knowledge such.’”’ So C&cumenius seems to take it, who par-
aphrases this comment, and adds cat xwpigeo@ar, ‘and sepa-
rate themselves.”’


Lies


Tfomity XXV.]


Pie EPIStEE TO. THE: ROMANS.


523


gluttony.
were of the Gentiles too. Wherefore he
proceeds, ‘‘for God hath received him. But
in the other’s case he does not say this.
And yet to be despised was the eater’s
share, as a glutton, but to be judged, his
that did not eat, as of little faith. But he
has made them change places, to show that he
not only does not deserve to be despised, but
that he can even despise. But do I condemn
him? he means. By no means. For this is
why he proceeds, “for God hath received
him.” Why then speakest thou to him of
the law, as to a transgressor? “For God
hath received him:” that is, has shown His
unspeakable grace about him, and hath freed
him from all charges against him ; then again
he turns to the strong.

Ver. 4. ‘Who art thou that judgest another
man’s servant?”

Whence it appears that they too judged,
and did not despise only. ‘To his own
Master he standeth or falleth.” See here is
another stroke. And the indignation seems
to be against the strong man, and he attacks
him. When he says, ‘Yea, he shall be
holden up,” he shows that he is still waver-
ing, and requireth so much attention as to
call in God as a physician for this, “ for
God,” he says, “is able to make him stand.”
And this we say of things we are quite in
despair about. Then, that he may not de-
spair he both gives him the name of a servant
-when he says, “Who art thou that judgest
another man’s servant?”” And here again he
secretly attacks him. For it is not because
he does things worthy to exempt him from
being judged, that I bid you not judge him,
but because he is Another’s servant, that is, not
thine, but God’s. Then to solace him again
he does not say, “falleth,” but what?
“‘standeth or falleth.” But whether it be
the latter or the former, either of these is the
Master’s concernment, since the loss also goes
to Him, if he does fall, as the riches too, if he
stand. And this again if we do not attend to
Paul’s aim in not wishing them to be rebuked
before a fitting opportunity, is very un-
worthy of the mutual care becoming for
Christians. But (as I am always saying) we
must examine the mind with which it is
spoken, and the subject on which it is said,
and the object he would compass when he
says it. But he makes them respectful by
no slight motive, when he says this : for what
he means is, if God, Who undergoeth the
loss, hitherto doth nothing, how can you be
else than ill-timed and out of all measure
exact, when you seize on (ayxw», throttle) him
and annoy him?


And of these it is likely that many |


Ver. 5. “One man esteemeth one day
above another, another esteemeth every day
alike.”

Here he seems to me to be giving a gentle
hint about fasting. For it is not unlikely that
some who fasted were always judging those
who did not, or among the observances it is
likely that there were some that on fixed
days abstained, and on fixed days did not.
Whence also he says, ‘Let every man be
fully persuaded in his own mind.” And in
this way he released those who kept the
observances from fear, by saying that the
thing was indifferent, and he removed also
the quarrelsomeness of those who attacked
them, by showing that it was no very desirable
(or urgent, zepioroidacrov) task to be always
making a trouble about these things. Yet it
was not a very desirable task, not in its own
nature, but on account of the time chosen,
and because they were novices in the faith.
For when he is writing to the Colossians, it is


with great earnestness that he forbids it,
saying, ‘Beware lest any man spoil you


through philosophy and vain deceit, after the
traditions of men, after the elements of the
world, and not after Christ.” (Col. ii. 8, see
p. 4.) And again, “ Let no man judge you
in meat or in drink” (ib. 16), and, “let no
man beguile you of your reward.” (ib. 18.)
And when writing to the Galatians with great
precision, he exacts of them Christian spirit
and perfectness in this matter. But here
he does not use this vehemency, because
the faith was lately planted in them. Let
us therefore not apply the. phrase, “ Let
every man be persuaded in his own mind,” to
all subjects. For when he is speaking of
doctrines, hear what he says, “If any one
preacheth unto you any gospel other than that
ye have received, let him be accursed” (Gal.
i. g), “even” if it be “an angel.” And again,
‘“‘T fear lest by any means as the serpent
beguiled Eve through his subtilty, so your
minds should be corrupted.” (2 Cor. xi. 3.)
And in writing to the Philippians, he says,
“Beware of dogs, beware of evil workers,
beware of the concision.” (Phil. ili. 2.) But
with the Romans, since it was not yet the
proper time for setting things of this sort
right, “‘ Let every man,” he says, “be fully
persuaded in his own mind.” For he had
been speaking of fasting. It was to clear
away the vanity of the others and to release
these from fear then, that he said as fol-
lows :

Ver. 6. “He that regardeth the day,
regardeth it unto the Lord; and he that


1 exoudvous, here opposed to arexouevous.


524


|
regardeth not the day, to the Lord he doth
not regard it.” And, “ He that eateth, eateth
to the Lord, for he giveth God thanks; and
he that eateth not, to the Lord he eateth not,
and giveth God thanks.”

He still keeps to the same subject. And
what he means is about this. The thing is
not concerned with fundamentals. For the
thing requisite is, if this person and the other
are acting for God’s sake, the thing requisite
is (these words are repeated 3 Mss.), if
both terminate in thanksgiving. For indeed
both this man and that give thanks to God.
If then both do give thanks to God, the
difference is no great one. But let me draw
your notice to the way in which here also he
aims unawares a blow at the Judaizers. For
if the thing required be this, the “ giving of
thanks,” it is plain enough that he which
eateth it is that “giveth thanks,” and not
“he which eateth not.” For how should he,
while he still holds to the Law? As then he
told the Galatians, “As many of you as are
justified by the Law are fallen from grace ”
(Gal. v. 4); so here he hints it only, but does
not unfold itso much. For as yet it was not
time to do so. But for the present he bears
with it (see p. 337): but by what follows he
gives it a further opening. For where he
says,

Ver. 7, 8. “For none of us liveth unto him-
self, and no man dieth unto himself. For
whether we live, we live unto the Lord; and
whether we die, we die unto the Lord,” by
this too he makes the same clearer. For how
can he that liveth unto the Law, be living
unto Christ? But this is not the only thing
that he effects by this, he also holds back the
person who was in so much haste for their
being set right, and persuades him to be
patient, by showing that it is impossible for
God to despise them, but that in due time He
will set them right. What is the force then of
“none of us liveth to himself?” It means,
We are not free, we have a Master who also
would have us live, and willeth not that we
die, and to whom both of these are of more
interest than to us. For by what is here said
he shows that he hath a greater concern for
us than we have ourselves, and considereth
more than we do, as well our life to be wealth,
as our death to be a loss. For we do not die
to ourselves alone, but to our Master also, if
we do die. But by death here he means that
from the faith. However, this were enough
to convince us that He taketh care for us, in
that it is to Him we live, and to Him we die.
Still he is not satisfied with saying this, but
proceeds further. For after saying, “‘ Whether


THE. WORKS..OF ST. CHRYSOSTae


we live, therefore, or die, we are the Lord’s,”


[HomILy XXV.


and passing from that death to the physical
one, that he may not give an appearance of
harshness to his language, he gives another
very great indication of His care for us. Now
of what kind is this?

Ver. g. ‘“‘ For to this end Christ both died,
and rose, and revived, that He might be Lord
both of the dead and living.”

And so let us at least convince thee, that
He is thoughtful for our salvation. For had
He not had this great care for us, where were
the need of the Dispensation (or Incarnation,
oikovouiac) ? He then that hath shown so
much anxiety about our becoming His, as to
take the form of a servant, and to die, will
He despise us after we have become so?
This cannot be so, assuredly it cannot! Nor
would He choose to waste so much pains.
“For to this end (he says) he also died,” as if
any one were to say, Such an one will not
have the heart to despise his servant. For he
minded his own purse. (Cf. Ex. xxi. 21.)
For indeed we are not so much in love with
money, as is He with our salvation. Where-
fore it was not money, but His own Blood
that He gave as bail for us. And for this
cause He would not have the heart to give
them up, for whom He had laid down so
great a price. See too how he shows that
His power also is unspeakable. For he says,
“to this end He both died and revived, that
He might be Lord both of the dead and the
living.” And above he said, “for whether we
live or die, we are His.” See what a wide
extended Mastery! see what unconquerable
might! see what exact providence over us!
For tell me not, he means, of the living.
Even for the departed He taketh care. But
if He doth of the departed, it is quite plain
that He doth of the living also. For He hath
not omitted any point for this Mastery, mak-
ing out for Himself more claims than men do,
and especially beside’ all other things in
order to take care of us. For a man puts
down money, and for this clings strongly to
his own slave. But He Himself paid down
His death; and the salvation of one who was
purchased at so great a price, and the
Mastery over whom He had gained with so
much anxiety and trouble, He is not likely to
count of no value. But this he says to make
the Judaizer abashed, and to persuade him to
call to mind the greatness of the benefit, and


how that when cead he had come to be alive, ~


and that there was nothing that he gained
from the Law, and how that it would be the


2 xwpis: The construction seems imperfect: the Translator
suggests xwpiceis, ‘‘separating Himself from all others.’ If
the passage be not corrupt, xwpis Tav aAAwy amavtwy is merely
= in primis; and so Field.


HomiLty XXV.]


last degree of unfeelingness, to leave Him
Who had shown so much care toward him,
and run away back to the Law. After attack-
ing him then sufficiently, he relaxes again,
and says,

Ver. 10. “ But why dost thou judge thy
brother? or why dost thou set at nought thy
brother?”

And so he seems to be setting them upon a
level, but from that he has said, he shows that
the difference between them is great. First
then by the appellation of “brother ’’ he does
away with disputatiousness, and then also by
calling that awful day to their mind. For
after saying, “‘ Why dost thou set at nought
thy brother?” he proceeds, *‘ For we shall all
stand before the judgment-seat of Christ.”

And he seems indeed to be again rebuking
the more advanced in saying this, but he is
putting the mind of the Judaizer to confusion
by not only calling for his reverence to the
benefit that had been done him, but also mak-
ing him afraid of the punishment to come.
““For we Shall all,” he says, “‘stand before
the judgment-seat of Christ.”

Ver. 11, 12. “‘ For it is written, As I live,
saith the Lord, every knee shall bow to Me,
and every tongue shall confess to God. So
then every one of us shall give account of
himself to God.”

See how he again puts his mind into con-
fusion, while he seems to be rebuking the
other. For he intimates some such thing, as
if he had said, How does it affect you? Are
you to be punished for him? But this he
does not say, but hints at it by putting it in
a milder form, and saying, “ For we shall all
stand before the judgment-seat of Christ :”’
and, ‘So then every one of us shall give ac-
count of himself to God.” And he introduces
the prophet ' in witness of the subjection of
all to Him, yea a subjection extended even
to those in the Old Testament, and of all ab-
solutely. For he does not barely say every
one shall worship, but “shall confess,” that
is, shall give an account of what he has done.
Be in anxiety then as seeing the Master of all
sitting on His judgment-seat, and do not
make schisms and divisions in the Church, by
breaking away from grace, and running over
to the Law. For the Law also is His. And
why say I so of the Law? Even those in the
Law and those before the Law are His. And
it is not the Law that will demand an
account of thee, but Christ, of thee and
of all the human race. See how he has re-


1 Some Mss. and edd. ‘‘ with all attesting the subjection to
Him.” The passage is found Is. xlv. 23, probably the reading
of the LXX., till it was corrected to suit the Hebrew. See
Parsons ad doc.


HE RElot ek. © “LHe ROMANS,


525


leased us from the fear of the Law. Then
that he may not seem to be saying this to
frighten them for the occasion, but to have
come to it in the course he had proposed him-
self, he again keeps to the same subject, and
says,

Ver. 13. “Let us not therefore judge one
another any more: but judge this rather, that
no man put a stumbling-block or an occasion
to fall in his brother’s way.”

This does not apply to one less than the
other: wherefore it may well fit with both,
both the advanced man that was offended at -
the observance of meats, and the unadvanced
that stumbled at the vehement rebuke given
him. But consider, I pray you, the great
punishment we shall suffer, if we give offence
at all. For if in a case where the thing was
against law, yet, as they rebuked unseason-
ably, he forbade their doing it, in order that
a brother might not be made to offend and
stumble ; when we give an offence without
having anything to set right even, what treat-
ment shall we deserve? Forif not saving others
be a crime (and that it is so, he who buried
the talent proves), what will be the effect of
giving him offence also? But what if he gives
himself the offence, you may say, by being
weak? Why this is just why thou oughtest
to be patient. For if he were strong, then he
would not require so much attention. But
now, since he is of the feebler sort, he does
on this ground need considerable care. Let
us then yield him this, and in all respects bear
his burdens, as it is not of our own sins only
that we shall have to give an account, but for
those also wherein we cause others to offend.
For if that account, were even by itself hard
to pass, when these be added too, how are we
to be saved? And let us not suppose, that if
we can find accomplices in our sins, that will
be an excuse; as this will prove an addition
to our punishment. Since the serpent too
was punished more than the woman, as was
the woman likewise more than the man
(x Tim. ii. 14); and Jezebel also was punished
more severely than Ahab, who had seized the
vineyard ; for it was she that devised the
whole matter, and caused the king to offend.
(1 Kings xxi. 23, 25,29.) And therefore thou,
when thou art the author of destruction to
others, wilt suffer more severely * than those
who have been subverted by thee. For sin-


/ning is not so ruinous as leading others also


into the same. Wherefore he speaks of those
who “ not only do the same, but have pleasure
in them that do them.” (Rom. i. 32.) And


2 Sav. Mar. and one Ms. end the sentence, ‘‘ having punish-
ment exacted of the for those who have been made by thee to
offend.”


526


so when we see any sinning, let us, so far
from thrusting them on, even pull them back
from the pit of iniquity, that we may not
have to be punished for the ruin of others
besides ourselves. And let us be continually
in mind of the awful judgment-seat, of the
stream of fire, of the chains never to be
loosed, of the darkness with no light, the
gnashing of teeth, and the venomous worm.
“ Ah, but God is merciful!” Are these then
mere words? and was not that rich man
punished for despising Lazarus? Are not
the foolish? virgins cast out of the Bride-
chamber? Do not they who did not feed
Him go away into “the fire prepared for the
devil?’’ (Matt. xxv. 41.) Will not he that
hath soiled garments be “bound hand and
foot ?.\(iD.) Xxlls) \23)5, and \go..to Tum, 2.) Wall
not he that demanded the hundred pence to
be paid, be given over to the tormentors? Is
not that said of the adulterers * true, that
“their worm, shall not die, nor their fire be
Gmencheds sr ue Mark ix. \43s)) Were | these
but mere threats then? Yea, it is answered.
And from what source pray dost thou venture
to make such an assertion, and that too when
thou passest judgment of thine own opinion?
Why, I shall be able to prove the contrary,
both from what He said, and from what He did.
(See John v. 22.) For if you will not believe by
the punishments that are to come, at least be-
lieve by those that have happened already.
For what have happened, and have come forth
into reality, surely are not threats and words.
Who then was it that flooded the whole world,
and affected that baleful wreck, and the utter
destruction of our whole race! Who was
it that after this hurled those thunders and
lightnings upon the land of Sodom? Who
that drowned all Egypt in the sea? Who that
consumed the six hundred thousand men in the
wilderness? Who that burnt up the syna-
gogue of Abiram? Who that bade the
earth open her mouth for the company of
Core and Dathan, and swallow them up?
Who that carried off the threescore and ten
thousand at one sweep in David’s time?
Shall I mention also those that were punished
individually ! Cain, who was given up to a


1 The oil representing especially deeds of mercy. Hil. ad. 1.
See St. Chrys. on Rom. xi. 6. p. 485.

2 See Matt. v. 28, and 2 Pet. ii. 14. And with respect to
giving cause of offence to others, Mark. ix. 44.

S Field’s punctuation will give the sense, ‘‘ These then are
mere words—the rich man is not punished, nor the foolish
virgins cast out, etc., but these are only threats!”’ which is
ptaes more vigorous. Compare Hom. xxxi. p. 496: also

rowning’s Heretic’s Tragedy.


‘Who maketh God’s menace an idle word ?
Saith, it no more means what it proclaims
Than a damsel’s threat to her wanton bird ?
—For she too prattles of ugly names.
Saith, he knoweth but one thing—what he knows?
That God is good and the rest is breath.”


THE WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[HomiLy XXV..


continual vengeance? (the son of) Charmi,!
who was stoned with his whole family? Or
him, that suffered the same thing for gather-
ing sticks on the sabbath? ‘The forty children
who were consumed by those beasts, and ob-
tained no pardon even on the score of their
age? And if you would see these same things.
even after the times of grace, just consider
what great suffering the Jews had, how the
women ate their children, some roasting
them, and some consuming them in other
ways :° how after being given up to irremedi-
able famine, and wars varied and _ severe,
they threw all previous catastrophes into the
shade by the exceeding greatness of their own
calamities. For that it was Christ Who did
these things unto them, hear Him declaring
as much, both by parables, and clearly and
explicitly. By’ parables, as when He says,
‘“‘ But those that would not that I should reign
over them, bring hither and slay them”
(Luke xix. 27); and by that of the vineyard,
and that of the marriage. But clearly and
explicitly, as when He threatens that they
shall fall by the edge of the sword, and shall
be led away captive into the nations, and
there shall be upon the earth ‘distress of
nations with perplexity, at the roaring of the
sea and waves;® men’s hearts failing them
for fear.’”’* (ib. xx1)\24,;25) -26.)5 8°) And ems
shall be tribulation, such as there never was,
no, nor ever shall be.” (Matt, xxiv 2a)
And what a punishment Ananias too and
Sapphira suffered, for the theft of a few pieces
of money, ye all know. Seest thou not the
daily calamities also? Or have these too not
taken place? Seest thou not now men that
are pining with famine? those that suffer
elephantiasis, or are maimed in body? those
that live in constant poverty, those that suffer
countless irreparable evils? Now then will it
be reasonable for some to be punished, and
some not? For if God be not unjust (and
unjust He is not), thou also wilt assuredly
suffer punishment, if thou sinnest. But if
because He is merciful He doth not punish,
then ought not these either to have been pun-
ished. But now because of these words of
yours, God even here punisheth many, that
when ye believe not the words of the threaten-
ing, the deeds of vengeance ye may at least
believe. And since things of old do not
affright you so much, by things which happen
in every generation, He correcteth those that
in every generation are growing listless.
And what is the reason, it may be said, why


4 Most Mss. have ‘‘ Charmi” or ‘* Charmin;”’ one “* Achar,’”
one ‘‘ Achar the son of Charmi.”’

5 Josephus, B. J. vi., vii. c. 8., Euseb. H. E. iii. 6.

6 So most Mss. of St. Chrysostom, and the best of the N. T.


HomiLty XXV.]


THE EPISTLE TO THE ROMANS. 527


He doth not punish all here? That He may
give the others an interval’ for repentance.
Why then does He not take vengeance upon
all in the next world?* [tis lest many should
disbelieve in His providence. How many
robbers are there who have been taken, and
how many that have left this life unpunished ?
Where is the mercy of God then? it is my
turn now to ask of thee. For supposing no
one at all had vengeance taken upon him,
then you might have taken refuge in this.
But now that some are punished, and some
are not, though they be the worse sinners,
how can it be reasonable that there be not the
same punishments for the same sins? How
can those punished appear to be else than
wronged? What reason is there then why all
are not punished here? Hear His own de-
fence for these things. For when some
had died by the falling of a tower on them;
He said to those who raised a question
upon this, “* Suppose ye that they were sin-
ners above all men? I tell you nay, but ex-
cept ye repent, ye shall all likewise perish ”
(Luke xiii. 4, 5); so exhorting us not to feel
confident when others suffer punishment, and
we ourselves, though we have committed many
transgressions, do not. For except we change
our conduct, we assuredly shall suffer. And
how, it may be said, is it that we are to be
punished without end for sinning a short
time here? how, I ask, is it that in this world,’
those who in a short moment of time have
done one murder, are condemned to constant
punishment in the mines? ‘ But it is not
God that does this,” it may be said. How
then came He to keep the man with a palsy
for thirty and eight years in so great punish-
ments? For that it was for sins that He
punished him, hear what He says, “ Behold,
thou art made whole, sin no more.” (John v.
14.) Still it is said, he found arelease. But
the case is not so with the other life. For
that there, there will never be any release,*
hear from His own mouth, “ Their worm will
not die, nor their fire be quenched.” (Mark
ix. 44.) And “these shall go into everlasting
life, but these into everlasting punishment.”
(Matt. xxv. 46.) Now if the life be eternal,
the punishment is eternal. Seest thou not
how severely He threatened the Jews? Then
have the things threatened come to pass, or
were those that were told them a mere talk?
** One stone shall not remain upon another.”
(Luke xxi. 6.) And has it remained? But
what, when He says, “ There shall be tribula-


1 rpodecuiav, lit. a set time. He has used the term before
with especial view to the length of the time.
’ ? i. e. so as to spare all in this.
3 See Butler’s Azad. i.2. ‘* But all this,” and i. 3. iii.
4 So Mss. Avow. Sav. Anguv, cessation: see 383, note §.


tion such as hath not been?” (Matt. xxiv.
21.) Has it not come then? Read the his-
tory of Josephus, and thou wilt not be able to
draw thy breath even, at only hearing what
they suffered for their doings. This I say,
not that I may pain you, but that I may make
you secure, and lest by having humored you
overmuch, I should but make a way for the
endurance of sorer punishments. For why,
pray, dost thou not deem it right thou shouldest
be punished for sinning? Hath He not told
thee all beforehand? Hath He not threat-
ened thee? not come to thy aid?* not done
things even without number for thy salvation’s
sake? Gave He thee not the laver of Regen-
eration, and forgave He not all thy former
sins? Hath He not after this forgiveness,
and the laver, also given thee the succor of
repentance if thou sin? Hath He not made
the way to forgiveness of sins, even after all
this, easy* to thee? Hear then what He hath
enjoined: “If thou forgive thy neighbor, I
also will forgive thee” (ib. vi. 14), He
says. What hardship is there in this? “If
ye judge the cause of the fatherless, and see
that the widow have right, come and let us
converse together,” He saith, “and if your
sins be as purple, I will make them white as
snow.” (Is. i. 17, 18.) What labor is there
here? ‘Tell thy sins, that thou mayest be
justified.” (Is. xliii. 26. LXX.) What hard-
ship is there in this? ‘‘ Redeem thy sins with
alms.” (Dan. iv. 24.) What toilsomeness is
there in this? The Publican said, ‘“ Be mer-
ciful to me a sinner,” and “ went down home
justified.” (Luke xviii. 13, 14.) What labor
is it to imitate tHe Publican? And wilt thou
not be persuaded even after this that there is
punishment and vengeance? At that rate
thou wilt deny that even the devil is punished.
For, ‘“‘ Depart,” He says, “into the fire pre-
pared for the devil and his angels.” (Matt.
xxv. 41.) Now if there be no hell, then
neither is he punished. But if he is punished,
it is plain that we shall also. For we also


5 So Field: Vulg. ‘ made thee afraid.”

6 St. Chrysostom must not be understood here as making
light of the labor of an effectual repentance, nor as excluding
the office of the Church in accepting the Penitent. His ob-
ject is to show that there is no such difficulty in repentance, as
need be an objection to our belief in eternal punishment. He
is speaking of repentance in the lowest degree, and he cer-
tainly held that different degrees of it would obtain different
degrees of benefit. As of almsgiving on Rom. xi. 6, p. 485.
etc. ‘Itis possible to gain approval by thy last will, not in-
deed in such way as in thy lifetime,”’ and more generally ad
Theodorum Lapsum, t. i. p. 11, 12. Ben. where he represents
it as difficult, though not so much so as it might seem to those
who did nottry it, and know its consolations: and Hom i,
de S. Pentec. fin. he says, *‘It is possible by diligence, prayer,
and exceeding watchfulness, to wipe out all our sins that are
written down. This then let us make our business all our
days, that when we depart thither, we may obtain some for-
giveness, and all escape irrevocable punishments.’’ Of con-
fession he speaks strongly, de Cruce et Latrone, Hom. i. t. 2,
407; B. ad Pop. Ant. Hom. 3, p. 42 E. on the Statues, p. 66
O. T. and of the power of the Priesthood to absolve, de Sac.,
c. 3, § 5, t. i. p. 384 E. quoting Ja. v. 14, 15.


528 THE WORKS OF


ST. CHRYSOSEOM:


[HomILY XXV.


have disobeyed, even if it be not in the same
way. And how comest thou not to be afraid
to speak such daring things? For when thou
sayest that God is merciful, and doth not
punish, if He should punish he will be found
in thy case to be no longer merciful. See
then unto what language the devil leadeth
you? And what? are the monks that have
taken up with the mountains, and yield ex-
amples of such manifold self-denial, to go
away without their crown? For if the wicked
are not to be punished, and there is no recom-
pense made to any one, some one else will
say, perhaps, that neither are the good
crowned. Nay, it will be said, For this is
suitable with God, that there should be a
kingdom only, and not a hell. Well then,
shall the whoremonger, and the adulterer,
and the man who hath done evils unnum-
bered, enjoy the same advantages with the
man who has exhibited soberness and _holi-
ness, and Paul is to stand with Nero, or rather
even the devil with Paul? For if there be no
hell and yet there will be a Resurrection of
all, then the wicked will attain to the same
good things! And who would say this?
Who even of men that were quite
crazed ? or rather, which of the devils even
would say this? For even they confess that
there is a hell. Wherefore also they cried out
and said, ‘‘ Art Thou come hither to torment
us) before the time?” - Gb. viii. 29.)) How
then comest thou not to fear and tremble,
when even the devils confess what thyself art
denying? Or how is it that thou dost not
see who is the teacher of these evil doctrines?
For he who deceived the first,man, and under
the pretext of greater hopes, threw them out
even of the blessings they had in possession,
he it is who now suggests the saying and
fancying of these things. And for this reason
he persuades some to suspect there is no hell,
that he may thrust them into hell. As God
on the other hand threateneth hell, and made
hell ready, that by coming to know of it thou
mightest so live as not to fall into hell. And
yet if, when there is a hell, the devil per-
suades thee to these things, how came the
devils to confess it, if it did not exist,? whose
aim and desire it is that we should not suspect
anything of the kind, that through fearlessness
we might become the more listless, and so
fall with them into that fire? How then (it


1 wvptav aoKnow: the term asceticism is an insufficient trans-
lation of ascesis, since its termination takes off the reality.
The word ‘*“‘crown”’ hints at a play on its secular sense, of
gymnastic training.

2 This sentence may be read so as to avoid the fault in rea-
soning ; he breaks off the supposition as too absurd, and after
a pause gives the true account of the case, which he in fact
assumes in the first clause. The whole passage is rhetorical,
and the first mention of the devils is introduced with tremen-
dous power, as almost any one must have felt in reading it.


will be said) came they to confess it? It was
through their not bearing the compulsion laid
upon them. ‘Taking all these things into con-
sideration then, let those who talk in this yes:
leave off deceiving both themselves and others
since even for these words of theirs they will
be punished for detracting (sacipovrec) from
those awful things, and relaxing the vigor? of
many who are minded to be in earnest, and
do not even do as much as those barbarians,
for they, though they were ignorant of every-
thing, when they heard that the city was to be
destroyed, were so far from disbelieving, that
they even groaned, and girded themselves
with sackcloth, and were confounded, and did
not cease to use every means until they had
allayed the wrath. (Jonah iii. 5.) But dost
thou, who hast had so great experience of
facts and of teaching, make light of what is
told thee? The contrary then will be thy
fate. For as they through fear of the words
had not to undergo the vengeance in act, so
thou who despisest the threatening by words,
wilt have to undergo the punishment in very
deed. And if now what thou art told seems
a fable to thee, it will not, however, seem so
when the very things convince thee, in that
Day. Have you never noticed what He did
even in this world? How when He met
with two thieves, He counted them not worthy
of the same estate, but one He led into the
Kingdom, and the other He sent away into
Hell? And why speak I of a robber and
murderer? For even the Apostle He did not
spare, when he had become a traitor, but even
when He saw him rushing to the halter, and
hanging, and bursting asunder in the midst
(for he did ‘‘ burst asunder, and all his bowels
gushed out”) (Acts i. 18), still when He
foresaw all these things, He let him suffer all
the same, giving thee from the present a proof
of all that is in the other world also. Do not
then cheat yourselves, through being per-
suaded of the devil. These devices are his.
For if both judges, and masters, and teachers,
and savages, respect the good, and punish the —
evil, with what reason is the contrary to be
the case with God, while the good man and ~
he who is not so are deemed worthy of the ~
same estate? And when will they leave off]
their wickedness? For they who now are
expecting punishment, and are amongst so-
many terrors, those from the judges and from —
the laws, and yet do not for this depart from —
iniquity ; when on their departing this life they
are to lay aside even this fear, and are not only —
not to be cast into hell, but are even to obtain
a kingdom; when will they leave doing


rt ee tan ea ess Dp eee


;


4a Or “undoing the awe,’’ as edd. before Field, and some
ss.


HomiLy XXVI.|


THE EPISTLE TO: THE: ROMANS.


529


wickedly? Is this then mercy, pray? to add
to wickedness, to set up rewards for iniquity,
to count the sober and the unchastened, the
faithful and the irreligious, Paul and the
devil, to have the same deserts? But how
long am I to be trifling ?


Wherefore I exhort |


|


having grown to be your own masters, per-
suade your souls to fear and to tremble, that
they may at once be saved from the hell to
come, and may, after passing the life in this
world soberly, attain unto the good things
to come by the grace and love towards man,


you to get you free from this madness, and ‘etc.


HONPLY AXVI.


ROM. XIV. 14.


“*T know, and am persuaded by (Gr. in) the Lord
Jesus, that there is nothing unclean of itself, but
to him that esteemeth anything to be unclean, to
him it is unclean.’’


AFTER first rebuking the person who
judgeth his brother, and moving him to leave
off this reproaching, he then explains himself
further upon the doctrinal part, and instructs
in a dispassionate tone the weaker sort,
displaying in this case tooa great deal of
gentleness. For he does not say he shall
be punished, nor anything of the sort, but
merely disburdens him of his fears in the
matter, and that with a view to his being
more easily persuaded with what he tells him;
and he says, “I know, and am persuaded.”
And then to prevent any of those who did
not trust him (or “believe,” rév oi morév)
saying, And what is it to us if thou art
persuaded? for thou art no_ trustworthy
evidence to be set in competition with so
great a law, and with oracles brought down
from above, he proceeds, “in the Lord.”
That is, as having learned from Him, as
having my confidence from Him. The judg-
ment then is not one of the mind of man.
What is it that thou art persuaded of and
knowest? Tell us. ‘That there is nothing
unclean of itself.” By nature, he says, noth-
ing is unclean but it becomes so by the
spirit in which a man uses it. Therefore


it becomes so to himself only, and not to|


all. “For to him that esteemeth anything
to be unclean, to him it is unclean.” What
then? Why not correct thy brother, that
he may think it not unclean? Why not
with full authority call him away from this
habit of mind and _ conception of things,
that he may never make it common?
reason is, he says, I am afraid to grieve him.


Wherefore he proceeds,


/to tongue-tie him.


Ver. 15. “ But if thy brother be grieved |


with thy meat, walkest thou


charitably.”
34


now


not |


|


You see how far, for the present, he goes
in affection for him, showing that he makes
so great account of him, that with a view not
to grieve him he does not venture even to
enjoin things of great urgency, but by
yieldingness would rather draw him to him-
self, and by charity. For even when he has
freed him of his fears, he does not drag him
and force him, but leaves him his own master.
For keeping a person from meats is no such
matter as overwhelming with grief.t You see
how much he insists upon charity. And this
is because he is aware that it can do every-
thing. And on this ground he makes some-
what larger demand upon them. For so far
he says from its being proper for them to
distress you at all, they ought even, if need
be, not to hesitate at condescending to you.
Whence he proceeds to say, “‘ Destroy not
him with thy meat, for whom Christ died.”
Or dost thou not value thy brother enough
even to purchase his salvation at the price
of abstinence from meats? And yet Christ
refused not to become a slave, nor yet to
die for him; but thou dost not despise even
food, that thou mayest save him. And yet
with it all Christ was not to gain all, yet still
He died for all; so fulfilling His own part.
But art thou aware that by meat thou art
overthrowing him in the more important
matters, and yet makest a disputing? And
him who is. the object of such care unto
Christ, dost thou consider so contemptible,
and dishonor one whom He loveth? Yet
He died not for the weak only, but even for
an enemy. And wilt not thou refrain from
meats even, for him that is weak? Yet


'Christ did what was greatest even, but thou
My |


not even the less. And He was Master, thou
a brother. These words then were enough
For they show him to
be of a little spirit, and after having the


1 j, e. ‘better deprive the strong of his meats, than deeply
grieve the weak.”’


530


benefit of great things from God, not to give
in return even little ones.

Ver. 16, 17. ‘Let not then your good be
evil spoken of. For the kingdom of God is
not meat and drink.”

By their “good,” he means here either
their faith, or the hope of rewards hereafter,
or the perfectness of their religious state.*
For it is not only that you fail to profit your
brother, he means, but the doctrine itself,
and the grace of God, and His gift, you cause
to be evil spoken of. Now when thou fightest,
when thou quarrellest, when thou art vex-
atious, when thou makest schism in the
Church, and reproachest thy brother, and
art distant with him, those that are without
will speak evil of you. And so good is so
far from coming of this, that just the opposite
is the case. For your good is charity, love
of the brotherhood, being united, being
bound together, living at peace, living in
gentleness (émexeiac), He again, to put an
end to his fears and the other’s disputatious-
ness, says, ‘For the kingdom of God is
not meat, and) drink:” © Is it bythese; je
means, that we are to be approved? As he
says in another passage too, ' “Neither if
we eat are we the better, neither if we eat not
are we the worse.”’ And he does not need
any proof, but is content with stating it.
And what he says is this, If thou eatest,
does this lead thee to the Kingdom? And
this was why, by way of satirizing them as
mightily pleased with themselves herein, he
said, not ‘‘meat” only, but “drink.” What
then are the things that do bring us here?
“ Righteousness, and peace, and joy,” and
a virtuous life, and peace with our brethren
(whereto this quarrelsomeness is opposed),
the joy from unanimity, which this rebuking
puts anend to. But this he said not to one
party only, but to both of them, it being a
fit season for saying it to both. Then as he
had mentioned peace and joy, but there is
a peace and joy over bad actions also, he
adds, “in the Holy Ghost.”
ruins his brother, hath at once subverted
peace, and wronged joy, more grievously
than he that plunders money. And what is
worse is, that Another saved him, and thou
wrongest and ruinest him. Since then eating,
and the supposed perfect state, does not
bring in these virtues, but the things subver-
sive of them it does bring in, how can it be


* In addition to the three possible meanings of ** your good”
which Chrys. mentions, two other interpretations may be
noted: (1) ‘‘ The good you enjoy,” i. e. your Christian lib-
erty (Godet); (2) ‘‘The kingdom of God” (v. 17) (Meyer).
The connection favors the view that To aya@ov is a general
reference to the same source of blessing which is more specifi-
cally designated as 7 BaovAeta tov Beov (17).—G. B. S.

1 x Cor. viii. 8, speaking of things offered to idols.


THE WORKS OF ST. -CHRYSOS#oOM.


Since he that |


[HomMILy XXVI.


else than right to make light of little things,
in order to give firmness to great ones?
Then since this rebuking took place in some
degree out of vanity, he proceeds to say,

Ver. 18. For, he that.in .these things
serveth Christ, is acceptable to God, and
approved of men.”

For they will not admire thee so much for
thy perfect state, as all will for peace and am-
ity.
have the benefit of, but of that not one even
will.

Ver. 19. “ Let us therefore follow after the
things which make for peace, and_ things
wherewith one may edify one another.”

This applies to the other, that he may grow
peaceable. But the other to the latter too,
that he may not destroy his brother. Still he
has made both apply to either again, by say-
ing, “one another,” and showing that without
peace it is not easy to edify.

Ver. 20. “ For meat destroy not the work
of God.”

Giving this name to the salvation of a
brother, and adding greatly to the fears, and
showing that he is doing the opposite of that
he desires.t For thou, he says, art so far
from building up as thou intendest, that thou
dost even destroy, and that a building too not
of man but of God, and not for any great end
either, but for a trivial thing. For it was “ for
meat,” he says. Then lest so many indul-
gences should confirm the weaker brother in
his misconception, he again becomes doctrinal,
as follows,

“* All things indeed are pure, but it is evil
for that man who eateth with offence.”

Who does it, that is, with a bad conscience.
And so if you should force him, and he should
eat, there would be nothing gained. For it is
not the eating that maketh unclean, but the
intention with which a man eats. If then
thou dost not set that aright, thou hast done
all to no purpose, and hast made things worse :
for thinking a thing unclean is not so bad as
tasting it when one thinks it unclean. Here
then you are committing two errors, one by
increasing his prejudice through your quarrel-
someness, and another by getting him to taste
of what is unclean. And so, as long as you
do not persuade him, do not force him.

Ver. 21. “It is good neither to eat flesh,
nor to drink wine, nor anything whereby thy
brother stumbleth, or is offended, or is made
weak.”

Again, he requires the greater alternative,
that they should not only not force him, but


+ ‘““The work of God”’ is much more naturally taken as
designating the Christian himself—his personality, than as
designating his salvation (Chrys.).—G. B. S.


For this is a goodly thing, that all will °


Homily XXVI.|


THE DRPISTLE! CO ‘THE ROMANS:


te


31


5


even condescend to him. For he often did
this himself also, as when he circumcised
(Acts xvi. 3), when he was shorn (ib. xviii.
18), when he sacrificed that Jewish sacrifice.
(ibe exis ep, see p: 126); And he does
not say to the man “do so,” but he states it
in the form of a sentiment to prevent again
making the other, the weaker man, too listless.
And what are his words? “It is good not to
eat flesh.” And why do I say flesh? if it be
wine, or any other thing of the sort besides,
which gives offence, refrain. For nothing is
so important as thy brother’s salvation. And
this Christ shows us, since He came from
Heaven, and suffered all that He went
through, for our sakes. And let me beg you
to observe, how he also drives it home upon
the other, by the words “stumbleth, or is
offended, or is made weak.” And do not tell,
me (he means) that he is so without reason,
but, that thou hast power to set it right. For
the other has a sufficient claim to be helped in
his weakness, and to thee this were no loss,
not being a case of hypocrisy (Gal. ii. 13),
but of edification and economy. For if thou
force him, he is at once destroyed, and will
condemn thee, and fortify himself the more in
not eating. But if thou condescend to him,
then he will love thee, and will not suspect
thee as a teacher, and thou wilt afterwards
gain the power of sowing imperceptibly in him
the right views. But if he once hate thee,
then thou hast closed the entrance for thy
reasoning. Do not then compel him, but
even thyself refrain for his sake, not refrain-
ing from it as unclean, but because he is
offended, and he will love thee the more. So
Paul also advises when he says, “It is good
not to eat flesh,” not because it was unclean,
but because the brother is offended and is


, 22. “ Hast thou faith? have it to thy-
Seis.

Here he seems to me to be giving a gentle
warning to the more advanced on the score of
vanity. And what he says is this, Dost thou
wish to show me that thou art perfect, and
fully furnished? Do not show it to me, but
let thy conscience suffice. And by faith, he
here means that concerned not with doctrines,
but with the subject in hand. For of the for-
mer it says, “ With the mouth confession is
made unto salvation” (Rom. x. 10); and,
“Whosoever shall deny Me before men, him
will I also deny.”! (Luke ix. 26.) For the
former by not being confessed, ruins us ; and so
does this by being confessed unseasonably.
“Happy is he that condemneth not himself in|


1 Compare St. Ephrem. Ser. xx. vol. iii. adv. Scrutatores.


Ppp. 172, 173, Oxf. Tr.


the thing which he alloweth.”* Again he
strikes at the weaker one, and gives him (i. e.
the stronger) a sufficient crown, in that of his
conscience. Even if no man see, that is, thou
art able to be happy in thyself. For after
saying, “ Have it to thyself,” to prevent his
thinking this a contemptible tribunal, he tells
him this is better to thee than the world.
And if all accuse thee, and thou condemn not
thyself, and thy conscience lay no charge
against thee, thouart happy. But this is a state-
ment he did not make to apply to any person
whatever. For there are many that condemn
not themselves, and yet are great trans-
gressors: and these are the most miserable of
men. But he still keeps to the subject in
hand.

Ver. 23. “And he that doubteth is con-
demned if he eat.”

Again, it is to exhort him to spare the
weaker, that he says this. For what good is
it if he eat in doubt, and condemn himself?
For I approve of him, who both eateth, and
doeth it not with doubting. See how he in-
duces him not to eating only, but to eating
with a good conscience too, Then he men-
tions likewise the reason why he is condemned.
continuing in these words,

“ Because he eateth not of faith.” Not be-
cause it is unclean, but because it is not of
faith. For he did not believe that it is clean,
but though unclean he touched it. But by
this he shows them also what great harm they
do by compelling men, and not persuading
them, to touch things which had hitherto ap-
peared unclean to them, that for this at all
events they might leave rebuking, “For
whatsoever is not of faith is sin.” For whena
person does not feel sure, nor believe that a
thing is clean, how can he do else than sin?
Now all these things have been spoken by
Paul of the subject in hand, not of everything.
And observe what care he takes not to
offend any; and he had said before, “ If
thy brother be grieved with thy meat, now
walkest thou not charitably.” But if one
should not grieve him, much less ought one to
give him offence. And again, ‘“ For meat de-
stroy not the work of God.” For if it were a
grievous act of iniquity to throw down a
Church, much more so is it to do so to the
spiritual Temple. Since a man is more dig:


* Kpivwy should not be rendered ‘‘condemning” as if it
were xataxpivwy (as Chrys. and many mod. interpreters).
The meaning is: Happy is he who does not pass judgment
upon himself, i. e. who is so confident of the rightness of
his course that he has no anxiety or scruple regarding the
course of action in such disputed points which he approves
and has resolved upon.—G. B. Se

2 Nullum Theatrum virtuti conscientia majsus. Cicero,
Tusc. ii. 26. Virtue has no field for display more ample than
conscience.


532 THE WORKS OF - ST. °CHRYSOsS laa.


|HomILy XXVI.


nified than a Church: for it was not for walls} overlooked: for the facts of the truth are


that Christ died, but for these temples.

Let us then watch our own conduct on all
sides, and afford to no one ever so little
handle. For this life present is a race-course,
and we ought to have thousands of eyes
(Hilary in Ps. cxix.) on every side, and not
even to fancy that ignorance will be an
adequate excuse. For there is such a thing,
there certainly is, as being punished for igno-
rance, when the ignorance is inexcusable.
Since the Jews too were ignorant, yet not
ignorant in an excusable way. And the Gen-
tiles were ignorant, but they are without
excuse. (Rom. i. 20.) For when thou art igno-
rant of those things which it is not possible to
know, thou wilt not be subject to any charge
for it: but when of things easy and possible,
thou wilt be punished with the utmost rigor.
Else if we be not excessively supine, but con-
tribute our own share to its full amount, God
will also reach forth His hand unto us in those
things which we are ignorant of. And this is
what Paul said to the Philippians likewise.
“Tf in anything ye be otherwise minded, God
shall reveal even this unto you.” (Phil. iii
15.) But when we are not willing to do even
what we are masters of, we shall not have the
benefit of His assistance in this either. And
this was the case with the Jews too. “ For
this cause,” He says, “speak I unto them in
parables, because seeing they see not.”
(Matt. xiii. 13.) In what sense was it that
seeing they saw not? They saw devils cast
out, and they said, He hath a devil. They
saw the dead raised, and they worshipped not,
but attempted to kill Him. But not of this
character was Cornelius. (ib. xii. 24.) For
this reason then, when he was doing the whole
of his duty with sincerity, God added unto
him that which was lacking also. Say not
then, how came God to neglect such and such
a one who was no formalist (azAacroc) and a
good man, though a Gentile? For in the first
place no man can possibly know for certain
whether a person is no formalist, but He
only who “formed (xAdsavr) the hearts sev-
erally.7) ((PS.” xexiil. (xxx) rg) oe.) And
then there is this to be said too, that per-
chance (noAAd«c) such an one was neither
thoughtful nor earnest. And how, it may be
said, could he, as being very uninformed ?
(ax?acroc.) Let me beg you to consider then
this simple and single-hearted man, and take
notice of him in the affairs of life, and you
will see him a pattern of the utmost scrupu-
lousness, such that if he would have shown it
in spiritual matters he would not have been


1 So rendered, to keep up the play upon the words: it
means, not framing himself to a false show.


clearer than the sun. And wherever a man
may go, he might easily lay hold of his own

salvation, if he were minded, that is, to be
heedful, and not to look on this as a by-w ork.

For were the doings shut up into Palestine, or
in a little corner “of the world? Hast thou
not heard the prophet say, ‘“ All shall know
Me from the least even to the greatest?”
(Jer. xxxi. 34; Heb. viii. 11.) Do not you
see the things themselves uttering the truth?
How then are these to be excused, seeing as
they do the doctrine of the truth spread far
and wide, and not troubling themselves, or
caring to learn it? And dost thou require all
this, it is asked, of a rude savage? Nay not
of a rude savage only, but of any who is more
savage than men of the present day. For
why is it, pray, that in matters of this world
he knows how to answer when he is wronged,
and to resist when he has violence done him,
and do and devise everything to prevent his
ever having his will thwarted even in the
slightest degree; but in spiritual concerns he
has not used this same judgment? And when
a man worships a stone, and thinks it a god,
he both keeps feasts to it, and spends money
on it, and shows much fear towards it, and in.
no case becomes listless from his simpleness.
But when he has to seek ‘to the very and
true God, do you then mention singleness and
simpleness tome? These things are not so,
assuredly they are not! For the complaints
are those of mere listlessness. For which do
you think the most simple and rude, those in
Abraham’s day or those now? (Josh. xxiv. 2.)
Clearly the former. And when that it was
easiest to find religion out now or then?
Clearly now. For now the Name of God is
proclaimed even by all men, and the Prophets
have preached, the things come to pass, the
Gentiles been convinced.2, (Gen. xxxil. 29;
Judges xiii. 18.) But at that day the majority
were still in an uninstructed state, and sin was
dominant. And there was no law to instruct,
nor prophets, nor miracles, nor doctrine, nor
multitude of men acquainted with it, nor
aught else of the kind, but all things then lay
as it were in a deep darkness, and a night
moonless and stormy. And yet even then
that wondrous and noble man, though the ob-
stacles were so great, still knew God and prac-
tised virtue, and led many to the same zeal;
and this though he had not even the wisdom
of those without.2 For how should he, when


2 Or, ‘‘the systems of the Gentiles been confuted,” ra
“EAAnverv €Andreyxtac.

3 Philo, however, makes Abraham learned in all Chaldzan
wisdom. De Nod. § 5, also Joseph, Azz. i.c.8,§2. It is now
certain that the art of writing was older than his time, in


Mesopotamia as well as Egypt.


HoMILy XXVI.|


THESES LE: TO. THE: ROMANS,


533


there were no letters even yet invented? Yet
still he brought his own share in, and God
joined to bring in what was lacking to him.
For you cannot say even this, that Abraham
received his religion from his fathers, because
he (Terah, see Josh. xxiv. 2.) was an idolater.
But still, though he was from such ‘forefathers
and was uncivilized, and lived among unciv-
ilized people, and had no instructor in relig-
ion, yet he attained to a knowledge of God,
and in comparison with all his descendants,
who had the advantage both of the Law and
the Prophets, he was so much more illustrious
as no words can express. Why was it then?
It was because in things of this world he did
not give himself any great anxiety, but in
things of the spirit he applied his whole atten-
tion. (In Gen. Hom. 33, etc.) And what of
Melchizedek? was not he also born about
those times, and was so bright as to be called
even a priest of God? (In Gen. Hom. 35, 36.)
For it is impossible in the extreme, that the
sober-minded (vjoovra) should ever be over-
looked. And let not these things be a trouble
to us, but knowing that it is the mind with
which in each case the power lies, let us look
to our own duties, that we may grow better.
Let us not be demanding an account of God
or enquire why He let such an one alone, but
called such an one. For we are doing the
same as if a servant that had given offence
were to pry into his master’s housekeeping.
Wretched and miserable man, when thou
oughtest to be thoughtful about the account
thou hast to give, and how thou wilt reconcile
thy master, dost thou call him to account for
things that thou art not to give an account of,
passing over those things of which thou art to
give a reckoning?’ What am [I to say to the
Gentile? he asks. Why, the same that I
have been saying. And look not merely to
what thou shalt say to the Gentile, but also to
the means of amending thyself.2 When he is
offended by examining into thy life, then con-
sider what thou wilt say. For if he be
offended, thou wilt not be called to a reckon-
ing for him, but if it be thy way of life by
which he is injured, thou wilt have to undergo
the greatest danger. When he seeth thee phi-
losophizing about the kingdom, and fluttering
at the things of this life, and at once afraid
about hell, and trembling at the calamities of
this life, then lay it to mind. When he sees
this, and accuses thee, and says, If thou art in
love with the Kingdom, how is it thou dost
not look down upon the things of this life?
If thou art expecting the awful judgment, why


dost thou not despise the terrors of this world?
If thou hopest for immortality, why dost thou
not think scorn of death? When he says this,
be thou anxious what defence thou wilt make.
When he sees thee trembling at the thought of
losing thy money, thee that expectest the
heavens, and exceedingly glad about a single
penny, and selling thy soul again for a little
money, then lay it to mind. For these are the
things, just these, that make the Gentiles
stumble. And so, if thou art thoughtful about
his salvation, make thy defence on these heads,
not by words, but by actions. For it is not
through that question that anybody ever blas-
phemed God, but through men’s bad lives it
is, that there are thousands of blasphemies in
all quarters. Set him right then. For the
Gentile will next ask thee, How am I to know
that God’s commands are feasible? For thou
that art of Christian extraction, and hast been
brought up in this fine religion, dost not do
anything of the kind. And what will you tell
him?» You will be sure to say, I will show
you others that do; monks that dwell in the
deserts. And art thou not ashamed to confess
to being a Christian, and yet to send to others,
as unable to show that you display the temper
of a Christian? For he also will say directly,
What need have I to go to the mountains, and
to hunt up the deserts? For if there is no
possibility for a person who is living in the
midst of cities to be a disciple, this is a sad
imputation on this rule of conduct, that we are
to leave the cities, and run to the deserts.
But show me a man who has a wife, and chil-
dren, and family, and yet pursueth wisdom.
What are we then to say to all this? Must we
not hang down our heads, and be ashamed ?
For Christ gave us no such commandment;
but what? ‘Let your light shine before
men” (Matt. v. 16), not mountains, and des-
erts, and wildernesses, and out-of-the-way
places. And this I say, not as abusing those
who have taken up with the mountains, but as
bewailing those that dwell in cities, because
they have banished virtue from thence.
Wherefore I beseech you let us introduce the
discipline they have there here also, that the
cities may become cities indeed. This will
improve the Gentile. This will free him from
countless offences. And so if thou wouldest
set him free from scandal, and thyself enjoy
rewards without number, set thy own life in
order, and make it shine forth upon all sides,
“that men may see your good works, and glo-
rify your Father which is in heaven.” For so
we also shall enjoy that unutterable and great
glory, which God grant that we may all attain


1 So Field with most Mss. Vulg. *‘ for which thou art to be | to, by the grace and love toward man, etc.


punished.”’
2 So Field avrov for avror.


534


THE WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOST Ga


[HomiLty XXVII.


HO Melia): XOX V EH,


ROM. XVI. 25-27.


““ Now to Him that is of power to stablish you according
to my Gospel, and the preaching of Jesus Christ,
according to the revelation of the mystery, which
was kept secret since the world began, but now is
made manifest, and (Mss. te which Sav. omits)
by the Scriptures of the Prophets, according to
the commandment of the everlasting God, made
known to all nations for the obedience of faith: to
God only wise, to Him be glory through Jesus
Christ our Lord. Amen.’’!


Ir is always a custom with Paul to conclude
his exhortation with prayers and doxologies.
For he knows that the thing is one of no
slight importance. And it is out of affection-
ateness and caution that he is in the habit of
doing this. For it is the character of a
teacher devoted to his children, and to God,
not to instruct them in words only, but by
prayer too to bring upon his teaching the
assistance which is from God. And this he
does here also. But the connection is as
follows: “To Him that is of power to
stablish you, be glory for ever. Amen.”
For he again clings to those weak brethren,
and to them he directs his discourse. For
when he was rebuking, he made all share his
rebuke ; but now, when he is praying, it is for
these that he wears the attitude of a suppliant.
And after saying, “to stablish,” he proceeds
to give the mode of it, “according to my
Gospel; ” and this was what one would do to
show that as yet they were not firmly fixed,
but stood, though with wavering. ‘Then to
give a trustworthiness to what he says, he pro-
ceeds, “and the preaching of Jesus Christ ;”
that is, which He Himself preached, But if
He preached it, the doctrines are not ours,
but the laws are of Him. And afterwards, in
discussing the nature of the preaching, He
shows that this gift is one of much benefit,
and of much honor; and this he first proves
from the person of the declarer thereof, and


1 These three verses are placed here by Theodoret, St. Cyr.
Alex., St. John Dam. and some 200 cursive Mss. Of the few
uncial Mss. which have come down to us, the Codex Stnazticus
the Codex Vaticanus and the very ancient C. D. with the
chief versions of the New Testament, including the two first
made, the Old Latin and the Peschito-syriac. Origen put them
where we do,at the end of the Epistle. The fifth century
Alexandrian Ms. in the British Museum and two or three
other Mss. have the passage twice over. (For an elaborate
defence both of the genuineness of this doxology and of the
view that it belongs at the end of chap. xvi. see Meyer’s criti-
cal note prefixed to his comments on chap. xvi.—G. B. S.)


then likewise from the things declared. For it
was glad tidings. Besides, from His not
having made aught of them known to any
before us: And, thissheruntimatessunpthe
words, “according to the revelation of the
mystery.” And this is a sign of the greatest
friendliness, to make us share in the mysteries,
and no one before us. ‘Which was kept
secret since the world began, but now is made
manifest.” For it had been determined long
ago, but was only manifested now. How was
it made manifest? ‘By the Scriptures of the
Prophets.” Here again he is releasing the
weak person from fear. For what dost thou
fear? is it lest? thou depart from the Law?
This the Law wishes, this it foretold from of
old. But if thou pryest into the cause of its


being made manifest now, thou art doing a _


thing not safe to do, in being curious about
the mysteries of God, and calling Him to
account. For we ought not with things of
this nature to act as busybodies, but to be
well pleased and content with them. Where-
fore that he might himself put a check upon a
spirit of this sort, he adds, “ according to the
commandment of the everlasting God, for the
obedience of faith.” For faith requires obe-
dience, and not curiosity. And when God
commands, one ought to be obedient, not
curious. Then he uses another argument to
encourage them, saying “‘made known to all
nations.” That is, it is not theu alone but
the whole world that is of this Creed, as hav-
ing had not man, but God for a Teacher.
Wherefore also he adds, “through Jesus
Christ.” But it was not only made known,
but also confirmed. Now both are His work.
And on this ground too the way it is to be
read is,3 “‘Now to Him that is of power to
stablish you through Jesus Christ ;” and, as I
was saying, he ascribes them both to Him; or
rather, not both of these only, but the glory
belonging (or ascribed, Gr. rj cic) to the
Father also. And this too is why he said,
“to Whom be glory forever, Amen.” And he
uses a doxology again through awe at the


2 Mj amoorys, one Ms. ov uy, which seems to determine the
construction.

3 v.27, in the Greek reads thus: ‘‘ To God only wise through
Jesus Christ, to Him (or to Whom) be glory,”’ etc.


]
q
:


HOMILY XXVII.]


incomprehensibleness of these mysteries.
For even now they have appeared, there is
no such thing as comprehending them by rea-
sonings, but it is by faith we must come toa
knowledge of them, for in no other way can
we. He well says, “To the only wise God.”
For if you will only reflect how He brought
the nations in, and blended them with those
who in olden time had wrought well, how He
saved those who were desperate, how He
brought men not worthy of the earth up to
heaven, and brought those who had fallen
from the present life into that undying and
unalterable life, and made those who were
trampled down by devils to vie with Angels,
and opened Paradise, and put a stop to all
the old evils, and this too in a short time,
and by an easy and compendious way, then
wilt thou learn His wisdom ;—when thou
seest that that which neither Angels nor
Archangels knew, they of the Gentiles learnt
on a sudden through Jesus. (2 Mss. add,
“then wilt thou know His power.) Right
then is it to admire His wisdom, and to give
Him glory!- But thou keepest dwelling over
little things, still sitting under the shadow.
And this is not much like one that giveth
glory. For he who has no confidence in
Him, and no trust in the faith, does not bear
testimony to the grandeur of His doings.
But he himself offers glory up in their behalf,
in order to bring them also to the same zeal.
But when you hear him say, “to the only
wise God,” think not that this is said in dis-
paragement of the Son. For if all these
things whereby His wisdom is made apparent
were done (or made, see John i. 3) by Christ,
and without Him no single one, it is quite
plain that he is equal in wisdom also. What
then is the reason of his saying “only?” To
set Him in contrast with every created being.
After giving the doxology* then, he again goes
from prayer to exhortation, directing his dis-
course against the stronger, and saying as
follows :

Chap, xv. ver. 1. “We then that ‘are
Strong, ought ’”’—it is “we ought,” not “we
are so kind as to.” What is it we ought to
do ?—“ to bear the infirmities of the weak.”

See how he has roused their attention by
his praises, not only by calling them power-
ful, but also by putting them alongside of
himself. And not by this only, but by the
advantage of the thing he again allures them,
and by its not being burdensome. For thou,


* The grammaticai form of the doxology presents a notice-
able anacoluthon. The dative To dvvayerw is resumed in hovw
go$® eo and again in the relative ® as 7f the proposition
begun with the dative had been completed. Thus the pre-
vious datives are ieft without grammatical government.
, if read (many texts omit it) is to be understood as referring
to dew. —G. B.S.


THE: EPISTLE TO THE ROMANS: 535


he says, art powerful, and art no whit the
worse for condescending. But to him the
hazard is of the last consequence, if he is not
borne with. And he does not say the infirm,
but the “infirmities of the weak,” so drawing
him and bending him to mercy. As in
another place too he says, “ Ye that are spirit-
ual restore such an one.” (Gal. vi. 1.) Art thou
become powerful ? Render a return to God for
making thee so. But render it thou wilt if
thou settest the weakness of the sickly right.
For we too were weak, but by grace we have
become powerful. And this we are to do not
in this case only, but also in the case of those
who are weak in other respects. As, for
instance, if any be passionate, or insolent, or
has any such like failing bear with him. And
how is this to be? Listen to what comes
next. For after saying “we ought to bear,”
he adds, “and not to please ourselves.”’T

Ver. 2. “Let every one of us please his
neighbor for his good to edification.”

But what he says is this. Art thou power-
ful? Let the weak have trial of thy power.
Let him come to know thy strength; please
him. And he does not barely say please, but
for his good, and not barely for his good, lest
the advanced person should say, See I am
drawing him to his good! but he adds, “to
edification.”” And so if thou be rich or be in
power, please not thyself, but the poor and
the needy, because in this way thou wilt at
once have true glory to enjoy, and be doing
much service. For glory from things of the
world soon flies away, but that from things of
the Spirit is abiding, if thou do it to edifica-
tion. Wherefore of all men he requires this.
For it is not this and that person that is to doit,
but “each of you.” Then since it was a great
thing he had commanded them, and had bid-
den them even relax their own perfectness in
order to set right the other’s weakness; he
introduces Christ, in the following


again
words :

Ver. 3. “For even Christ pleased not
Himself.”


And this he always does. For when he
was upon the subject of alms, he brought
Him forward and said, ‘ Ye know the grace
of the Lord, that though He was rich, yet for
our sakes he became poor.” (2 Cor. viii. 9.)
And when he was exhorting to charity, it was
from Him that he exhorted in the words “ As
Christ also loved us.” (Eph. v. 25.) And


+ Chap. xv. contains conclusions and applications drawn
from the principles laid down in regard to the treatment
which should be accorded to the weak in chap. xiv. The
crowning consideration is that Christ pleased not himself,
but bore the burdens of the weak. This 1s presented as the
type of all Christian duty. In_v.6the construction usually

referred is (as in R. V.) “‘the God and Father of our Lord

esus Christ”’ (cf. Eph. i. 3, 17).—G. B. S.


530 THESWORKS: OF


when he was giving advice about bearing
shame and dangers, he took refuge in Him,
and said, “Who for the joy that was set
before Him endured the Cross, despising the
shame.” (Heb. xii. 2). So in this passage
too he shows how He also did this, and how
the prophet proclaimed it from of old.
Wherefore also he proceeds:

“The reproaches of them that reproached
Thee fell upon Me.” (Ps. Ixix. 9.) But what
is the import of, ‘‘ He pleased not Himself ?”
He had power not to have been reproached,
power not to have suffered what He did
suffer, had He been minded to look to His
own things. But yet He was not so minded.
But through looking to our good He
neglected His own. And why did he not say,
meee emptied “Elimself?”’* (Phil. ii,.7.)) Itis
because this was not the only thing he wished
to point out, that He became man, but that
He was also ill-treated, and obtained a bad
reputation with many, being looked upon as
weak. For it says, “If Thou be the Son of
God, come down from the Cross.” (Matt.
xxvil. 4o). And, “ He saved others, Himself
He cannot save.” (ib. 42). Hence he men-
tions a circumstance which was available for
his present subject, and proves much more
than he undertook to do; for he shows that it
was not Christ alone that was reproached, but
the Father also. “For the reproaches of
them that reproached Thee fell,’ he says,
“upon Me.” But what he says is nearly this,
What has happened is no new or strange
thing. For they in the Old Testament who
came to have a habit of reproaching Him,
they also raved against His Son. But these
things were written that we should not imi-


tate them. And then he supplies (Gr. anoints)
them for a patient endurance of tempta-
tions.


Ver. 4. “ For whatsoever things were writ-
ten aforetime,” he says, “‘ were written for our
learning, that we, through patience and com-
fort of the Scriptures, might have hope.”

That is, that we might not fall away, (for
there are sundry conflicts within and with-
out), that being nerved and comforted by the
Scriptures, we might exhibit patience, that
by living in patience we might abide in hope.
For these things are productive of each other,
patience of hope, and hope of patience. And
both of them are brought about by the Scrip-
tures. Then he again brings his discourse
into the form of prayer, and says,

Ver. 5. ““Now the God of patience and
consolation grant you to be like-minded one
towards another, according to Christ Jesus.”

For since he had given his own advice, and
had also urged the example of Christ, he


e


ST. CHRYS@SfOmM: |Homiry XXVIT.
added the testimony of the Scriptures also,
to show that with the Scripture Himself
giveth patience also. And this is why he
said, ‘‘ Now the God of patience and consola-
tion grant you to be like-minded one towards
another, according to Christ Jesus.” For this
is what love would do, be minded toward
another even as toward himself. Then to
show again that it is not mere love that he
requires, he adds, “according to Christ
Jesus.” And this he does, in all places, be-
cause there is also another sort of love, And
what is the advantage of their agreeing ?

Ver. 6, ‘“‘That ye may with one mind,” he
says, ‘“‘and one mouth, glorify God, even the
Father of our Lord Jesus Christ.”

He does not say merely with one mouth,
but bids us do it with one will also. See how
he has united the whole body into one, and
how he concludes his address again with a
doxology, whereby he gives the utmost in-
ducement to unanimity and concord. Then
again from this point he keeps to the same
exhortation as before, and says,

Ver. 77.4“ Wherefore: 9 receive! aye amome
another, as Christ also received us, to the
glory of God.”

The example again is as before, and the
gain unspeakable. For this is a thing that
doth God especial glory, the being closely
united. And so if even against thy will
(Field “being grieved for His sake,” after
Savile, but against Mss.) and for His sake,
thou be at variance with thy brother, consider
that by putting an end to thine anger thou art
glorifying thy Master, and if not on thy
brother’s account, for this at all events be
reconciled to him: or rather for this first.
For Christ also insists upon this upon all
possible grounds,! and when addressing His
Father he said, “ By this shall all men know
that Thou hast sent Me, if they be one.”
(John xvii. 21.)

Let us obey then, and knit ourselves to one
another. For in this place it is not any
longer the weak, but all that he is rousing.
And were aman minded to break with thee,
do not thou break also. Nor give utterance
to that cold saying, ‘‘ Him I love that loveth
me; if my right eye does not love me, I tear
it out.” For these are satanical sayings, and
fit for publicans, and the little spirit of the
Gentiles. But thou that art called to a
greater citizenship, and are enrolled in the
books of Heaven, art liable to greater laws.
Do not speak in this way, but when he is not
minded to love thee, then display the more
love, that thou mayest draw him to thee. For


1 ayw kat kaTw otpeper, see Ast. ad Platon. Phedr. 127.


HomMILy XXVII.]


THEVEPIS TLE TOrtTHE ‘ROMANS.


537


he is a member; and when by any force a| not love those who love while they are hated ?


member is sundered from the body, we do
everything to unite it again, and then pay
more attention to it. For the reward is the
greater then, when one draws to one a person
not minded to love. For if He bids us invite
to supper those that cannot make us any
recompense, that what goes for recompense
may be the greater, much more ought we to
do this in regard to friendship. Now he that
is loved and loveth, does pay thee a recom-
pense. But he that is loved and loveth not,
hath made God a debtor to thee in his own
room. And besides, when he loves thee he
needs not much pains; but when he loves
thee not, then he stands in need of thy assist-
ance. Make not then the cause for painstak-
ing a cause for listlessness; and say not,
because he is sick, that is the reason I take no
care of him (for a sickness indeed the dulling
of love is), but do thou warm again that
which hath become chilled. But suppose he
will not be warmed, ‘“‘ what then?” is the
reply. Continue to do thy own part. ‘ What
if he grow more perverse?” He is but pro-
curing to thee so much greater return, and
shows thee so much the greater imitator of


Christ. For if the loving one another was to
bes;the, characteristic of disciples - (“‘ For
hereby,” He says, “shall all men know that


ye are My disciples, if ye love one another),
(ib. xili. 35) consider how great an one loving
one that hates us must be. For thy Master
loved those that hated Him, and called them
to Him; and the weaker they were, the
‘greater the care He showed them; and He
eried and said, “They that are whole need
not a physician, but they that are sick.”
(Matt. ix. 12.) And He deemed publicans
and sinners worthy of the same table with
Him. And as great as was the dishonor
wherewith the Jewish people treated Him, so
great was the honor and concern He showed
for them, yea, and much greater. Him do
thou also emulate: for this good work is no
light one, but one without which not even he
that is a martyr can. please God much, as.
Paul says.’ Say not then, I get hated, and
that is why I do not love. For this is why
thou oughtest to love most. And _ besides, it
is not in the nature of things for a man who
loves to be soon hated, but brute as a person
may be, he loves them that love him. For
this He says the heathens and the publicans
do. (Matt. v. 46.) But if every one loves
those that love him, who is there that would


1 See St. Chrys. ad loc. Hom. 32,0n 1 Cor p. 446 O.T. in
some places he seems to speak exclusively of love to one’s
neighbor in quoting this passage, but he always views this as
the carrying out of love toward God, see p. 515.


Display then this conduct, and cease not to
to use this word, ‘“‘ Hate me as much as you
may, I will not leave off loving thee,” and
then thou wilt humble his quarrelsomeness,
and cast out all coldness.*? For this disorder
comes either from excessive heat (oAeypovie,
inflammation), or from coldness; but both of
these is the might of love wont to correct by
its warmth. Did you never see those who in-
dulge a base love beaten, spit upon, called
names, ill-treated in a thousand ways by those
fornicatresses? What then? Do the insults
break off this love? In no wise: they even
kindle it the more. And yet they who do
these things, besides being harlots, are of a
disreputable and low grade. But they who
submit to it, have often illustrious ancestors
to count up, and much other nobility to boast
of. Yet still none of these things break the
tie, nor keep them aloof from her whom they
love. And are we not ashamed then to find
what great power the love of the devil (v. p.
520) and the demons hath, and not to be able
to display as much inthe love according to
God? Dost thou not perceive that this is a
very great weapon against the devil? Do
you not see, that that wicked demon stands by,
dragging to himself the man thou hatest, and
desiring to snatch away the member? And
dost thou run by, and give up the prize of the
conflict? For thy brother, lying between vou,
is the prize. And if thou get the better, thou
receivest a crown; but if thou art listless,
thou goest away without a crown. . Cease
then to give utterance to that satanical saying,
“if my eye hates me, I cannot see it.”* For
nothing is more shameful than this saying,
and yet the generality lay it down for a sign
of a noble spirit. But nothing is more
ignoble than all this, nothing more senseless,
nothing more foolish.* Therefore I am
indeed quite grieved that the doings of vice
are held to be those of virtue, that looking
down on men, and despising them, should
seem to be honorable and dignified. And
this is the devil’s greatest snare, to invest
iniquity with a good repute, whereby it be-
comes hard to blot out. For I have often
heard men taking credit to themselves at
their not going near those who are averse to


them. And yet thy Master found a glory in
this. How often do not men _ despise


(diéxrvcav) Him? how often show aversion to


2 Mss. Wutuv éfeBadres, Sav. wuxny éuadakas, soften any soul,

3 So Field from Mss.: old edd. ‘* If my brother hates me, I
do not even wish to see him.’’ Perhaps the true reading iS,

‘If my eye hates me, Ido not even wish it to see,’ cay o
OPOadmos mov mion me, OVdE idetv aiTov BovAowat, which seems
more proverbial, (if the aorist will bear this construction as
Matt. xiii. 14), and agrees with p. 537.

* Soall Mss. Sav. * more crue}.”


538


Him? Yet He ceaseth not to run unto them.
Say not then that “I cannot bear to come
near those that hate me,” but say, that ‘‘ I can-
not bear to despise (s:arricar) those that de-
spise me.” This is the language of Christ’s
disciple, as the other is of the devil’s. This
makes men honorable and glorious, as the
other doth shameful and ridiculous. It is on
this ground we feel admiration for Moses, be-
cause even when God said, “ Let Me alone,
that I may destroy them in Mine anger,”
(Exod, xxxii. 10) he could not bear to despise
those who had so often shown aversion to
him, but said, “If thou wilt forgive them their
trespass, forgive it; else blot out me also.”
{ibid. 32.) This was owing to his being a
friend of God, and a copyer of Him. And let
us not pride ourselves in things for which we
ought to hide our faces. Nor let us use the
language of these lewd fellows, that are the
scum of men, I know how to scorn (karazricai,
spit at) thousands. But even if another use
it, let us laugh him down, and stop his mouth
for taking a delight in what he ought to feel
ashamed of. What say you, pray, do you
scorn aman that believes, whom when unbe-


THE WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSPRIE


{[Homity XXVIII.


lieving Christ scorned not? Why do I say
scorned not? Why He had such ilove
towards him, when he was vile and unsightly,
as even to die for him. He then so loved,
and that such a person, and do you now,
when he has been made fair and admirable,
scorn him; now he is made a member of
Christ, and hath been made thy Master’s
body? Dost thou not consider what thou art
uttering, nor perceive what thou art vent-
uring to do? He hath Christ as a Head,
and a Table, and a Garment, and Life, and
Light, and a Bridegroom, and He is every-
thing to him, and dost thou dare to say, “‘ this
fellow I despise?’ and not this only, but
thousands of others along with him? Stay
thee, O man, and cease from thy madness ;
get to know thy brother. Learn that these
be words of unreasonableness, and frenzy,
and say on the contrary, though he despise
me ten thousand times, yet will I never stand
aloof from him. In this way thou wilt both
gain thy brother, and wilt live to the glory of
God, and wilt share the good things to come.
To which God grant that we may all attain,
by the grace and love toward man, etc.


MOMMY xX VEL.


ROM. XV. 8.


** Now I say that Jesus Christ was a minister of the | for the truth of God, to confirm the promises


circumcision for the truth of God, to confirm the |


promises made unto the fathers.”


AGAIN, he is speaking of Christ’s concern
for us, still holding to the same topic, and
showing what great things He hath done for
us, and how “He pleased not Himself.”
(Rom. xv. 3.) And besides this, there is an-
other point which he makes good, that those of
the Gentiles are debtors to a larger amount
unto God. And if to a larger amount, then
they ought to bear with the weak among the
Jews. For since he had spoken very sharply
to such, lest this should make these elated, he
humbles their unreasonableness, by showing
that it was by “promise made to the fathers”
that they had the good things given them,
while they of the Gentiles had them out of
pity and love toward man only. And this is
the reason of his saying, ‘ And that the Gen-
tiles might glorify God for his mercy.” But
that what is said may be made plainer, it is
well to listen once more to the words them-
selves, that you may see what Christ’s having
been made ‘“‘a Minister of the circumcision


unto the fathers.


made unto the fathers,” means. What then
is that which is stated? There had been a
promise made to Abraham, saying, “ Unto
thee will I give the earth, and to thy seed, and
in thy seed shall all the nations be blessed.”
(Gen. xii. 7; xxii. 18.) But after this, they of
the seed of Abraham all became subject to
punishment. For the Law wrought wrath
unto them by being transgressed, and thence-
forward deprived them of that promise made
Therefore the Son came
and wrought with the Father, in order that
those promises might come true, and have
their issue. For having fulfilled the whole
Law in which He also fulfilled the circum-
cision, and having by it, and by the Cross,
freed them from the curse of the transgression,
He suffered not this promise to fall to the
ground. When then he calls Him “a Min-
ister of the circumcision,” he means-this, that
by having come and fulfilled the Law, and
been circumcised, and born of the seed of
Abraham, He undid the curse, stayed the
anger of God, made also those that were to


HomMILy XXVIII.]


receive the promises fit for them, as being
once for all freed from their alienation. To
prevent then these accused persons from say-
ing, How then came Christ to be circumcised,
and to keep the whole Law? he turns their
argument to the opposite conclusion. For it
was not that the Law might continue, but that
He might put an end to it, and free thee from
the curse thereof, and set thee entirely at
liberty from the dominion of that Law. For
it was because thou hadst transgressed the
Law, that He fulfilled it, not that thou might-
est fulfil it,! but that He might confirm to thee
the promises made unto the fathers, which the
Law had caused to be suspended, by showing
thee to have offended,” and to be unworthy of
the inheritance. And so thou also art saved
by grace, since thou wast cast off. Do not
thou then bicker, nor perversely cling to the
Law at this unsuitable time, since it would
have cast thee also out of the promise, unless
Christ had suffered so many things for thee.
And He did suffer these, not. because thou
wast deserving of salvation, but that God
might be true. And then that this might not
puff up him of the Gentiles, he says.

Nier. “ And that the Gentiles
glorify God for His mercy.”

But what he means is this. Those of the
Jews would have had promises, even though
they were unworthy. But thou hadst not this
even, but wast saved from love towards man
alone, even if, to put it at the lowest, they too
would not have been the better for the prom-
ises, unless Christ had come. But yet that
he might amalgamate (or temper, «epacy)
them and not allow them to rise up against
the weak, he makes mention of the promises.
But of these he says that it was by mercy
alone that they were saved. Hence they are
the most bound to glorify God. And a glory
it is to God that they be blended together, be
united, praise with one mind, bear the weaker,
neglect not the member that is broken off.
Then he adds testimonies, in which he shows
that the man of the Jews ought to blend him-
self with those of the Gentiles; and so he says,
“As it is written, For this cause I will con-
fess to Thee among the Gentiles, O Lord, and
will sing unto Thy Name.” * (Ps. xviil. 46.)


might


1 See on Rom. viii. 4, supra p. 433.

2 mpooxexpouxevar, not *‘ stumbled,” but “struck against” a
person, same word as “‘alienation”’ just before. '

* The quotations in the passage on which this homily is
based are all taken from the LXX. with a few trifling verbal
changes. They are designed to show that the prophetic
conception of the Messiah's work contemplated salvation for
the Gentiles, so that Christ was not to be merely a ** minister
of the circumcision,”’ but that he is to bring through the Jews
salvation to the Gentiles so that they shall “ glorify God for
his mercy”’ (9). The passages in the O. T. relate primarily
either to the Psalmist himself (v. 9. cf. Ps. xviil. 50) or to the
King of Israel (v. 12. cf. Is. xi. 10), or to the relations of the


Enh EEIStLe TO THE ROMANS.


539

Ver. ro-12. “And, rejoice, ye Gentiles,
with His people. And, Praise the Lord, all
ye Gentiles” (Deut. xxxii. 43); “and let all
people Jaud Him.” (Ps. cxvil. 1.) ‘And,
There shall be a root of Jesse, and He that
shall rise to reign over the Gentiles, in Him
shall the Gentiles trust.” (Is. xi. 1, 10.)

Now all these quotations he has given to
show that we ought to be united, and to glo-
rify God ; and also, to humble the Jew, that he
may not lift himself up over these, since all
the prophets called these, as well as to per-
suade the man of the Gentiles to be lowly, by
showing him that he had a larger grace to
answer for. Then he concludes his argument
with a prayer again.

Ver. 13. ““Now the God of hope fill you
with all joy and peace in believing, that ve
may abound in hope, through the power of the
Holy Ghost.”

That is, that ye may get clear of that heart-
lessness (a#uuiac) towards one another, and
may never be cast down by temptations. And
this will be by your abounding in hope. Now
this is the cause of all good things, and it
comes from the Holy Ghost. But it is not
simply from the Spirit, but on condition of
our contributing our part also. This is why
he says, “in believing.” For this is the way
for you to be filled with joy, if ye believe, if
ye hope. Yet he does not say if ye hope, but,
“if ye abound in hope,” so as not to find
comfort in troubles only, but even to have joy
through the abundance of faith and hope.
And in this way, ye will also draw the Spirit
to you. In this way, when He is come ye will
continually keep to all good things. For just
as food maintaineth our life, and by this
ruleth the body, * so if we have good works,
we shall have the Spirit; and if we have the
Spirit, we shall also have good works. As
also, on the other hand, if we have no works,
the Spirit flieth away. But if we be deserted
by the Spirit, we shall also halt in our works.
For when this hath gone, the unclean one
cometh: this is plain from Saul. For what if
he doth not choke‘ us as he did him, still he
strangles us in some other way by wicked
works. We have need then of the harp of
David, that we may charm our souls with the
divine songs, both these, and those from good
actions. Since if we do the one only, and


cxvii. 1), but are applied to the relations of Christ to the nations
in accordance with the prophetico-typical exegesis which
regarded the prophets, kings and the history and people of
Israel as having their chief significance in the fact that they
embodied hopes and ideals which pointed farward to the
Messiah and were realized only in the work and principles of
His kingdom.—G. B. S.

3 So Field with two or three Mss.: others, ‘‘and this ruleth:”
Vulg. ‘“ and life ruleth.”


42 Sam. xvi. 14, LXX. éxvcyev, A. V. troubled: see Matt.


people of Israel to the nations (vv. ro, 11, cf. Deut. xxxii. 43; Ps. | vili. 32


540


THE WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSE@GRr


[HomiLty XXVIIL


while we listen to the charm, war with the
charmer by our actions, as he did of old (1
Sam. xix. 10); the remedy wiil even turn to
judgment to us, and the madness become the
more furious. For before we heard, the
wicked demon was afraid lest we should hear
it and recover. But when after hearing it
even, we continue the same as we were, this
is the very thing to rid him of his fear. Let
us sing then the Psalm of good deeds, that we
may cast out the sin that is worse than the
demon. For a demon certainly will not de-
prive us of heaven, but doth in some cases’
even work with the sober-minded. But sin
will assuredly casteus out. For this is a de-
mon we willingly receive, a self-chosen mad-
ness. Wherefore also it hath none to pity it
or to pardon it. Let us then sing charms
over a soul in this plight, as well from the
other Scriptures, as also from the blessed
David. And let the mouth sing, and the
mind be instructed. Even this is no small
thing. For if we once teach the tongue to
sing, the soul will be ashamed to be devising
the opposite of what this singeth. Nor is this
the only good thing that we shall gain, for we
shall also come to know many things which
are our interest. For he discourseth to
thee both of things present, and things to
come, and of things seen, and of the invisible
Creation. And if thou wouldest learn about
the Heaven, whether it abideth as it is or
shall be changed, he gives thee a clear an-
swer, and will say, ‘The heavens shall wax
old as doth a garment, and as a vesture shalt
thou fold them up, O God, and they shall be
changed.” (Ps. cii. 26.) And if thou wish-
est to hear of the form of them again, thou
shalt hear, ‘‘ That spreadeth forth the Heaven
like a curtain” (déppw). And if thou be
minded to know further about the back of
them, he will tell thee again, “that covereth
His upper chambers with waters.” (Ps. civ.
2, 3.) And even here he does not pause, but
will likewise discourse with thee on the
breadth and height, and show thee that these
are of equal measure. For, “As far as the
east,” he says, “is from the west, so far hath
He set our iniquities from us. Like as the
heaven’s height above the earth, so is the
Lord’s mercy upon them that fear Him.” (ib.
cill. 12, 11.) But if thou wouldest busy thy-
self with the foundation of the earth, even this
he will not hide from thee, but thou shalt hear
him singing and saying, “‘ He hath founded it

1 Such was the case of Stagirius, wzt. Chrys. Montf. p. 97.
See St. Chrysostom’s Exhortation to him, t. 1. Ben. t. vi. Sav.
Bingham, art, Energumens. . . St. Aug. de Civ. Dez. 19, 4.
§ 2 and 21, 14. ‘“*A messenger of Satan’? was given to St.
Paul Himself, 2 Cor. xii. 7, and it was in hope of their salva-


tion he delivered Hymeneus and Alexander to Satan. 1 Tim.
i. 20, and another, 1 Cor. v. 5.


upon the seas.” (ib. say," 2:)) And ii vot
earthquakes thou art desirous to know, whence
they come, he will free thee from this diffi-
culty also, by saying, ‘‘ That looketh upon the
earth, and maketh it tremble.” (ib. civ. 32.)
And if thou enquire the use of the night, this
too mayest thou learn, and know from him.
For “therein all the beasts of the forest do
move.” (ib. 20.) And in what way the
mountains are for use, he will tell thee, ‘“‘ The
high mountains are for the stags.” And why
there are rocks, “ The rocks are a refuge for
the porcupines.”’ (b. 18.) Why are there
trees yielding no fruit? learn from him, for
“there the sparrows build their nests.” (ib.
17.) Why are there fountains in the wilder-
nesses ? hear, “that by them the fowls of the
heaven dwell, and the wild beasts.” (ib. 12.)
Why is there wine? not that thou mayest
drink only (for water is of a nature to suffice
for this), but that thou mayest be gladdened
also, ‘‘For wine maketh glad the ‘heart of
man.” (ib. 15.) And by knowing this you
will know how far the use of wine is allow-
able. Whence are the fowls and the wild
beasts nourished? thou wilt hear from his
words, ‘“ All these wait upon Thee, to give
them their meat in due season.” (ib. 27.).
If thou sayest, For what purpose are the
cattle? he will answer thee, that these also
are for thee, “‘ That causeth the grass,” he
says, “to grow for the cattle, and the green
herb for the service (or retinue) cf men.”
(ib. 14.) What is the use of the moon? hear
him saying, ‘‘ He made the moon for seasons.”
(Ps. civ. 19.) And that all things seen and
those not seen are made, is a thing that he
has also clearly taught us by saying, ‘‘ Him-
self spake, and they were made, He com-
manded, and they were created.” (ib. xxxiii.
g.) And that there is an end of death, this
he also teaches when he says, ‘‘ God shall de-
liver my soul from the hand of hell when He
shall ‘receive me.” (ib, xlixoe#5:)) Whence
was our body made? he also tells us; “He
remembereth that we are dust”’ (ib. ciii. 14);
and again, whither goeth it away? “It shall
return to its dust.” (ib. civ. 29.) Why was
this universe made? For thee: “For thou
crownest him with glory and honor, and
settest him over the works of Thy hands.”
(ib. vill. 5, 6.) Have we men any community
with the Angels? This he also tells us, say-
ing as follows, “Thou hast made him a little
lower than the Angels.”’ Of the love of God,
“Like as a father pitieth his own children,
even so is the Lord merciful to them that fear
Him.” (ib. ciii. 13.) And of the things that
are to meet us after our present life, and of
that undisturbed condition. he teacheth, ‘“ Re-


HomMILy XX VIII.]


turn unto thy rest, O my soul.’’ (ib. exvi. 7.)
Why the Heaven is so great, this he will also
say. For it is because “the heavens declare
the glory of God.” (ib. xix. 1.) Why day
and night were made,—not that they may
shine and give us rest only, but also that they
may instruct us. ‘‘ For there are no speeches
nor words, the sounds of which (i. e. day and
night) are not heard.” (ib. 3.) How the
sea lies round about the earth, this too thou
wilt learn from hence. “The deep as a gar-
ment is the envelopment thereof.””* For so
the Hebrew has it. But having a sample in
what I have mentioned, ye will have a notion
of all the rest besides, the things about Christ,
about the resurrection, about the life to come,
about the resting, about punishment, about
moral matters, all that concerns doctrines,
and you will find the book filled with count-
less blessings. And if you fall into tempta-
tions, you will gain much comfort from hence.
If you fall into sins even, you will find count-
less remedies stored up here, or if into poverty
or tribulation, you will see many havens.
And if thou be righteous thou wilt gain much
security hence, and if a sinner much relief.
For if thou be just and art ill-treated, thou
wilt hear him say, “For Thy sake are we
killed all the day long, we are counted as
sheep for the slaughter.” (Ps. xliv. 22.)
“All these things have come upon us, and
yet have we not forgotten Thee.” (ib. 17.)
And if thy well-doings make thee high, thou
wilt hear him say, “ Enter not into judgment
with Thy servant, for in Thy sight shall no
man living be justified” (ib. exliii. 2), and
thou wilt be straightway made lowly. And if
thou be a sinner, and hast despaired of thy-
self, thou wilt hear him continually singing,
“To-day, if ye will hear His voice, harden
not your hearts, as in the provocation ” (ib.
xcv. 7, 8), and thou wilt be stayed up speedily.
And if thou have a crown even on thy head,
and art high-minded, thou wilt learn that “a
king is not saved by a great host, neither shall
a giant be saved by the greatness of his
might” (ib. xxxiii, 16): and thou wilt find
thyself able to be reasonable. If thou be
rich, and in reputation, again thou wilt hear
him singing, “ Woe to them that trust in their
own might, and boast themselves in the mul-


17 Ps. civ. 6. )
nine, which would be expected in speaking of the sea.
Theodoret on the Psalm.


Where Aquila and Theodotion have the femi-
See


THEVEP EST LE) FO ‘THE: ROMANS,


541


titude of their riches.” (ib. xlix. 6.) And,
“As for man, his days are as grass”? (ib. ciii.
15), And, “ His glory shall not go down with
him, after him” (ib. xlix. 17): and thou wilt
not think any of the things upon the earth
are great. For when what is more splendid
than all, even glory and power, is so worthless,
what else of things on earth is worth account-
ing of? But art thou in despondency? Hear
him saying, ‘“‘Why art thou so sorrowful, O
my soul, and why dost thou so disturb me?
Trust in God, for I will confess unto Him.”
(ib. xlii. 5.) Or dost thou see men in honor
who deserve it not?” “Fret not thyself at
them that do wickedly. For as the grass
shall they be dried up, and as the green herb
shall they soon fall away.” (ib. xxxvil. 1, 2.)
Dost thou see both righteous and sinners
punished? be told that the cause is not the
same. For “many” he says, . “are the
plagues of sinners.” (ib. xxxil. 10.) But in
the case of the righteous, he does not say
plagues,® but, “‘ Many are the troubles of the
righteous, but the Lord delivereth them out of
them all.” (ib. xxxiv. 19.) And again, “The
death of the sinner is evil.” (ib. 21.) And,
“Precious in the sight of the Lord is the
death of His saints.” (ib. cxvi. 15.) These
things do thou say continually: by these be
instructed. For every single word of this has
in it an indiscoverable ocean of meaning.
For we have been just running over them
only: but if you were minded to give these
passages accurate investigation, you will see
the riches to be great. But at present it is
possible even by what I have given, to get
cleared of the passions that lie on you. For
since he forbids our envying, or being grieved,
or despondent out of season, or thinking that
riches are anything, or tribulation, or poverty,
or fancying life itself to be anything, he frees
thee from all passions. So for this let us
give thanks to God, and let us have our treas-
ure always in hand, “that by patience and
comfort of the Scriptures we may have hope”
(Rom. xv. 4), and enjoy the good things to
come. Which God grant that we may all
attain, by the grace and love toward man of
our Lord Jesus Christ. By Whom and with
Whon, etc.


2 2 Mss. * Receive a cure for even this.”

3 Orig. in Rom. v. 4. Trtbudatio proprie sanctorum est,
imptorum autem. . . flagella appellantur., ‘* Tribulation
properly belongs to the saints, the things the wicked suffer
are called scourges.”’


THE WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOS#Oa.


[HomILy XXIX.


OWE Ws KL.


ROM. XV. 14.


‘‘ And I myself also am persuaded of you, my brethren,


that ye also are full of goodness, filled with all |


knowledge, able also to admonish one another.”
+ 5 ‘ “ ?
(Sommost:a5-6 Chrys. Others: )


We had: said,-Inasmucheas Igam the
Apostle of the Gentiles, I magnify mine
office.” (Rom. xi. 13.) He had said, “ Take
heed lest He also spare not thee.” (ib. 21.)
He had said, “ Be not wise in your own
conceits” (ib. xii. 16); and again, “ Why
dost thou judge thy brother?” (ib. xiv. ro)
And, “ Who art thou that judgest another
man’s servant?” (ib. 4.) And several other
like things besides. Since then he had often
made his language somewhat harsh, he now
speaks kindly (@epareve). And what he said
in the beginning, that he doth in the end also.
At the beginning he said, “I thank my God
for you all, that your faith is spoken of
throughout the whole world.” (ib. i. 8.)
But here he says, ““I am persuaded that ye
also are full of goodness, being able also to
admonish others ;” and this is more than the
former. And he does not say, I have heard,
but, “I am persuaded,” and have no need to
hear, from others. And, “I myself,” that is,
I that rebuke, that accuse you. That “ye
are full of goodness,” this applies to the ex-
hortation lately given. As if he said, It was
not as if you were cruel, or haters of your
brethren, that I gave you that exhortation,
to receive, and not to neglect, and not to
destroy “the work of God.” For I am aware
that “ye are full of goodness.” But he
seems to me here to be calling their virtue
perfect. And he does not say ye have, but
“ve are full of.” And the sequel is with the
same intensitives: “filled with all knowl-
edge.” For suppose they had been affection-
ate, but yet did not know how to treat those
they loved properly. This was why he added,
“all knowledge. Able to admonish others,”
not to learn only, but also to teach.

Ver. 15. “ Nevertheless, I have written the
more boldly unto you in some sort.”

Observe the lowly-mindedness of Paul,
observe his wisdom, how he gave a deep cut
in the former part, and then when he had
succeeded in what he wished, how he uses
much kindliness next. For even without


what he has said, this very confession of his
having been bold were enough to unstring
their vehemency. “And this he does in writ-
ing to the Hebrews also, speaking as follows,
“ But, beloved, I am persuaded better things
of you, and things which belong unto salva-
tion, though we thus speak.” (Heb. vi. g.)
And to the Corinthians again, “ Now I praise
you, brethren, that ye remember me in all
things, and keep the ordinances, as I delivered
them to you:” (4 Cor.-xi. 2.) -And anew
ing to the Galatians he says, “I have confi-
dence in you, that ye will be none otherwise
minded.” (Gal. v. 10.) And in all parts of
his Epistles one may find this to be frequently
observed. But here even in a greater degree.
For they were in a higher rank, and there was
need to bring down their fastidious spirit, not
by astringents only, but by laxatives also.
For he does this in different ways. Where-
fore he says in this place too, “ I have written
the more boldly unto you,” and with this
even he is not satisfied, but has added, “in
some sort,” that is, gently; and even here he
does not pause, but what does he say? “As
putting you in mind.”* And he does not say
as teaching, nor simply putting in mind,
(avapipvicKwr) but he uses a word (éxavauiuv7cKwr)
which means putting you in mind in a quiet
way. Observe the end falling in with the
introduction. For as in that passage he said,
“that your faith is made known in all the
world.” (Rom. i. 8.) Soin the end of the
Epistle also, “For your obedience hath
reached unto all.” (ib. xvi. 19.) And as in
the beginning he wrote, “‘ For I long to see
you, that I may impart unto you some spirit-
ual gift, to the end that ye may be established ;
that is, that I may be comforted together with
you.” (ib. i, 11; 12);.so, here: also, he same
“ As putting you in mind.” And having come
down from the seat of the master, both there


* Besides the interpretation adopted by Chrys. which joins
amo wepous closely with dvautuvynoxwy and understands it to
mean, zz a sort—gently, two other views deserve notice (1)
that which joins it to toAunpotepov—in fart, or somewhat
more boldly (Hodge) and (2) that which joins it to éypava—I
have written more boldly zz farts of the epistle (De Wette,
Meyer, Alford). Both our Eng. vss. seem to understand it as
Chrys. viz. : as a conciliatory modification of ‘‘ more boldly,”
and connecting with it the explanatory statement that the rea-
son of his more bold writing was the kindly one of putting
them in remembrance.—G. B.S.


HomiLy XXIX.]


THE UEY IST LE; TO"; THE: ROMANS.


543


and here, he speaks to them as brethren and
friends of equal rank. And this is quite a
Teacher’s duty, to give his address that
variety which is profitable to the hearers.
See then how after saying, ‘I have written
the more boldly,” and, “in some sort,” and,
‘as putting you in mind,” he was not satis-
fied even with these, but making his language
still more lowly, he proceeds : |

“Because of the grace that is given me of
God.” As he said at the beginning, “I ama
debtor.” (Rom. i. 14.) As if he had said, I
have not snatched at the honor for myself,
neither was I first to leap forward to it, but
God commanded this, and this too according
unto grace, not asif He had separated me for
this office because I deserved it. Do not ye
then be exasperated, since it is not I that
raise myself up, but it is God that enjoins it.
And as he there says, “whom I serve in the
Gospel of His Son” (ib. 9), so also here,
after saying, ‘because of the grace given
unto me by God,” he adds,

Ver. 16. “ That I should be the minister
of Jesus Christ to the Gentiles, ministering
(ispovpyoovra) the Gospel of God.”

For after his abundant proof of his state-
ments, he draws his discourse to a more lofty
tone, not speaking of mere service, as in the
beginning, but of service and priestly minister-
ing (Aecroupyiav xaiiepovpyiav). For to me this is
a priesthood, this preaching and declaring.
This is the sacrifice I bring. Now no one
will find fault with a priest, for being anxious to
offer the sacrifice without blemish. And he
says this at once to elevate (rrepov) their
thoughts, and show them that they are a sacri-
fice, and in apology for his own part in the
matter, because he was appointed to this
office. For my knife, he says, is the Gospel,
the word of the preaching. And the cause
is not that I may be glorified, not that I may
appear conspicuous, but that the “ offering
up (xposdopa) of the Gentiles may be accept-
able, being sanctified by the Holy Ghost.”

That is, that the souls of those that are
taught by me, may be accepted. For it was
not so much to honor me, that God Jed me to
this pitch, as out of a concern for you. And
how are they to become acceptable? In the
Holy Ghost. For there is need not only of
faith, but also of a spiritual way of life, that
we may keep the Spirit that was given once
for all. For it is not wood and fire, nor altar
and knife, but the Spirit that is all in us.
For this cause, I take all means to prevent
that Fire from being extinguished, as I have


1 Some Mss. ‘‘all is spiritual with us”’ (rvevwartixa). Savile's
marginal reading is unintelligible, but might suggest conjec-
tures.


been also enjoined to do. Why then do you
speak to those that need it not? This is just
the reason why I do not teach you, but put
you in mind, he replies. As the priest stands
by stirring up the fire, so I do, rousing up
your ready-mindedness. And observe, he
does not say, “that the offering up of” you
“may be” etc. but “of the Gentiles.” But
when he says of the Gentiles, he means the
whole world, the land, and the whole sea, to
take down their haughtiness, that they
might not disdain to have him for a teacher,
who was putting himself forth (recvéuevov) to
the very end of the world. As he said in the
beginning, “as among the other Gentiles
also, I am a debtor to Greeks, and also
to barbarians, to wise, and to foolish.” (Rom.
i ES, pad, SER. 947-)

Ver. 17. “I have therefore whereof I may
glory, through Jesus Christ, in those things
which pertain to God.”

Inasmuch as he had humbled himself
exceedingly, he again raised his style, doing
this also for their sakes, lest he should seem
to become readily an object of contempt.
And while he raises himself, he remembers
his own proper temper, and says, “I have
therefore whereof to glory.” I glory, he
means, not in myself, not in our zeal, but in
the “grace of God.”

Ver. 18. “For I will not dare to speak of
any of those things which Christ hath not
wrought by me, to make Gentiles obedient by
word and deed, through mighty signs and
wonders, by the power of the Spirit of
God.” *

And none, he means, can say that my
words area mere boast. For of this priestly
ministry of mine, the signs that I have, and
the proofs of the appointment too, are many.
Not the long garment (zodjpyc) and the~bells
as they of old, nor the mitre and the turban
(xidapic), but signs and wonders, far more awful
than these. Nor can it be said that I have
been entrusted indeed with the charge, but
yet have not executed it. Or rather, it is not
I that have executed, but Christ. Wherefore
also it is in Him that I boast, not about
common things, but about spiritual. And
this is the force of, “in things which pertain

* Verse 18 may yield three different meanings according to
the word which receives the main emphasis. If it is placed
on through me the meaning is: I shall not mention or lay
claim to results wrought by others, but only to those
secured by my own labors. The desire of the apostle (20) not
to build upon another man’s foundation favors this view,
(So Alford, Hodge). If the stress is placed on the word
wrought the sense is: I shall not dare to mention any of
| those things which Christ did not actually work, 1. €., I
shall make no claim to success not actually achieved (Meyer).
| The emphasis may be placed on Chrest. If so, it means: I


will mention only what Christ (he and he alone) wrought
through me for the extension of his kingdom. Chrys. under-


stands the passage thus and, we think, rightly. (So Tholuck,
} Olshausen, Boise).—G.


544


to God.” For that I have accomplished the
purpose for which I was sent, and that my
words are not mere boast, the miracles, and
the obedience of the Gentiles show. “For I
will not dare to speak of any of those things
which Christ hath not wrought by me, to
make the Gentiles obedient by word and deed,
through signs and wonders, by the power of
the Spirit of God.” See how violently he
tries to show that the whole is God’s doing,
and nothing his own. For whether I speak
anything, or do anything, or work miracles,
He doth all of them, the Holy Spirit all.
And this he says to show the dignity of the
Holy Spirit also. See how these things are
more wondrous and more awful than those
of old, the sacrifice, the offering, the sym-
bols. For when he says, “in word and deed,
through mighty signs and wonders,” he
means this, the doctrine, the system (g:Aooudiav)
relating to the Kingdom, the exhibition of
actions and conversation, the dead that were
raised, the devils that were cast out, and the
blind that were healed, and the lame that
leaped, and the other marvellous acts, all
whereof the Holy Spirit wrought in us. Then
the proof of these things (since all this is yet
but an assertion) is the multitude of the
disciples. Wherefore he adds, “So that
from Jerusalem, and round about unto
Illyricum, I have fully preached the Gospel of
Christ.” Count up then cities, and places,
and nations, and peoples, not those under the
.Romans only, but those also under barbarians.
For I would not have you go the whole way
through Pheenicia, and Syria, and the Cilicians,
and Cappadocians, but reckon up also the
parts behind,’ the country of the Saracens,
and Persians, and Armenians, and that of the
other savage nations. For this is why he
said, ‘“‘round about,” that you might not only
go through the direct high road, but that you
should run over the whole, even the southern
part of Asia in your mind. And as he ran
over miracles thick as snow, in a single word,
by saying, “through mighty signs and won-
ders,” so he has comprehended again endless
cities, and nations, and peoples, and places,
in this one word “round about.” For he was
for removed from all boasting. And _ this
he said on their account, so that they
should not be conceited about themselves.
And, at the beginning he said, <that 71
might have some fruit amongst you also,
even as among other Gentiles.’’ But here
he states the compulsion of his priesthood.
For as he had spoken in a sharper tone,
he shows also by it his power more


This is scarcely historical, except with reference to Arabia.
Even St. Jerome on Amos v. 8, implies less.


THE WORKS ‘OBST. CHR Ys0stee


{HomiILy XXIX.


clearly. This is why he there only says,
“even as among other Gentiles.” But here
he insists on the topic fully, so that the
conceit may be pruned away on all grounds.
And he does not merely say, preached the
Gospel, but “have fully preached the Gos-
pel of Christ.’”*

Ver. 20. “ Yeaesorvhave. Eo strived eto
preach the Gospel, not where Christ was
named.”

See here another preéminence; that he
had not only preached the Gospel to so
many, and persuaded them, but he did not
even go to those who had become disci-
ples. So far was he from thrusting him-
self upon other men’s disciples, and from
doing this for glory’s sake, that he even
made it a point to teach those who had not
heard. For neither does he say where
they were not persuaded, but “ where
Christ was. not even named,” which is more.
And what was the reason why he had
this ambition? ‘Lest I should build,” he
says, ‘upon another man’s foundation.”

This he says to show himself a stranger
to vanity, and to instruct them that it ’
was not from any love of glory, or of
honor from them, that he came to write,.
but as fulfilling his ministry, as perfecting
his priestly duty, as loving their salvation.
But he calls the foundation of the Apos-
tles “another man’s,” not in regard to the
quality of the person, or the nature of
preaching, but in regard to the question
of reward. For it was not that the preach-
ing was that of another man,* but so far
as it went to another man’s reward. For
the reward of the labors of others was, to
this man, another man’s. Then he shows
that a prophecy was fulfilled also say-
ing,

Ver. 21. “As it is written, To whom He
was not spoken of, they shall see, and they
that have not heard shall understand.” (Is.
Wis TS.)

You see he runs to where the labor is
more, the toil greater.

Ver. 22. “For which cause also I have
been much hindered from coming to you.”

Observe again, how he makes the end of the
like texture with the introduction. For while
he was quite at the beginning of the Epistle, he
said, “Oftentimes I purpose to come unto
you, but was <let -hitherto”’) (Rom!) i 73:)


22 Mss. add wore detEar didotimias To KatopOwua ov. The
tAoriwta, ** zealous striving,’’ is here opposed to mere neces-
sity of duty, ‘“‘the compulsion of his priesthood.’’ The words
thus are a gloss on those next cited, not a proper part of the
text.

3 aAAotprov, which means either ‘“‘alien,’> or ‘‘another
man’s.”


TloMILy XXIX.]} TAE


But here he gives the cause also by which
he was let, and that not once, but twice
even, aye, and many times. For as he
says there, “oftentimes I purposed to come
to you,” so here too, “I have been much (or
often, ra 7022a) hindered from coming to you.”
Now it is a thing which proves a very strong
desire, that he attempted it so often.

Ver. 23. “But now having no more place
in these parts.”

See how he shows that it was not from
any coveting of glory from them, that he
both wrote and was also coming. “ And
having a great desire to come to you these
many years,”

Ver. 24. ‘“‘Whensoever I take my journey
into Spain, I trust to see youin my journey ;
and to be brought on my way thitherward by
you, if first I be somewhat filled with your
company,”

For that he might not seem to be holding
them very cheap, by saying, Since I have
not anything to do, therefore I am coming
to you, he again touches on the point of
love by saying, “I have a great desire, these
many years, to come unto you.” For the
reason why I desire to come, is not because
I am disengaged, but that I may give birth
to that desire wherewith I am travailing so
long. Then that this again should not puff
them up, consider how he lowers them by
saying, ‘“ Whensoever I take my journey


into Spain, I trust to see you in my jonrney.” |


For this was why he stated this, that they
should not be high-minded. For what he
wants is to show his love, and at the same
time to prevent them from. being dainty.
And so he places this close on the other, and
uses things
nately. For this reason again that they
might not say, Do you make us a by-object
of your journey? he adds, “and to be
brought on my way thitherward by you:
that is, that you may be my witnesses that it
is not through any slight of you, but by
force of necessity, that I run by you. But
as this is still distressing, he heals it over
more carefully, by saying, “If I be first some-
what filled with your company.” For by
his saying, “in my journey,” he shows that
he did not covet their good opinion. But
by saying “be filled,” that he was eager for
their love, and not only was eager for it,
but exceedingly so; and this is why he does
not say “be filled,” but be “somewhat”’ so.
That is, no length of time can fill me or
create in me a satiety of your company.
See how he shows his love, when even though
in haste he doth not rise up until he be filled.
And this is a sign of his great affectionate-


35


confirmative of either alter- |


EPISTLE; TO: THE (ROMANS:


545


ness, that he uses his words in so warm a
way. For he does not say even I will see,
but “shall be filled,” imitating thus the
language of parents. And at the beginning
he said, “that I might have some fruit.”
(Rom. i. 13.) But here that I may be
“filled.” And both these are like a person
who is drawing others to him. For the one
was a very great commendation of them,
if they were likely to yield him fruit from
their obedience; and the other, a genuine
proof of his own friendship. And in writing
to the Corinthians he thus says, ‘‘ That
ye may bring me on my journey whithersoever
I go” (1 Cor. xvi. 6), so in all ways exhibit-
ing an unrivalled love to his disciples. And
so at the beginning of all his Epistles it is
with this he starts, and at the end in this he
concludes again. For as an indulgent father
doth an only and true born son, so did he
love all the faithful. Whence it was that he
said, ‘‘Who is weak, and I am not weak?
who is offended, and I burn not?” (2 Cor.
xi. 29.)

For before everything else this is what
the teacher ought to have. Wherefore also
to Peter Christ saith, “If thou lovest Me,
feed My sheep.” (John xxi. 16.) For he
who loveth Christ loveth also His flock.
And Moses too did He then set over the
people of the Jews, when he had shown
a kindly feeling towards them. And David
in this way came to be king, having been
first seen to be affectionately-minded towards
them; so much indeed, though yet young,
did he grieve for the people, as to risk his life
for them, when he killed that barbarian.
But if he said, ‘‘ What shall be done to the
man that killeth this Philistine?” (1 Sam.
xix. 5; ib. xvii.26) he said it not in order
to demand a reward, but out of a wish to
have confidence placed in himself, and to
have the battle with him delivered to his
charge. And therefore, when he came to
the king after the victory, he said nothing
of these things. And Samuel too was
very affectionate; whence it was that he
said, “But God forbid that I should sin
in ceasing to pray unto the Lord for you.”
(x Sam. xii. 23.) In like way Paul also,
or rather not in like way, but even in a
far greater degree, burned towards all his
subjects (rav apyouévwv). Wherefore he made
his disciples of such affection towards him-
self, that he said, “If were possible, ye
would have pulled out your eyes and given
them to me.” (Gal. iv. 15.) On this ground
too it is, that God charges the teachers
of the Jews above all things with this, saying,
“Oh shepherds of Israel, do shepherds


ST. CHRYSOSTGIME [HomiLy XXIX.


540 THE: WORKS, OF
feed themselves? do they not feed the
Hoek a ek, xxxive. 2 3.) But they


did the reverse. For he says, “ Ye eat the
milk, and: clothe you with the wool, and
ye kill them that are fed, but ye feed not
the flock.” And Christ, in bringing out the
rule for the fittest Pastor, said, ‘The good
shepherd layeth down his life for his sheep.”
(John x. 11.) This David did also, both on
sundry other occasions,and also when that
fearful wrath from above came down upon
the whole people. For while all were being
slain he said, “I the shepherd? have sinned,
I the shepherd have done amiss, and these
the flock what have they done?” (2 Sam.
xxiv. 17.) And so in the choice of those
punishments also, he chose not famine, nor
flight before enemies, but the pestilence sent
by God, whereby he hoped to place all the
others in safety, but that he should himself
in preference to all the rest be carried off.
But since this was not so, he bewails, and
says, -/ On, me--be> ‘Thy. -Eland!:.?-‘or riaut his
be not enough, ‘on my father’s house ” also.
‘For I,” he says, ‘‘ the shepherd have sinned.”
As though he had said, that if they also sinned,
I was the person who should suffer the
vengeance, as I corrected them not. But
since the sin is mine also, it is I who
deserve to suffer the vengeance. For wishing
to increase the crime he used the name of
“Shepherd.” Thus then he stayed the wrath,
thus he got the sentence revoked! So great
is the power of confession. ‘‘For the right-
eous is his own accuser first.2 So great
is the concern and sympathy of a good
Pastor. For his bowels were writhed at their
falling, as when one’s own children are
killed. And on this ground he begged that
the wrath might come upon himself. And
in the beginning of the slaughter he would
have done this, unless he had seen it advanc-
ing and expected that it would come to
himself. When therefore he saw that this
did not happen, but that the calamity was
raging among them, he no longer forebore,
but was touched more than for Amnon his
first-born. For then he did not ask for
death, but now he begs to fall in preference
to the others, Such ought a ruler to be
and to grieve rather at the calamities of
others than his own.? Some such thing he
suffered in his son’s case likewise, that you
might see that he did not love his son more


1 So LXX. Cod. Alex. Theodoret zz doc. makes David
herein a type of Christ.

2 Prov. xviii. 17, LXX. and Vulg. Our version is, ‘‘ He that
is first in his own cause seemeth just.’’ ‘The text is much
quoted by the Fathers, as Hil. in Ps. cxxxv.

3 See a remarkable form in use in China on the occasion of
such calamities, Windischman, Philos. im fortgang der
Weltgeschichte, i. p. 29.


than his subjects, and yet the youth was
unchaste, and an ill-user of his father (xazpa-
joiac), and still he said, “‘ Would that I might
have died for thee” (2) Sam)... xviil.. 34.)
What sayest thou, thou blessed one, thou
meekest of all men? Thy son was set
upon killing thee, and compassed thee, about
with ills unnumbered. And when he had
been removed, and the trophy was raised,
dost thou then pray to be slain? Yea, he
says, for it is not for me that the army has
been victorious, but I am warred against
more violently than before, and my bowels
are now more torn than before. These how-
ever were all thoughtful for those committed
to their charge, but the blessed Abraham
concerned himself much even for those that
were not entrusted to him, and so much so as
even to throw himselt amongst alarming
dangers. For when he did what he did,
not for his nephew only, but for the people
of Sodom also, he did not leave driving
those Persians before him until he had set
them all free: and yet he might have
departed after he had taken him, yet he did
not choose it. For he had the like concern
for all, and this he showed likewise by
his subsequent conduct. When then it was
not a host of barbarians that was on the
point of laying siege to them, but the wrath
of God that was plucking their cities up from
the foundations, and it was no longer the
time for arms, and battle, and array, but
for supplication; so great was the zeal he
showed for them, as, if he himself had been
on the point of perishing. For this reason
he comes once, twice, thrice, aye and many
times to God, and finds a refuge (i. e.
an excuse) in his nature by saying, “I am
dust and ashes” (Gen. xviii. 27) : and since
he saw that they were traitors to themselves,
he begs that they may be saved for others.
Wherefore also God said, ‘‘I will hide not
from Abraham My servant that thing which
I am about to do” (ib. 17), that we might
learn how loving to man the righteous is.
And he would not have left off beseeching, un-
less God had left off first (so he takes v. 33).
And he seems indeed to be praying for the
just, but is doing the whole for them. For the
souls of the Saints are very gentle and loving
unto man, both in regard to their own, and
to strangers. And even to the unreasoning
creatures they extend their gentleness.
Wherefore also a certain wise man_ said,
“The righteous pitieth the souls of his
cattle.’* But if he doth those of cattle,
how much more those of men. But since I


4 Prov. xii. 10, LXX. Know occurs in Exod, xxiii. 9, for
‘*enter into the feelings of.”


HomMILty XXX.]


DHE EPISTLE. TO. THE ROMANS.


547


have mentioned cattle, let us just consider the
shepherds of the sheep who are in the
Cappadocian land, and what they suffer in kind
and degree in their guardianship of unreason-
ing creatures. ‘They often stay for three days
together buried down under the snows. And
those in Libya are said to undergo no less
hardships than these, ranging about for whole
months through that wilderness, dreary as it
is, and filled with the direst wild beasts (4ypia
may include serpents). Now if for unreason-
able things there be so much zeal, what
defense are we to set up, who are entrusted
with reasonable souls, and yet slumber on in
this deep sleep? For is it right to be at rest,
and in quiet, and not to be running about
everywhere, and giving one’s self up to end-


less deaths in behalf of these sheep? Or
know ye not the dignity of this flock
Was it not for this that thy Master


took endless pains, and afterwards poured
forth His blood? And dost thou seek
for rest? Now what can be worse than these
Shepherds? Dost thou not perceive, that
there stand round about these sheep wolves
much more fierce and savage than those of
this world? Dost thou not think with thyself,
what a soul he ought to have who is to take
in hand this office? Now men that lead the
populace, if they have but common matters to
deliberate on, add days to nights in watching.
And we that are struggling in heaven’s behalf
sleep even in the daytime. And who is now
to deliver us from the punishment for these
things? For if the body were to be cut in
pieces, if to undergo ten thousand deaths,
ought one not to run to it as to a feast?
And let not the shepherds only, but the sheep
also hear this; that they may make the shep-


herds the more active minded, that they may the
more encourage their good-will: I do not
mean by anything else but by yielding all
compliance and obedience. Thus Paul also
bade them, saying, “Obey them which have
the rule over you, and submit yourselves :
for they watch for your souls as they that
must give account.” (Heb. xiii. 17.) And
when he says, “ watch,” he means thousands
of labors, cares and dangers. For the good
Shepherd, who is such as Christ wisheth for,
is contending, before countless witnesses.
For He died once for him; but this man
ten thousand times for the flock, if, that is,
he be such a shepherd as he ought to be;
for such an one can die every day. (See on
Rom. viii. 36. p. 456.) And therefore do
ye, as being acquainted with what the labor
is, coOperate with them, with prayers, with
zeal, with readiness, with affection, that both
we may have to boast of you, and you of us.
For on this gound He entrusted this to the
chief’ of the Apostles, who also loved Him
more than the rest; after first asking him
if He was loved by him, that thou mayest
learn that this before other things, is held
as a proof of love to Him. For this requir-
eth a vigorous soul. This I have said of the
best shepherds: not of myself and those
of our days, but of any one that may be such
as Paul was, such as Peter, such as Moses.
These then let us imitate, both the rulers of
us and the ruled. For the ruled may be in
the place of a shepherd to his family, to his
friends, to his servants, to his wife, to his
children: and if we so order our affairs we
shall attain to all manner of good things.
Which God grant that we may all attain
unto, by the grace and love toward man, etc.


HOMILY XXX.


ROM. XV. 25-27.


“But now I go unto Jerusalem to minister unto the
saints. For it has pleased them of Macedonia and
Achaia to make a certain contribution for the poor
saints which are at Jerusalem. It hath pleased
them verily, andtheir debtors they are.”


SincE he had said that I have no longer
“more place in these parts,” and, “‘I have a
great desire, these many years, to come unto
you,” but he still intended to delay; lest it
should be thought that he was making a jest


1 kopypaiw. The common title of St. Peter among the


Fathers.


of them, he mentions the cause also why he
still puts it off, and he says, that “ I am going
unto Jerusalem,” and is apparently giving the
excuse for the delay. But by means of this
he also makes good another object, which is
the exhorting of them to alms, and making
'them more in earnest about it. Since if he
/had not been minded to effect this, it had
sufficed to say, “I am going unto Jerusalem.”
But now he adds the reason of his journey.
“For I go,” says he, “to minister to the
i Saints.” And he dwells over the subject, and


548


enters into reasonings, and says that they
‘‘are debtors,” and that, “if the Gentiles
have been made partakers of their spiritual
things, their duty is also to minister unto
them in carnal things,” that they might learn
to imitate these. Wherefore also there is
much reason to admire his wisdom for devis-
ing this way of giving the advice.: For they
were more likely to bear it in this way than if
he had said it in the form of exhortation; as
then he would have seemed to be insulting
them, if, with a view to incite them, he had
brought before them Corinthians and Mace-
donians.* Indeed, this is the ground on
which he does incite the others as follows,
saying, ‘“‘ Moreover, brethren, we do you to
wit of the grace of God bestowed on the
Churches in Macedonia.” (2 Cor. viii. 1.)
And again he incites the Macedonians by
these. “For your zeal,’ he says, “ hath pro-
voked very many.” (ib. ix. 2.) And by the
Galatians in like manner he does this, as
when he says, “As I have given order to the
Churches of Galatia, even so do ye.” (1 Cor.
xvi. 1.) But in the case of the Romans he
does not do so, but in a more covert way.
And he does this also in regard to the preach-
ing, as when he says, ‘‘ What ? came the word
of God out from you? or came it unto you
only?” (ib. xiv. 36.) For there is nothing
so powerful as emulation. And so he often
employs it. For elsewhere too he says,”
‘“‘ And soordain I in allthe Churches ; ”’ (ib. vii.
17); and again, ‘‘As I teach everywhere in
everys Chureh.?—((ib.i\iv. 17.) And ‘)to: the
Colossians he says, “that the Gospel in-
creaseth and bringeth forth fruit in all the
world.” (Col.i.6.) This then he does here
also in the case of alms. And consider what
dignity there is in his expressions. . For he
does not say, I go to carry alms, but “ to min-
ister” (diaxovov). But if Paul ministers, just
consider how great a thing is doing, when the
Teacher of the world undertakes to be the
bearer, and when on the point of travelling to
Rome, and so greatly desiring them too, he
yet prefers this to that. “ For it hath pleased
them of Macedonia and Achaia, that is, it
meets their approbation, their desire. “A
certain contribution.” And, he does not say
alms, but “contribution” (koweviav). And
the “certain” is not used without a meaning,
but to prevent his seeming to reproach these.
And he does not say the poor, merely, but the


* “That, as Chrys., Calvin, Grotius, and many, including
Riickert and Olshausen assume, Paul intended *‘ courteously
and gently’ (Luther) to suggest to the Romans that they
should likewise bestow alms on those at Jerusalem, is very
improbable, inasmuch as no reason is perceivable why he
should not have ventured on a direct summons, and seeing,
moreover, that he looked upon the work of collection as con-
cluded, ver. 25,’’ Meyer.—G. B. S.


THE, WORKS OF) ST. (CHRYSsOstier


[HomMILy XXX.


b


‘poor saints,” so making his recommenda-
tion twofold, both that from their virtue and
that from their poverty. And even with this
alone he was not satisfied, but he adds, “ they
are their debtors.” Then he shows how
they are debtors) ) Sigma, hetusays, «uae
Gentiles have been made partakers of their
Spiritual things, their debt (A. V. duty) is
also to minister unto them in carnal things.”
But what he means is this. It was for
their sakes that Christ came. To them it
was that all the promises were made, to
them of the Jews. Of them Christ came.
(Wherefore also it said, ‘Salvation is of the
Jews.”) (John iv. 22.) From them were the
Apostles, from them the Prophets, from them
all good things. In all these things then the
world was made a partaker. If then, he says,
ye have been made partakers in that which is
greater, and when it was for them that the
banquet was prepared, ye have been brought
in to enjoy the feast that was spread (Matt.
xxii. g), according to the Parable of the Gos-
pel, ye are debtors also to share your carnal
things with them, and to impart to them.
But he does not say to share, but “ to minis-
ter? (Aecroupyisat), so ranking them with min-
isters (dvaxévwv), and those that pay the trib-
ute’ to kings. And he does not say in your
carnal things, as he did in “their spiritual
things.” For the spiritual things were theirs.
But the carnal belonged not to these alone,
but were the common property of all. For he
bade money to be held to belong to all,? not
to those who were its possessors only.

“Ver. 28.“ When theretere. “1 havesaaer
formed this, and have sealed unto them this
Fruit,”

That is, when I have laid it up as it were in
the royal treasuries, as in a place secure from
robbers and danger. And he does not say
alms, but “fruit” again, to show that those
who gave it were gainers by it. ‘1 will come
by you into Spain.” He again mentions
Spain to show his forwardness (dé«vov) and
warmth towards them.

Ver. 29. “And I am “sure, that whens
come unto you, I shall come in the fulness of
the blessing of the Gospel of Christ.”

What is the force of, “‘ In the fulness of the
blessing? Either he speaks of alms (Gr.
money), or generally of good deeds. For
blessing is a name he very commonly gives to
alms. As when he says, “ As:a blessing * and


+ Aetrovpyia, in Classical Greek, is performing a public ser-
vice at one’s own expense.

22 Cor. ix. 5. Mosheim de Rebus Christianorum ante
Const. p. 118, also Diss. ad Hist. Eccl. pert. vol. 2, 1. St.
Chrys. speaks at length of wealth on x Cor. xiv. 19, Hom. 35,
p 490,O.T. He thinks it lawful, but dangerous, and recom-
mends alms almost without limitation.

3 A. V. bounty, but margin, blessing.


HoMILy XXX.]


THE EPISTLE “TOSTHE: ROMANS.


549


mot as Coverousness.” (2 Cor. ix. 5.) And
it was customary of old for the thing to be
so called. But as he has here added “ of the
Gospel,” on this ground we assert that he
speaks not of money only, but of all other
things. Asif he had said, I know that when
I come I shall find you with the honor and
freshness of all good deeds about you, and
worthy of countless praises in the Gospel.*
And this is a very striking mode of advice,
I mean this way of forestalling their attention
by encomiums. For when he entreats them
in the way of advice, this is the mode of set-
ting them right that he adopts.

Ver. 30. “‘ Now I beseech you, brethren, for
the Lord Jesus Christ’s sake, and for the love
of the Spirit.”

Here he again puts forward Christ and the
Spirit, and makes no mention whatever of the
Father. And I say this, that when you find
him mentioning the Father and the Son, or
the Father only, you may not despise either
the Son or the Spirit. And he does not say
the Spirit, but “ the love of the Spirit.” Foras
Christ loved the world, and as the Father
doth, so doth the Spirit also. And what is
it that thou beseechest us, let me hear? ‘To
strive together with me in your prayers to
God for me,”

Wer. 31. Lhat I may be delivered from
them that do not believe in Judea.”

A great struggle then lies before him.
And this too is why he calls for their prayers.
And he does not say that I may be engaged
in it, but “I may be delivered,” as Christ
commanded, to ‘‘ pray that we enter not into
temptation.””? “ (Matt. xxvi. 41.) And in say-
ing this he showed, that certain evil wolves
would attack them, and those who were wild


* It is certain that Chrys. is incorrect in his interpretation
of the statement: ‘‘ When I come unto you I shall come in the
fulness the blessing of the Gospel of Christ.’’ (29.) The
meaning is not that he shall find them abounding in this bless-
ing, but that he (Paul) will come to them furnished with the
fulness of this blessing. The joyful hopes of Paul respecting
his journey to Rome and labors there, were not, indeed,
wholly thwarted, but how different were the experiences of
his journey and life there from what he had expected. He
went thither a prisoner and such missionary labors as he was
permitted to perform were accomplished hile he was kept in
ward by the civil authorities of Rome. And, yet, notwith-
standing these hardships, who can doubt that his prayer was
answered? He found joy in the saints at Rome who came
out from the city as far as Appii Forum and the Three
Taverns to welcome him (Acts xxviii. 15); he was permitted
for two years, at least, to occupy his own hired house and
freely to ‘‘ preach the kingdom of God and teach the things
concerning the Lord Jesus Christ with all boldness, none
forbidding him” (Acts xxviii. 30, 31); this preaching was
crowned with signal success extending to the conversion of
some of the members of Czsar’s household (Phil. iv. 22). It is
propable that we owe to this same period of imprisonment
at Rome the four epistles to the Colossians, Ephesians,
Philemon, and Philippians; 1f so, we have in them a reflec-
tion of the manifold activities and profound spiritual experi-
ences of the apostle during his stay in Rome which constitute
a genuine providential fulfilment of his desires, although it
proved that as in the case of an earlier visit to Jerusalem, he
went not knowing the things that should befall him there
(Acts xx. 22).—G. B. S.

1 2 Mss. add, So directing them to do this.


beasts rather than men. And out of this he also
found grounds for another thing, namely, for
showing that he with good reason took the
office of ministering to the Saints, if, that is,
the unbelievers were in such force that he even
prayed to be delivered from them. For they
who were amongst so many enemies, were in
danger of perishing by famine also. And
therefore there was absolute need of aid com-
ing (or “of his going”) from other quarters
to them. ‘And that my service which I
have for Jerusalem may be accepted of the
Saints.”

That is, that my sacrifice may be accepted,
that with cheerfulness they may receive what
is given them. See how he again exalts the
dignity of those who were to receive it. Then
he asks for the prayer of so great a people in
order to what was sent being received. And
by this he shows another point also, that to
have given alms does not secure its being
accepted. For when any one gives it con-
strainedly, or out of unjust gains, or for vanity,
the fruit of it is gone.

Ver. 32. “That I may come unto you with
joy by the will of God.”

As he had said at the beginning, “ If by any
means now at length I might have a pros-
perous journey, by the will of God, to come
unto you” (Rom. i. 10); so here again he
takes refuge in the same Will, and says that
this is why I press on and wish to be deliv-
ered from them, that I may see you shortly,
and that with pleasure, without bringing any
load of heaviness from thence. “ And may
with you be refreshed.”

See how he again shows unassumingness.
For he does not say, I may teach you, and
give you a lesson, but that, “I may with you
be refreshed.” And yet he was the very man
engaged in the striving and conflict. In what
sense then does he say “that I may be re-
freshed with you (cvvavarabowua) ?” It is to
gratify them on this point too, and to make
them the more cheerful by making them shar-
ers of his crown, and to show that they too
struggle and labor. Then, as was always his
custom to do, he adds prayer after the exhor-
tation, and says,

Ver. 33. ‘Now the God of peace be with
you all. Amen.”

Chap. xvi. ver. 1. “I commend unto you
Phebe our sister, which is a deaconess (A. V.
servant) of the church which is at Cen-
chrea.”

See how many ways he takes to give her


dignity. For he has both mentioned her
before all the rest, and called her sister.
And it is no slight thing to be called the


sister of Paul. Moreover he has added her


559


THE/ WORKS OF: ST. |\CHRMSOS5ORF.


[Homity XXX.


rank, by mentioning her being “ deacon-
essa

Ver. 2. ‘That ye receive her in the Lord,
as becometh saints. (Gr. “the saints.”’)

Thatis, for the Lord’s sake, that she may
enjoy honor among you. For he that receives
a person for the Lord’s sake, though it be no
great one that he receives, yet receives him
with attention. But when it isa saint, con-
sider what attention he ought to have shown
him. And this is why he adds, “as becometh
saints,’ as such persons ought to be received.
For she has two grounds for her having
attention shown her by you, both that of her
being received for the Lord’s sake, and that
of her being a saint herself. And “that ye
assist her in whatsoever business she hath
need (or “asks,” xp#én) of you.” You see
how little he burdens them. For he does not
say, That ye despatch, but that ye contribute
your own part, and reach out a hand to her:
and that “fin whatsoever business she hath
need.” Not in whatsoever business she may
be, but in such as she may ask of you. But she
will ask in such things as lie in your power.
Then again there comes a very great praise of
her. “ For she hath been a succorer of many
and of myself also.”

See his judgment. First come the ecomi-
ums, then he makes an exhortation intervene,
and then again gives encomiums, so placing
on each side of the needs of this blessed
woman her praises. For how can the woman
be else than blessed who has the blessing of
so favorable a testimony from Paul, who had
also the power to render assistance to him
who had righted the whole world? For this
was the summit of her good deeds, and so he
placed it the last, as he says, “and of “ myself
also.” But what does the phrase of myself
also” convey? Of the herald of the world,
of him who hath suffered so much, of him who
is equal to assisting tens of thousands
(uvpiore apKovvroc). Let us then imitate, both
men and women, this holy woman and her
that followeth, with her husband also. And
who are they ?

Ver./2. ‘'Greet,”. he: says, “t\Priscilla: and
Aquila, my helpers in Christ Jesus.”

To the excellence of these St. Luke also
bears witness. Partly when he says that Paul
“abode with them, for by their occupation
they were tent-makers” (Acts xviii. 3); and
partly when he points out the woman as re-
ceiving Apollos, and instructing him in the
way of the Lord. (ib. 26.) Now these are


1 See Bingham, b. ii. c. 22, for a full account of the office of
the widows, deaconesses, etc., also Cave, Prim. Christ. part
i.c.8. Theodoret thinks it a sign of there being a consider-
able Church at Cenchrea, that they had a deaconess there.


great things, but what Paul mentions are
greater. And what does he mention? In
the first place he calls them “helpers,” 2 to
point out that they had been sharers of his
very great labors and dangers. Then he
says,

Ver. 4. ““Who for my life have laid down
their own necks.”

You see they are thoroughly furnished
martyrs. For in Nero’s time it is probable
that there were thousands of dangers, at the
time as he even commanded all Jews to be
removed from Rome.” (Acts viii. 2).

“Unto whom not only I give thanks, but
also all the Churches of the Gentiles.”

Here he hints at their hospitality, and
pecuniary assistance, holding them in admi-
ration because they had both poured forth
their blood, and had made their whole prop-
erty open to all. You see these were noble
women, hindered no way by their sex in the
course of virtue. And this is as might be
expected. ‘“ For in Christ Jesus there is
neither male nor female.” (Gal. iii, 28.)
And what he had said of the former, that he
said also of this. For of heralso he had
said, “‘she hath been a succorer of many, and
of myself also.” So too of this woman “not
only I give thanks, but also all the Churches
of the Gentiles.” Now that in this he might
not seem to be a flatterer, he also adduces a
good many more witnesses to these women.

Ver. 5. “‘ Likewise greet the Church that is
in their house.”

For she had been so estimable as even to
make their house a Church, both by making
all in it believers, and because they opened it
to all strangers. For he was not in the habit
of calling any houses Churches, save where
there was much piety, and much fear of God
deeply rooted in them.* And on this ground
he said to the Corinthians also, ‘$Salute
Aquila and Priscilla, with the Church that is
in their house.” (1 Cor. xvi. 19.) And when
writing about Onesimus, “ Paul unto Phile-
mon, and to the beloved Apphia, and to the
Church that is in their house.” (Philem. 1, 2.)
For it is possible for a man even in the mar-
ried state to be worthy of being looked up to,
and noble. See then how these were in that


2 guddectoupyovs. Afterwards the common term by which
Bishops spoke of each other. As the Nicene Fathers of Alex-
ander. Ep. Synod. v. fin. Theod. i. 9.

* By ‘the church in the house” of Priscilla and Aquila,
Chrys. understands the pious family which constituted the
household. Such was the view of many of the older interpre-
ters. The more probable view is that the ‘‘churches in the
houses”’ (cf. 1 Cor. xvi. 19; Col. iv. 15; Philem. 2) were
assemblies of a part of the collective church of the city,
formed for the sake of convenience of meeting, especially in
the largest towns. There is no reason to believe that all the
persons named below were members of the household—church


| of Priscilla and Aquila.—G. B. S.


HoMILy XXX.]


THECEPISTLE TO THE! ROMANS:


551


state and became very honorable, and yet
their occupation was far from being honor-
able; for they were ‘‘tent-makers.” Still
their virtue covered all this, and made them
more conspicuous than the sun. And neither
their trade nor their marriage (ovfvyia cf:
Phil. iv. 3) was any hurt to them, but the
love which Christ required of them, that they
exhibited. ‘For greater love hath no man
than this, He says, that a man lay down his
lite for his) friends.” (John. xv. 13,)) And
that which is a proof of being a disciple, they
achieve, since they took up the Cross and
followed Him. For they who did this for
Paul, would much rather have displayed their
fortitude in Christ’s behalf.

Let rich and poor both hear all this. For if
they who lived from their labor, and were
managers of a workshop, exhibited such pro-
fuseness as to be of service to many
Churches; what pardon can they expect, who
are rich, and yet neglect the poor? For
they were not sparing even of their blood for
the sake of God’s will, but thou art sparing
even of scanty sums, and many times sparest
not thine own soul. But in regard to the
teacher were they so, and not so with regard
to the disciples? Nay even this cannot be
said. For “the churches of the Gentiles,”
he says, “thank them.” And yet they were
of the Jews. But still they had such a clear
(ciduxpwac) faith, as to minister unto them also
with all willingness. Such ought women to
be, not adorning themselves with “ broidered
hair, or gold, or costly array” (1 Tim. ii. 9),
but in these good deeds. For what empress
pray, was so conspicuous or so celebrated as
this wife of the tent-maker? she is in every-
body’s mouth, not for ten or twenty years, but
until the coming of Christ, and all proclaim
her fame for things such as adorn far more
than any royal diadem. For what is greater
or so great, as to have been a succorer of
Paul? at her own peril to have saved the
teacher of the world? And consider: how
many empresses there are that no one speaks
of. But the wife of the tent-maker is every-
where reported of with the tent-maker (mean-
ing perhaps St. Paul); and the width that the
sun sees over, is no more of the world than
what the glory of this woman runneth unto.
Persians, and Scythians, and Thracians, and
they who dwell in the uttermost parts of the
earth, sing of the Christian spirit of this
woman, and bless it... How much wealth,
how many diadems and purples would you
not be glad to venture upon obtaining such a
testimony ?


1 Omitted by most Mss.


For no one can say either, that)


in dangers they were of this character, and
lavish with their money, and yet neglected
the preaching. For he calls them “ fellow-
workers and helpers” on this ground. And
this “chosen vessel” (Acts ix. 15) does not
feel ashamed to call a woman his helper
but even finds an honor in doing so. For it
is not the sex (ice) that he minds, but the
will is what he honors, What is equal to this
ornament? Where now is wealth overflowing
on every side? and where the adorning of the
person? and where is vainglory? Learn
that the dress of woman is not that put about
the body, but that which decorates the soul,
which is never put off, which does not lie in
a chest, but is laid up in the heavens. Look
at their labor for the preaching, the crown in
martyrdom, the munificence in money, the
love of Paul, the charm (o/Arpov) they found in
Christ. Compare with this thine own estate,
thy anxiety about money, thy vying with har-
lots (i. e. in dress), thy emulating of the
grass, * and then thou wilt see who they were
and who thou art. Or rather do not compare
only, but vie with this woman, and after lay-
ing aside the burdens of grass (yAdyc), (for
this is what thy costly dressing is), take
thou the dress from heaven, and _ iearn
whence Priscilla became such as she was.
How then did they become so? For two
years they entertained Paul as a guest:
(Probably Acts xix. 10) and what is there that
these two years may not have done for their
souls? What am I to do then, you will say
because I have not Paul? If thou be minded
thou mayest have him in a truer sense than
they. For even with them the sight of Paul
was not what made them of such a character,
but the words of Paul. And so, if thou be
so minded, thou shalt have both Paul, and
Peter, and John, and the whole choir of the
Prophets, with the Apostles, associating with
thee continually. For take the books of
these blessed ones, and hold a continual
intercourse with their writings, and they will
be able to make thee like the tent-maker’s
wife. And why speak I of Paul? For if
thou wilt, thou mayest have Paul’s Master
Himself. For through Paul’s tongue even
He will discourse with thee. And in another
way again thou wilt be able to receive this Per-
son, when thou receivest the saints, even when
thou tendest those that believe on Him. And
so even after their departure thou wilt have
many memorials of piety. For even the
table at which the saint ate, and a seat on
which he sat, and the couch on which he lay


2 thy mpos Tow xoprov diAoverxiav, See Matt. vi. 30; Luke


xii. 28; Clem. Al. (Pott.) p. 232.


552


THE WORKS OF ST. ‘CHEYSOSTGR


[HoMILY XXX.


knoweth how to pierce? him that received
him; even after his departure. How then,
think you, was that Shunamite pierced at
entering the upper chamber where Elisha
abode, ‘when she saw the table, the couch on
which the holy man slept; and what religious-
ness must she have felt come from it?? For
had this not been so, she would not have cast
the child there when dead, if she had not
reaped g great benefit from thence. For if so
long time after upon entering in where Paul
abode, where he was bound, where he sat
and discoursed,? we are elevated, and find
ourselves starting off from the places to that
memory (so Field: Vulg. ‘‘the memory of
that day”); when the circumstances were still
fresher, what must those have been likely to
feel, who had religiously entertained him?
Knowing all this then, let us receive the
Saints, that the house may shine, that it may
be freed from choking thorns, that the bed-
chamber may become ahaven. And let us
receive them, and wash their feet. Thou art
not better than Sarah, nor more noble, nor
more wealthy, though thou be an empress. For
she had three hundred and eighteen home-
born servants, at a time when to have two


servants even was to be wealthy. And why
do I mention the three hundred and eigh-
teen servants? She had become pos-


sessed of the whole world in her seed and in
the promises, she had the ‘‘ friend of God”
(Is. xli. 8; James ii. 23) for her husband,
God Himself as a Patron, a thing greater than
any kingdom. And yet, though she was in so
illustrious and honorable estate, this woman
kneaded the flour, and did all the other ser-
vant’s offices, and stood by them as they ban-
queted too inthe rank of aservant. Thou
art not of nobler birth than Abraham, who
yet did the part of domestics after his exploits
after his victories, after the honor paid him
by the king of Egypt, after driving out the
kings of the Persians, and raising the glorious
trophies. And look not to this; that in
appearance the Saints that lodge with thee
are but poor, and as beggars, and in rags
many times, but be mindful of that voice
which says, “‘ Inasmuch as ye have done it
to the least of these, ye have done it unto
me.” (Matt. xxv. 40.) And, “ Despise not
one of these little ones, because their angels
do always behold the face of My Father
which is in heaven.” (Matt. xviii. 10.) Re-


1 xatavvéar, see p. 487, and p. 4

2 See the use made of such eileiat at the close of the
32d Homily.

3 He seems to have some place at Antioch in his mind, but
we do not know that St. Paul was ever bound there. |


ceive them then with readiness of mind, bring-
ing as they do ten thousand blessings to thee,
through the greeting of peace. (ib. x. 12,
13.) And after Sarah, reflect upon Rebecca
also, who both drew water and gave to drink,
and called the stranger in, trampling down
all haughtiness. However, through | this,
great were the rewards of hospitality she re-
ceived! And thou, if thou be so minded,
wilt receive even greater than those. For it
will not be the fruit of children only that
God will give thee, but the heaven, and the
blessings there, and a freedom from hell, and
a remission of sins. For great, yea, very great,
is the fruit of hospitality. (Luke xi. 41.)
Thus too Jethro, and that though he was a for-
eigner, gained for a relation him.who with so
great power commanded the sea. (Dan. iv.
27°, “Ex: iii “1:)') .For-7his\ daughters sites
drew into his net this honorable prey.
(Num. x. 29.) Setting then thy thoughts
upon these things, and reflecting upon
the manly and heroic* temper of those
women, trample upon the gorgeousness of
this day, the adornmenis of dress, the costly
jewelry, the anointing with perfumes, And
have done ‘with those wanton® and delicate
airs, and that mincing walk, and turn all this
attentiveness unto the soul, and kindle up in
thy mind a longing for the heavens. For
should but his love take hold of thee, thou
wilt discern the mire and the clay, and ridi-
cule the things now so admired. For it is
not even possible for a woman adorned with
spiritual attainments to be seeking after this
ridiculousness. Having then cast this aside,
which wives cf the lewder sort of men, and
actresses, and singers, have so much ambition
in, clothe thee with the love of wisdom, with
hospitality, with the succoring of the Saints,
with compunction, with continual prayer.
These be better than cloth of goid, these
more stately than jewels and® than neck-
laces,’ these both make thee of good repute
among men, and bring thee great reward with
God. This is the dress of the Church, that
of the playhouses. This is worthy of the
heaven, that, of horses and mules; that is
put even round dead corpses, this shineth in
a good soul alone wherein Christ dwelleth.
Let this then be the dress for us to acquire,
that we also may have our praise sung every-
where, and be well-pleasing to Christ, by
Whom and with Whom, etc. Amen.


* didogodiav, he means their simple habits; as in keeping
sheep, and the character perhaps ee in Moses’ choice.

5 kataxAav, Phryn. af Bek. Anec. p.

6 The remaining leaves of the Bodl. Mis. are lost.

7 mepideppaiwy thus spelt. Jul. Poll. 5, 5


HOMILY XX X‘1.]


THECEL ISI LE TO: THE SROMANS:


553


BMOMILY » LARL,


ROM. XVI. 5.


“Salute my well-beloved Epenetus, who is the first-
fruits of Achaia unto Christ.”


I THINK that many even of those who have
the appearance of being extremely good men,
hasten over this part of the Epistle! as super-
fluous, and having no great weight init. And
I think that the same befalls them in regard to
the genealogy that is in the Gospel. For
because it is a catalogue of names, they think
they cannot get any great good from it. Yet
the gold founders’ people* are careful even
about the little fragments ;3 while these pass
over even such great cakes of gold. That
this then may not befall them, what I have
already said were enough to lead them off
from their listlessness. For that the gain
even from this is no contemptible one, we
have shown even from what was said on a
former occasion, when we lifted up your soul
by means of these addresses. We will
endeavor then to-day also to mine in this
same place. For it is possible even from
bare names to find a great treasure. If, for
instance, you were shown why Abraham was
so called, why Sarah, why Israel, why Samuel,
you would find even from this a great many
real subjects of research. And from times
too, and from places, you may gather the
same advantage. For the good man waxes
rich even from these; but he that is slothful,
does not gain even from the most evident
things. Thus the very name of Adam
teaches us no small wisdom, and that of his
son, and of his wife, and most of the others.
For names serve to remind us of several cir-
cumstances. ‘They show at once God’s ben-
efits and women’s thankfulness. For when
they conceived by the gift of God, it was they
who gave these names to the children. But
why are we now philosophizing about names,
while meanings so important are neglected,
and many do not so much as know the very
names of the sacred books? Still even then
we ought not to recede from an attention to
things of this sort. For “thou oughtest,” He


1 So Mss. Ben. Sav. evToAjs.

2 Stallbaum ad Plat. PAzved. 74. ;

3 See the Introduction to Boyle’s Reflections, where this is
beautifully applied to the improvement of all fragments of
time by meditation.


says, ‘to have put My money to the ex-
changers.” (Matt. xxv. 27.) And therefore
though there be nobody that listens to it, let us
do our part, and show that there is nothing
superfluous, nothing added at random in the
Scriptures. For if these names had no use,
they would not then have been added to the
Epistle, nor would Paul have written what he
has written. But there are some even so low-
minded, and empty, and unworthy of Heaven,
as not to think that names only, but whole
books of the Bible are of no use, as Leviticus,
Joshua, and more besides. And in this way
many of the simple ones have been for reject-
ing the Old Testament, and advancing on in
the way, that results from this evil habit of
mind, have likewise pruned away many parts
of the New Testament also. But of these
men,‘ as intoxicated and living to the flesh,
we do not make much account. But if any
be a lover of wisdom, and a friend to spiritual
entertainments, let him be told that even the
things which seem to be unimportant in
Scripture, are not placed there at random and
to no purpose, and that even the old laws
have much to profit us. For it says, “ All
these things are types (A. V. ensamples) and
are written for our instruction.” (1 Cor, x.
11.) Wherefore to Timothy too he says,
“Give heed to reading, to exhortation”
(1 Tim. iv. 13), so urging him to the reading
of the old books, though he was a man with
so great a spirit in him, as to be able to
drive out devils,® and to raise the dead. Let
us now keep on with the subject in hand,
“Salute my well-beloved Epenetus.” It is
worth learning from this how he distributes to
each the different praises. For this praise
is no slight one, but even very great, and a
proof of great excellence in him, that Paul
should hold him beloved, Paul who had no
idea of loving by favor, and not by cool
judgment. Then another encomium comes,
‘Who is the first-fruits of Achaia.” For
what he means is, either that he leaped for-
ward before any one else, and became a


4 Such as the Manichees, see St. Aug. Conf. p. 340, O. T.
note at the end, and Marcion. Tert. adv. M. lib. 4.

5 This was done by his relics. St. Chrys. Hom. 1 ad Pof,
Ant. § 2, on the Statues, p. 4, O. T.


554


THE ‘WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSHOr:


[HomiLy XXXI,.


believer (and this were no slight praise), or
that he displayed more religious behavior
than any other, And on this account after
saying, ‘‘ who is the first-fruits of Achaia,” he
does not hold his peace, but to prevent your
suspecting it to be a glory of the world’s, he
added, “unto Christ.” Now if in civil mat-
ters, he that is first seemeth to be great and
honorable, much more so in these. As then
it was likely that they were of low extraction,
he speaks of the true noble birth and preémi-
nency, and gives him his honors from this.
And he says, that he “is the first-fruits,” not
of Corinth only, but of the whole nation, as
having become as it were a door, and an
entrance to the rest. And to such, the
reward is no small one. For such an one
will reap much recompense also from the
achievements of others, in that he too con-
tributed much toward them by beginning.

Ver. 6. “Greet Mary, who bestowed much
labor on us.”

How is this? a woman again is honored
and proclaimed victorious! Again are we
men put to shame. Or rather, we are not put
to shame only, but have even an honor con-
ferred upon us. For an honor we have, in
that there are such women amongst us, but
we are put to shame, in that we men are left
so far behind by them. But if we come to
know whence it comes, that they are so
adorned, we too shall speedily overtake them.
Whence then is their adorning? Let both
men and women listen. It is not from brace-
lets, or from necklaces, nor from their
eunuchs either, and their maid-servants, and
gold-broidered dresses, but from their toils in
behalf of the truth. For he says, “who
bestowed much labor on us,” that is, not on
herself only, nor upon her own advancement,
(see p. 520) (for this many women of the pres-
ent day do, by fasting, and sleeping on the
floor), but upon others also, so carrying on the
race Apostles and Evangelists ran. In what
sense then does he say, “I suffer not a woman
to teach?” (a Tim. ii. 12.) He means to
hinder her from publicly coming forward
(1 Cor. xiv. 35), and from the seat on the
bema,? not from the word of teaching. ?
Since if this were the case, how would he
have said to the woman that had an unbe-
lieving husband, “How knowest thou, O
woman, if thou shalt save thy husband?”
dib. vii. 16.) Or how came he to suffer her
to admonish children, when he says, but “ she


1 A raised place in which the Clergy were, v. Suicer, and
Bingham, b. viii. c. 6, § 1, and g-r2.

7 Or “ Teaching of the word.” rod Adyou THs SiSacKadrias, but
we have tod Adyou THs mapaxAncews, Heb. xiii. 22. The word
of Exhortation.


shall be saved by child-bearing: if they con-
tinue in faith, and charity, and holiness, with
sobriety?” Gq ‘Imm: ii, 452) How came
Priscilla to instruct even Apollos? It was
not then to cut in sunder private conversing
for advantage that he said this, but that
before all, and which it was the teacher’s
duty to give in the public assembly ; or again,
in case the husband be believing and
thoroughly furnished, able also to instruct
her. When she is the wiser, then he does
not forbid her teaching and improving him.
And he does not say, who taught much, but
‘“who bestowed much labor,” because along
with teaching (roi 26yov) she performs other
ministries besides, those in the way of dan-
gers, in the way of money, in the way of
travels. For the women of those days were
more spirited than lions, sharing with the
Apostles their labors for the Gospel’s sake.
In this way they went travelling with them,
and also performed al! other ministries. And
even in Christ’s day there followed Him
women, ‘‘ which ministered unto Him of their
substance” (Luke viil. 3), and waited upon
the Teacher.

Ver. 7. ‘Salute Andronicus and Junia my
kinsmen.”

This also looks like an encomium. And
what follows is much more so. And what
sort is this of? ‘And my fellow-prisoners.”
For this is the greatest honor, the noble proc-
lamation. And where was Paul a prisoner,
that he should call them “my fellow-pris-
oners?” A prisoner indeed he had# not
been, but he had suffered things worse® than
prisoners, in being not an alien only to his
country and his family, but in wrestling with
famine and continual death, and thousands of
other things. For of a prisoner the only mis-
fortune is this, that he is separated from his
relations, and often has to be a slave instead
of being free. But in this case one may men-
tion temptations thick as snow-flakes, which
this blessed person underwent by being car-
ried and taken about, scourged, fettered,
stoned, shipwrecked, with countless people
plotting against him. And captives indeed


3 St. C. does not seem to be here alluding to the former, but
to the latter part of this very difficult passage. The most
comprehensive view of it, on this interpretation, seems to be,
that Christ has so hallowed all pain, that it has a saving influ-
ence init: yet not in such wise saving, that the bearing of the
great pain and peril of childbearing will atone for the neglect
of the after labors of education. See Marlorate and Corn. a
Lapide. in loc. The whole interpretation is questionable.
Theoph. mentions some who take the words “the childbear-
ing’’ of the birth of our Lord, which he rejects as not agree-
ing with what follows. But Estius justly observes, that the
‘*abiding,’’ etc. may be better applied to the man and wife.

4 St Chrys. takes the word in its literal sense of a captive in
war. Ifso meant it might be figurative, but it most likely re-
fers either to an imprisonment, or to what he speaks of 2 Cor.
xi. 26, as perils from robbers. 2

5 Lit. ‘‘far more like a prisoner’’—for Field reads aixuadw-
totepa for xadeTwrepa.


~Homity XXXI.]


THE: EPISTLE TO THE: ROMANS,


555


have no further foe after they are led away,
but they even experience great care from
those who have taken them. But this man
was continually in the midst of enemies, and
saw spears on every side, and sharpened
swords, and arrays, and battles. Since then
it was likely that these shared many dangers
with him, he calls them fellow-captives. As in
another passage also, ‘‘ Aristarchus my fellow-
prisoner.” (Col. iv. 10.) Then another
praise besides. ‘‘Who are of note among
the Apostles.” And indeed to be apostles? at
all is a great thing. But to be even amongst
these of note, just consider what a great
encomium this is! But they were of note
owing to their works, to their achievements.
Oh! how great is the devotion (@:Aocogia)
of this woman,? that she should be even
counted worthy of the appellation of apostle ! *
But even here he does not stop, but adds
another encomium besides, and says, “ Who
were also in Christ before me.”

For this too is a very great praise, that they
sprang forth and came before others. But let
me draw your attention to the holy soul, how
untainted itis by vanity. For after glory such
as his in kind and degree, he sets others before
himself, and does not hide from us the fact of
his having come after them, nor is ashamed of
confessing this. And why art thou surprised
at his not being ashamed of this, when he
shunneth not even to parade before men his
former life, calling himself “‘a blasphemer,
erga. persecutor?”’ (x. Tim. . i.. .43.) ° Since
then he was not able to set them before
others on this score, he looked out himself,
who had come in after others, and from this
he did find means of bestowing a praise upon
them by saying, ‘‘ Who were in Christ before
me;

Ver. 8. ‘‘Greet Amplias my beloved.”

Here again he passes encomiums upon his
person by his love. For the love of Paul was
for God, carrying countless blessings with it.


1 St. Chrys. on 2 Cor. viii. 23, p. 2r5 O. T. and Phil. ii. 25,
. 104 O,. T. takes this word to mean messengers of the
hurches. Theodoret, on Phil. ii. 25, takes it to mean ** Bish-
op,’’ as on 1 Tim. ii. 8, he says, ‘* they then called the same
ae Bishops and Elders, but those who are now called
ishops they named Apostles.’”’ St. Chrys. Hom. zx St. /gnat.
call him an Apostle.
2 Hammond reads the name Junias, and supposesa man to
be intended.
* It is impossible to determine with certainty whether
€mLoyot Ev TOs aToaTOAoLs (7) means that the persons referred
to were themselves apostles, or merely that they were held in
high esteem by the apostles. The interpretation of Chrys. (the
former) is possible both in point of language and in view of
the fact that amogrdAoc embraced more than the twelve in
N. T. usage, e. g. Paul, Barnabas, and probably, James, the
Lord’s Brother (Gal. i. 19) (so Tholuck, Riickert, Ewald). The
more probable view is that Andronicus and Junias [not Junia
as Chrys., certainly not if his interpretation is correct ; that
a woman should have been an apostle is out of the question]
are designated as distinguished, Ronoravty known among
by) Hs euostles. (So De Wette, Philippi, Hofmann, Meyer).


For if being loved by the king is a great thing,
what a great encomium must it be to be
beloved by Paul? For if he had not acquired
great virtue, he would not have attracted his
love? Since as for those who live in vice
and transgressions he is accustomed (vide) not
only to abstain from loving them, but even to
anathematize them. As when he says, “If
any man love not the Lord Jesus, let him be
accursed ” (1 Cor, xvi. 22); and, “ If any man
preach any other gospel unto you than that ye
have received, let him be accursed.” (Gal.
i. 8.)

Ver. g. “Salute Urbane, my helper in the
Lord.”’

This is a greater encomium than the other.
For this even comprehends that. ‘And Sta-
chys, my beloved.” This again is an honor
of the same kind.

Ver. ro. “Salute Apelles,
Christ.”

There is no praise like this, being unblam-
able, and giving no handle in the things of
God. For when he says, “approved in
Christ,” he includes the whole list of virtues.
And on what ground does he nowhere say my
Lord such an one, my Master this? It is
because these encomiums were greater than
those. For those are mere titles of rank
(ryuy¢), but these are of virtue. And this same
honor he paid them not at random, or as
addressing several of inferior virtue with the
high and great characters. For so far as he
is addressing, and that too one along with an-
other, and in the same letter, he honors them
all alike. But by stating the praises particu-
larly to each, he sets before us the virtue
peculiar to each; so as neither to give birth to
envy by honoring one and dishonoring another,
nor to work in them listlessness and confusion,
by giving them all the same dignity, though
they did not deserve the same. See now how
he again comes to the admirable women. For
after saying, “Salute them which are of Aris-
tobulus’ household,”

Ver. 11. “Salute Herodion my kinsman ;
greet them which be of the household of Nar-
Cissus ; ”

Who, it is likely, were not so worthy as the
afore-mentioned, on which account also he
does not mention them all by name even, and
after giving them the encomium which was
suited to them, that of being faithful, (and
this the meaning of,

‘Which are in the Lord.”

He again reverts to the women, and says,

Ver. 12. “Salute Tryphena and Tryphosa,
who labor in the Lord.”

And in regard to the former woman, he
| says that ‘she bestowed labor upon you,” but


approved in


556


THE WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOS#POM-


[HomILy XXXI.


of these that they are still laboring. And
this is no small encomium, that they should
be in work throughout, and should not only
work, but labor even. But Persis he calls
beloved too, to show that she is greater than
these.

For he says, ‘‘ Salute my bcloved Persis.”

And of her great laborings he likewise
bears testimony, and says, “which labored
much in the Lord.”

So well does he know how to name each
after his deserts, so making these more eager
by not depriving them of any of their dues,
but commending even the slightest preemi-
nence, and making the others more virtuous,
and inciting them to the same zeal, by -his
encomiums upon these.

Ver. 12. ‘Salute Rufus, chosen in the
Lord, and his mother and mine.”

Here again the good things are without any
drawback, since the son and the mother are
each of such a character, and the house is full
of blessing, and the root agreeth with the
fruit; for he would not have simply said, “ his
mother and mine,” unless he had been bear-
ing testimony to the woman for great virtue.

Ver. 14. “Salute Asyncritus, Phlegon, Her-
mas, Patrobas, Hermes, and the brethren
which are with them.”

Here do-not be looking to how he starts
them without any encomium, but how he did
not reckon them, though far inferior, as it
seems, to all, unworthy of being addressed by
him. Or rather even this is no slight praise
that he even calls them brethren, as also
those that are after them he calls saints. For
he says,

Ver. 15. “Salute Philologus, and Julius,
and Nereus, and his sister, and Olympas, and
all the saints which are with them; ”’

Which was the greatest dignity, and un-
speakable height of honor. Then to prevent
any jealousy rising from his addressing one in
one way and another in another, and some by
name and some with no distinction, and some
with more points of praise, and some with
fewer, he again mingles them in the equality
of charity, and in the holy kiss, saying,

Ver. 16. ‘“ Salute one another with an holy
kiss.”

To cast out of them, by this salutation, all
arguing that confused them, and all grounds
for little pride; that neither the great might
despise the little, nor the little grudge at the
greater, but that haughtiness and envy might
be more driven away, when this kiss soothed
down and levelled every one. And therefore
he not only bids them salute in this way, but
sends in like manner to them the greeting
from the Churches. For “there salute you,”


he says, not this or that person individually,
but all of you in common,

“ The Churches of Christ.”

You see that they are no small gains that
we earn from these addresses, and what treas-
ures we should have passed hastily over, un-
less in this part of the Epistle also we had
examined it with accuracy, such, I mean, as
was in our power. So if there be found any
man of wisdom and spiritual, he will dive
even deeper, and find a greater number of
pearls.'| But since some have often made it a
question wherefore it was that in this Epistle
he addressed so many, which thing he has not
done in any other Epistle, we might say that
it is owing to his never having seen the
Romans yet, that he does this. And yet one
may say, “Well, he had not seen the Colos-
sians either, and yet he did not do anything
of the kind.” But these were more honor-
able than others, and had come thither from
other cities, as to a safer and more royal city.
Since then they were living in a foreign coun-
try, and they needed much provision for
security,” and some of them were of his ac-
quaintance, but some too were there who had
rendered him many important services, he
with reason commends them by letters; for
the glory of Paul was then not little, but so
great, that even from his sending them letters,
those who had the happiness to have an
Epistle to them, gained much _proiection.
For men not only reverenced him, but were
even afraid of him. Had this not been so,*
he would not have said, who had been “a suc-
corer of many, and of myself also.”* (vy. 2.)
And again, “I could wish that myself were
accursed.” (Rom. ix. 3.) And to Philemon
he wrote and said, ‘“‘as Paul the aged, anda
prisoner of Jesus Christ.” (Phil. 9.) And to
the Galatians, ‘“ Behold, I Paul say unto you.”
(Gal. v.2.) | And,'“ Wemrecerved: meceveneas
Jesus Christ.” (ib. iv. 14.) And writing to
the Corinthians he said, “Now some are
puffed up, as though I would not come unto
you.” (1 Cor.-iv. 18.) Andyagain, "These


things I have in a figure transferred to myself.


and to Apollos, that ye might learn in us not
to think of men above that which is written.”
(ib. 6.) Now from all these passages it is
clear that all had a great opinion of him.
Wishing then that they should feel on easy


terms, and be in honor, he addressed each of


1 He perhaps means something in the names, as well as in
the facts implied; most of them are significant. In several
places, as where he refers to Ps. xix. and in his metaphors, he
shows that he knew and valued allegorical interpretation, but
he makes little public use of it.

2 This is rather an unusual way of taking “‘ roAAjs agdadetas
éSev atoAavewy avtois,’’ but the sequel allows no other.

3 j. e. had he not been so greatly esteemed.

4 avrov €xov, even of myself.


ee


a


|


+


ST ae


is


CE


Le
be
v

ie


y


HomiLty XXXI.]


ibe EPlOtLE LO ‘THES ROMANS,


250.


them, setting forth their praise to the best ad-
vantage he might. For one he calls beloved,
another kinsman, another both, another fel-
low-prisoner, another fellow-worker, another
approved, another elect. And of the women,
one he addresses by her title, for he does not
call her servant of the Church in an unde-


fined way (because if this were so he would


have given Tryphena and Persis this name
too), but this one as having the office of dea-
coness, and another as helper and assistant,
another as mother, another from the labors
she underwent, and some he addresses from


the house they belonged to, some by the
name of Brethren, some by the appellation of


Saints. And some he honors by the mere
fact of addressing them, and some by address-
ing them by name, and some by calling them
first-fruits, and some by their precedence in
time, but more than all, Priscilla and Aquila.


(rove wept Ip. x.’A.) For even if all were be-


lievers, still all were not alike, but were differ-
ent in their merits. Wherefore to lead them
all to greater emulation, he keeps no man’s
encomiums concealed. For when they who
labor! more, do not receive the greater reward
also, many? become more listless. On this
ground even in the kingdom, the honors are
not equal, nor among the disciples were all
alike, but the three* were preéminent above
the rest. And among these three again there
was a great difference. For this is a very ex-


act method observed by God even to the last.


Hence, “one star differeth from another star
in’ elory,” (x Cor. xv. 41), it says. And yet
all were Apostles and all are to sit on twelve
thrones,’ and all left their goods, and all com-
panied with Him; still it was the three He
took. And again, to these very three, He said
it was possible (éyywpeiv) that some might even
be superior. “ For to sit,” He says, “ on My
right hand and on My left, is not mine to give,
save to those for whom it is prepared.” (Mark
x. 40.) And He sets Peter before them,
when He says, “ Lovest thou Me more than
these?” (John xxi. 15.) And John too was
loved even above the rest. For there shall be
a strict examination of all, and if thou be but
little better than thy neighbor, if it be even
an atom, or anything ever so little, God will
not overlook even this. And this even from
of old one might see coming out. For even
Lot was a righteous man, yet not so, as was


1 So Field with 4 Mss. Vulg. ‘‘ do,”

2 woAAot would bear to be rendered “‘ they often.”

3 i.e. Peter, James, and John.

4 See Macarius, Hom. vi. v. fin. ‘So then many that were
taught by Peter, came to repentance, and formed a new
world, elect of God. You see how a beginning of judgment
was manifested. For then a new world was made manifest.
For then was power given them to sit and judge in this world.
However, they will sit and give judgment at the coming of
the Lord, in the resurrection of the dead.”


Abraham; and Hezekiah again, yet not so as
was David: and all the prophets, yet not so
as was John.

Where then are they who with all this great
exactness in view, yet will not allow that there
is a hell? For if all the righteous are not to
enjoy the same lot, if they exceed others even
a little (“for one star,” it says, ‘ differeth
from another star in glory,”) (1 Cor. xv. 41),
how are sinners to be in the same lot with
the righteous? Such a confusion as this even
man would not make, much less God! But if
ye will, I will show you that even in the case
of sinners, arguing from existing facts, there
is this distinction, and exact just judgment.
Now consider; Adam sinned, and Eve sinned,
and both transgressed, yet they were not
equally sinful. And therefore neither were
they equally punished. For the difference
was so great that Paul said, “ Adam was not
deceived but the woman being deceived was
in the transgression.”® And yet the deceit
was one. But still God’s searching examina-
tion pointed out a difference so great, as that
Paul should make this assertion. Again,
Cain was punished, but Lamech, who commit-
ted a murder after him, did not suffer near so
great a punishment. And yet this was a
murder, and that was a murder, and that
so much the worse, because even by the
example he had not become the better. But
since the one neither killed his brother after
exhortation, nor needed an accuser, nor
shrunk from answering when God questioned
him, but even without any accuser both
pleaded again himself, and condemned him-
self more severely, he obtained pardon. But
the other as having done the opposite was
punished. See with what exactness God
sifteth the facts. For this reason He pun-
ished those in the flood in one way,
and those in Sodom in another; and the
Israelites again, both those in Babylon, and
those in Antiochus’ time, in different ways:
so showing that He keeps a strict account of
our doings. And these were slaves for
seventy years, and those for four hundred,
but others again ate their children, and under-
went countless other more grievous calamities,
and even in this way were not freed, either
they or those that were burnt alive in Sodom.
“For it shall be more tolerable,” He says,
“for the land of Sodom and Gomorrha, than
for that city.” “(Matt. x. 15.) For if He
hath no care for us, either when we sin or
when we do aright, perhaps there will be


some reason in saying that there is no

& y Tim. ii. 14, whence it appears that St. C. looked upon
the pains of childbirth as a punishment, though they were
capable of being turned to good: see Gen. iii. 16.


558


punishment. But since He is so exceedingly
urgent about our not sinning, and adopts so
many means to keep us in the right, it is very
plain that He punisheth the wicked, and also
crowneth those that do right. But let me
beg you toconsider the unfairness of the
generality. For they find fault with God
because He so often long-suffering, over-
looks so many that are impious, impure, or
violent, without now suffering punishment.
Again, if He threaten to punish them in the
other world, they are vehement and pressing
in their accusations. And yet if this be
painful, they ought to accept and admire
the other. But alas the folly! the unreason-
able and asinine spirit! alas the sin-loving*
soul, that gazes after vice! For it is from
this that all these opinions have their birth.
And so if they who utter these things should
be minded to lay hold upon virtue, they will
presently find themselves satisfied concerning
hell also, and will not doubt. And where (it
is said) and in what place is this hell? For
some fablers say that it is in the valley of
Josaphat, thus drawing that which was said
about a certain by-gone war, to apply to hell.2
But the Scripture does not say this. But in
what place, pray, will it be? Somwhere as
I think at least quite out of the pale of this
world. For as the prisons and mines are at a
great distance from royal residences,® so will
hell be somewhere out of this world. Seek
we not then to know where it is, but how we
may escape it. Neither yet because God doth
not punish all here, therefore disbelieve
things to come. For merciful and long-suffer-
ing He is: that is why he threatens, and does
not cast us into it forthwith. For “I desire
not,” He says, “the death of a sinner.” (Ez.
KVil. 32.) Butvit there. is no death jof a
sinner, the words are but idle. And I know
indeed that there is nothing less pleasant to
you than these words. But to me nothing
is pleasanter. And would it were possible at
our dinner, and our supper, and our baths,
and everywhere, to be discoursing about hell.
For we should not then feel the pain at the
evils in this world, nor the pleasure of its
good things. For what would you tell me was
an evil ? poverty? disease ? captivity ? maiming
of the body? Why all these things are sport
compared to the punishment there, even should
you speak of those who are tormented with
famine all their life long; or those who are


2S)
maimed from their earliest days, and beg,


‘ ?


1 Mss. omit
the next line.

2 Joel iii. 2, which is however a type of the last judgment.
Isaiah xxx. 33. can hardly be meant, as the LXX. there has
not the name Tophet.

3 Ben. and 3 Mss, Bacideiwr,


‘plieasure-loving’’ and ‘‘love of pleasure’”’ in


THE. WORKS “OF 'ST.-“CHRYSOsSiaar:


_[Homity XXX1.


even this is luxury compared to those other
evils. Let us then continually employ our-
selves with talking about these things.* For
to remember hell prevents our falling into
hell. Dost thou not hear St. Paul saying,
“Who shall suffer everlasting punishment
from the face of the Lord?” (2 Thess. i. 9.)
Dost thou not hear what Nero’s character
was, whom Paul even calls the Mystery of
Antichrist? For “the mystery of iniquity,”
he ‘says, “already worketh:” ~ (ib: m7)
What then? Is Nero to suffer nothing? Is
Antichrist to suffer nothing? or the Devil
nothing? ‘Then he will always be Antichrist,
and so the Devil. For from mischief they
will not leave off, unless they be punished.
“Yea,” you say, “but that there is a” hell
everybody sees. But the unbelievers only are
to fall into it.” What is the reason, pray ?
It is because the believers acknowledge their
Master. And what is this to the purpose ?
when their life is impure, they will on this
ground be punished more severely than the un-
believers. ‘For as many as have sinned
without law shall also perish without law: but
as many as have sinned in the law shall be
judged by the law.” ‘(Rom, ii. 12:) And
“The servant that knew his master’s will,
and did it not, shall be beaten with many
stripes.” (Luke xii. 47.) But if there ise
such thing as giving an account of one’s life,
and all this is said in a loose way then neither
will the Devil have vengeance taken upon him. |
For he too knows God, and far more than® —
men too, and all the demons know Him, and —
tremble, and own He is their Judge. If then
there is no giving an account of our life, nor —
of evil deeds, then will they also clean escape.
These things are not so, surely they are not! —
Deceive not yourselves, beloved. For if
there is no hell, how are the Apostles to judge —
the twelve tribes of Israel? How cometh
Paul to say, “ Know ye not that we shall
judge Angels? how much more things of this
life?’ (1 Cor. vi. 3.) How came Christ tog
say, “The men of Nineveh shall arise and
condemn this generation” (Matt. xii, 41);
and, ‘It shall be more tolerable for the@
land of Sodom in the day of judgment?” ~
ib. xi. 24.) Why then make merry with
things that are no subjects for merriment? 7
Why deceive thyself and put cheats upon thy ~
reason (xaparoyitn, om. ryv wWoyjvoov) ? Why ;
fight with the love of God toward man? For ~
itwas through this that He prepared it, and ©
threatened, that we might rot be cast into it, as ~


4 This whole argument is nearly that ot the close of Hom. —
25. The object of it is clearly to keep their minds to the sub- ~
ject. as well as to convince gainsayers.

* So Field; others: ‘‘ more than many.”


HomiLy XXXII]


having by this fear become better. And thus
he that does away with speaking on these
subjects doth nothing else than thrust us into
it, and drive us thither by this deceit.
Slacken not the hands of them then that
labor for virtue, nor make the listlessness of
them that sleep greater. For if the many be
persuaded that there is no hell, when will they
leave off vice? Or when will right be seen?
I do not say between sinners and righteous
men, but between sinners and sinners? For
why is it that one is punished here, and an-
other not punished, though he does the same
sins, or even far worse? For if there be no
hell, you will having nothing to say in defence
of this to those who make it an objection.
Wherefore my advice is, that we leave off this
trifling, and stop the mouths of those that are
gainsayers upon these subjects. For there
will be an exact searching into the smallest
things, both in the way of sins and in the way
of good deeds, and we shall be punished for
unchaste looks, and for idle words, and for
mere reproachful words, and for drunkenness
we shall render an account, as even for a


TE EPiShle. TO THEAROMANS,


559
cup of cold water we shall receive a reward,
and a sigh only. (Eccl. xii. 14.) For it says,
‘Set a mark upon the foreheads of the men
that sigh and that cry.” (Ez. ix. 4.) How
then darest thou to say that He, who with so
great exactness will search into our doings,
threatened hell in bare words, and lightly ?
Do not, I beseech you, do not with these vain
hopes destroy thyself and those that are per-
suaded by thee! For if thou disbelievest our
words, make enquiry of Jews and Gentiles,!
and all heretics. And all of them as with one
mouth will answer that a judgment there shall
be, and a retribution. And are men not
enough? Ask the devils themselves, and thou
wilt hear them cry, ‘“ Why hast thou come
thither to torment us before the time.’”’ (Matt.
vill. 29.) And putting all this together per-
suade thy soul not to trifle idly, lest by expe-
rience thou come to know there is a hell, but
from this thou mayest be sobered, and so able
to escape those tortures, and attain to the
good things to come; whereof may we all
partake by the grace and love towards man,
etc.


HOMILY : XOGATE


ROM. XVI. 17, 18.


“ Now I beseech you, brethren, mark them which cause
divisions and offences contrary to the doctrine
which ye have learned, and avoid them. For the
that are such serve not our Lord Jesus Christ, but
their own belly; and by good words and _ fair
speeches deceive the hearts of the simple.”


AGAIN an exhortation, and prayer after the
exhortation. For after telling them to “ mark
them which cause” divisions,” and not to listen
to them, he proceeds, ‘‘ And the God of peace
shall bruise Satan under your feet shortly: ”
and, “The grace of our Lord be with you.”
And notice how gently too he exhorts them:
doing it not in the character of a counsellor,
but that of a servant, and with much respect.
For he calls them brethren, and supplicates
them likewise. For, ‘‘I beseech you, breth-
ren,” (he says). Then he also puts them on
the defensive by showing the deceitfulness of
those who abused them. For as though they
were not at once to be discerned, he says, “I
beseech you to mark,” that is, to be exceed-


1 See Bp. Taplor, Sex. on Sir G. Dalston; and Bp. Butler,
Ana/. 1, 2, note n.

2 Field with most Mss. omits tocovvtas; of course it is to be
supplied from the context.


ingly particular about, and to get acquainted
with, and to search out thoroughly—whom,
pray? why, “those that cause divisions and
offences, contrary to the doctrine which ye
have learned.” * For this is, if anything the
subversion of the Church, the being in divi-
sions. This is the devil’s weapon, this turn-
eth all things upside-down. For so long as
the body is joined into one, he has no power


* At Rome also there were, as in so many other places,
those who, either within or in contact with the church, made
divisions and perverted the true Christian teaching. The
Epistle to the Romans deals but to a small extent directly
with these persons. It 1s, in the main, constructive. Gala-
tians is a letter on similar lines of teaching but more polemic
in character. In the case of how few of the churches to
which the apostle wrote could he spare himself the unpleas-
ant task of warning them against heretics or immoral ten-
dencies of life. In Corinth the abuses were chiefly of a moral
and practical character. In Coloss# and perhaps in Ephesus,
there was a Judeo-Gnostic theosophy which threatened the
Christian faith of the people. The Roman church was, prob.
ably, predominantly Gentile and was a Pauline church, in the
sense, that, though not founded by Paul, it had been trained
in the Pauline ‘* gospel,’’ the type of doctrine more or less
peculiar to that apostle. The extended refutation of Jewish
claims to special divine favor in chaps. ii. and iii. as well as
the consideration of the problem offered by the lapse of the
Jews in chaps. 1x., x., and xi., shows that there was an
important Jewish element in the church, while these conclud-
ing warnings (17, 18) intimate the presence of Judaizing
heretics who sought to conceal their real wickedness by
smooth and plausible language and thus to lead innocent and
unsuspecting Christians astray.—G. B.S


—


560


THE ‘WORKS! OF ‘ST. CHRYSOSiIiaa


[Homity XXXI1.


to get an entrance, but it is from division that
the offence cometh. And whence is division ?
From opinions contrary to the teaching of the
Apostles. And whence come opinions of this
sort? From men’s being slaves to the belly,
and the other passions. For “such,” he says,
“serve not the Lord, but their own belly.”
And so there would be no offence, there would
be no division, unless some opinion were
thought of contrary to the doctrine of the
Apostles. And this he here points out by
saying, ‘contrary to the doctrine.” And he
does not say which we have taught, but
“which ye have learned,” so anticipating
them, and showing that they were persuaded
of and had heard them and received them.
And what are we to do to those who make
mischief in this way? He does not say have
a meeting and come to blows, but “ avoid
them.” For if it was from ignorance or error
that they did this, one ought to set them right.
But if they sin willingly, spring away from
them. And in another place too he says this.
For he says, “ Withdraw from every brother
that walketh disorderly ” (2 Thess. iii. 6): and
in speaking to Timothy about the copper-
smith, he gives him the like advice, and says,
“Of whom be thou ware also,” (2 Tim. iv. 15.)
Then also to lash (kwuzwdev) those who dare to
do such things, he mentions also the reason of
their devising this division. ‘For they that
are such,” he says, “serve not our Lord
Christ, but their own belly.” And this he
said too when he wrote to the Philippians,
“Whose god is their belly.” (Phil. iii. 19.)
But here he appears to me to intimate those of
the Jews, whom he ever uses particularly to
find fault with as gluttonous. For in writing
to Titus too, he said of them, “ Evil beasts,
slow bellies: (Hit. 4) va2, see. x. “1o.). .And
Christ also blames them on this head: “Ye
devour widows’ houses ” (Matt. xxiii. 14), He
says. And the Prophets accuse them of
things of the kind. For, “ My beloved,” He
says, “hath waxen fat and gross, and hath
kicked.” (Deut, xxxit, 15). Wherefore also
Moses exhorted them, and said, ‘‘ When thou
hast eaten and drunken and art full, remem-
ber the’ Lord thy God.” (ib. vi, 12, 12:)- And
in the Gospels, they who say to Christ, “‘ What
sign showest thou unto us?” (John vi. 30)
pass over everything else, and remember the
manna. So do they everywhere appear to be
possessed with this affection. How then
comest thou not to be ashamed at having
slaves of the belly for thy teachers, when thou
art a brother of Christ? Now the ground of
the error is this, but the mode of attack is
again a different disorder, viz. flattery. For it
is by “fair speeches,” he says, “that they


| ; :
deceive the hearts of the simple.”


For their
attention reaches only to words; but their
meaning is not such, for it is full of fraud.
And he does not say that they deceive you,
but “the hearts of the simple.” And even
with this he was not satisfied, but with a view
to making this statement less grating, he says,

Ver. 19. “For your obedience is come
abroad unto all men.”

This he does, not to leave them free to
be shameless, but to win them beforehand
with encomiums, and the number of his wit-
nesses, to arrest their attention. For neither
is it I alone that am the witness, but the whole
world. And he does not say for your under-
standing, but, ‘your obedience :” that is, their
compliance, which was evidence of much
meekness in them. ‘I am glad therefore on
your behalf.” And this is no small encomium
too. Then, after the praise, admonition. For
lest, after liberating them from any charges
against them, he should make them the more
listless, as not being observed; he gives them
another hint in the words,

“T would have you wise unto that which is
good, and simple concerning evil.”

You see then how he attacks them again,
and that without their suspecting it. For this
looks like intimating that some of them were
apt to be led astray.

Ver. 20. “And the God of peace sshall
bruise Satan under your feet shortly.”

For since he had spoken of those who
“caused divisions and offences among them,”
he has mentioned “the God of peace” also,
that they might feel hopeful about the riddance
of these evils. For he that rejoiceth in this
Gi. e., peace) will put an end to that which
makes havoc of it. And he does not say, will
subject, but “ will bruise ” (Gen. ili. 19), which
is a stronger expression. And not those peo-
ple only, but also him who was the general
over them herein, Satan. And not “ will
bruise” merely, but ‘‘under your feet,” so
that they may obtain the victory themselves,
and become noble by the trophy. And the
time again is made a ground of comfort. For
he adds, ‘ shortly.” And this was prayer and
prophecy as well at once. ‘“ The grace of our
Lord Jesus Christ be with you.”

That greatest weapon; that impregnable
wall; that tower unshaken! For he reminds
them of the grace, that he may give them
the more alacrity. Because if ye have been
freed from the ills more grievous by far,
and freed by grace only, much more will ye
be freed from the lesser, now ye have
become friends too, and contribute your
own share likewise. You see how he
neither puts prayer without works, nor


Homity XXXII] THE sPIStLE; 2


‘O THE ROMANS.


561


works without prayer. For after giving
them credit for their obedience, than he
prays; to show that we need both, our own
part as well as God’s part, if we are to
be duly saved. For it was not before only,
but now too, even though we be great
and in high esteem, we need grace from
Him.

Ver. 21. “ Timotheus my work-fellow salut-
eth you.”

Observe the customary encomiums again.
“And Lucius, and Jason, and Sosipater my
kinsmen.”

This Jason Luke also mentions, and sets
before us his manliness also, when he
says, that “they drew” him “to the rulers
eipthe city, crying,” ete. (Acts) ,Xvil...5;)
And it is likely that the others too were
men of note. For he does not mention
relations barely, unless they were also
like him in religiousness.

Ver. 22. “I Tertius, who wrote this Epistle,
salute you.”

This too is no small encomium, to be
Paul’s amanuensis. Still it is not to pass
encomiums on himself that he says this, but
that he might attach a warm love to him
on their part, for this ministration.

Ver. 23. “Gaius mine host (gévoc), and of
the whole Church, saluteth you.”

See what a crown he has framed for him,
by bearing witness to such great hospitality
in him, and brought in the entire Church
into this man’s house! For by the word
sévov, used here, he means a host, not a
guest. But when you hear that he was Paul’s
host, do not admire him for his munificence
only, but also for his strictness of life.
For except he were worthy of Paul’s ex-
cellency, he would never have lodged there,
since he, who took pains to go beyond?
many of Christ’s commands, would never have
trespassed against that law, which bids us be
very particular about who receive us, and
about lodging with “worthy” persons.
(Matt. x. 11.) “ Erastus, the chamberlain of
the city, salutes you, and Quartus a_brother.”
There is a purpose in his adding “the
chamberlain of the city,’ for as he wrote to
the Philippians, ‘‘ They of Czsar’s household
salute you” (Phil. iv. 22), that he might


show that the Gospel had taken a hold upon |


great folk, so here too he mentions the title


with a view to the same object, and to show |


that, to the man who gives heed, neither
riches are a hindrance, nor the cares of
government, nor anything else of the
kind.


1 UmepBatvery, See Pp. 44T.


36


Ver. 24. “The grace of our Lord Jesus
Christ be with you all. Amen.”’*

See what we ought to begin and to end
with everywhere! For in this he laid the
foundation of the Epistle, and in this he
putteth on the roof, at once praying for the
mother of all good things for them, and call-
ing the whole of his loving-kindness to their
mind. For this is the best proof of a
generous teacher, to benefit his learners not
by word only, but likewise by prayer, for
which cause also one said, “ But let us give
ourselves contiually to prayers, and to the
ministry of the word.” (Acts vi. 4.)

Who is there then to pray over us, since
Paul hath departed? These who? are the
imitators of Paul. Only let us yield ourselves
worthy of such intercession (cvvyyopiac), that it
may not be that we hear Paul’s voice here
only, but that hereafter, when we are departed,
we may be counted worthy to see the wrestler
of Christ.2 Or rather, if we hear him here,
we shall certainly see him hereafter, if not as
standing near him, yet see him we certainly
shall, glistening near the Throne of the king.*
Where the Cherubim sing the glory, where
the Seraphim are flying, there shall we see
Paul, with Peter, and as a chief® and leader


* The Mss. authorities and vss. strongly favor the omis-
sion of v. 24 (as, A, B, C, 8, Copt., Eth., Vulg.) It appears
to be a repetition of the benediction in v. 20 and is omitted by
most critics.—G. B.S.

2 Field thinks he points to the Bishop and clergy present.

3 The following passage strongly illustrates what St. Chry-
sostom says, in the first page of the Introduction, of his affec-
tionate intimacy with the Apostle, through meditation on his
writings.

« The Martyrs were thought to be admitted to the Beatific
Vision at once. See Tertullian de Anima, 55, but this is a
subject on which the Fathers speak with caution,

5 Kopudacor, not of the Aeoutles, but of the Saints in general
The manner in which St. Paul is coupled with St. Peter, is re-
markable, as in the Roman Breviary, esp. et Laud. Commem
Com. de Apost. ** Peter the Apostle, and Paul the Teacher of
the Gentiles, these taught us Thy Law, O Lord. R. Thou
shalt make them princes over all the earth.”’ In the York
Breviary, F. SS. App. Petr. et Paul, ad Vesp. Hymn, St. 2.
‘“These are the two olive trees before the Lord (Zech. iv. 3),
and the candlesticks beaming with light, the two bright lumi-
naries of Heaven.”’ And again, zon impar Paulus huic. St.
Augustin observes, ad Bont/. cont. du. Ep. Pelag. 1, 3, C. 3,
Ben. t. ro. ‘* When one says, ‘The Apostle,’ without sayin
what Apostle, no one understands any but Paul, because he is
best known from the number of his Epistles, and because he
labored most.’’ St. Maximus, Hom. 5, de Nat. Petr. et Paud,
“Therefore the blessed Peter and Paul are eminent among
all, and have a kind of peculiar precedency, but between
themselves, which is to be preferred to the other, is uncertain.
For I think they are equal in merits because they are equal in
suffering.’ He also says in the same Homily, * To Peter, as
to a good Steward, He gave the key of the Kingdom of
Heaven. On Paul, as on an able Teacher, He enjoined the
mastership in the teaching of the Church; that is, that whom
the one has instructed unto salvation, the other may receive
into rest: that whose hearts Paul hath opened by the teaching
of his words, to their souls Peter may open the Kingdom of
Heaven. For Paul too did also ina manner receive the key
of knowledge from Christ.’’ And St. Gregory, 1, 1 Dyad. c.
| 12. ‘*The Apostle Paul is brother in Apostolical preéminence
Leaner) to Peter, the first of the Apostles.” See also St.
| Chrys. on Gal. i. 18, p. 25 O. T. where he says, “* equal in dig-
| nity with him, for at present I will say no more,” and Gal. 1.
| 8, p. 34 O. T.; Tertull. adv. Marcion. 1, 5, and others, consider
him especially intended in Jacob’s blessing of Benjamin. St.
| Cyr. Hier. Cat. vi. p. 68, O. T. speaks of ** That goodly pair,
Peter and Paul, the Rulers of the Church."’ Many more pas-
sages might be cited, but these may suffice to show in what


ee ————————————


562


of the choir of the Saints, and shall enjoy his
generous love. For if when here he loved
men so, that when he had the choice of
departing and being with Christ, he chose
to be here, much more will he there display
a warmer affection. I love Rome even for
this, although indeed one has other grounds
for praising it, both for its greatness, and its
antiquity, and its beauty, and its populousness,
and for its power, and its wealth, and for its
successes in war. But I let all this pass, and
esteem it blessed on this account, that both
in his lifetime he wrote to them, and loved
them so, and talked with them whiles he was
with us, and brought his life to a close there.’
Wherefore the city is more notable upon this
ground, than upon all others together. And
as a body great and strong, it hath as two
glistening eyes the bodies of these Saints.
Not so bright is the heaven, when the sun
sends forth his rays, as is the city of Rome,
sending out these two lights into all parts of
the world. From thence will Paul be caught
up, from thence Peter. Just bethink you, and
shudder (opigare) at the thought of what a
sight Rome will see, when Paul ariseth sud-
denly from that deposit, together with Peter,
and is lifted up to meet the Lord. (1 Thess.
iv. 17.) What a rose will Rome send up to
Christ! (Is. xxxv. 1) what two crowns will
the city have about it! what golden chains
will she be girded with! what fountains
possess! Therefore I admire the city, not
for the much gold, not for the columns, not
for the other display there, but for these
pillars vor the (Church. ‘(2 “Cor. xv. 2am)
Would that it were now given me to throw
myself round (wepeyvbpvar) the body of Paul,
and be riveted to the tomb, and to see the
dust of that body that “filled up that which
was lacking: latter ““Chmst7-7 Col, 1,224):
that bore “the marks” (criywara,) (Gal. vi.
17) that sowed the Gospel everywhere
yea, the dust of that body through which he
ran to and fro everywhere! the dust of that
body through which Christ spoke, and the
Light shone forth more brilliant than any


lightning, and the voice started out, more
awful than any thunder to the devils!
through which he uttered that blessed
voice, saying, ‘I could wish that myself
were accursed, for my brethren” (Rom.
ix, 3),) through which he ‘spake before
kings, and was not ashamed!” (Ps, cxix.


46) through which we come to know Paul
through which also Paul’s Master! Not so


esteem St. Paul was held among the Fathers, and at the same
time that this did not interfere with their view of the prerog-
atives of St. Peter.

1 Some Mss. add, ‘‘ and they still possess his sacred body.


”


THE ‘WORKS OF (ST. ‘CHRYS@sT@ar


[Homity XXXII.


awful to us is the thunder, as was that voice
to the demons! For if they shuddered at
his clothes (Acts >xix. -12)))) amuch. ‘vane
did they at his voice. This led them away
captive, this cleansed out the world, this
put a stop to diseases, cast out vice, lifted
the truth on high, had Christ riding 2 upon
it, and everywhere went about with Him;
and what the Cherubim were, this was
Paul’s voice, for as He was seated upon
those Powers, so was He upon Paul’s
tongue. For it had become worthy of
receiving Christ, by speaking those things
only which were acceptable to Christ, and
flying as the Seraphim to height unspeak-
able! for what more lofty than that voice
which says, “For I am _ persuaded that
neither Angels, nor Principalities, nor Powers,
nor things present, nor things to come,
nor height, nor depth, nor any other creature,
shall be able to separate us from the
love of God, which is in -Christ Jesus?”
(Rom. vill. 38, 39.) What pinions doth not
this discourse seem to thee to have? what
eyes? (Ez. x. 12.) It was owing to this
that he said, ‘for we are not ignorant of
his devices.” (2° Cor! <1 11) sO wane
this did the devils fiee not only at hear- .


ing him speak, but even at seeing his
garments. This is the mouth, the dust
whereof I would fain see, through which


Christ spake the great and secret thiags,
and greater than in His own person, (for
as He wrought, so He also spake greater
things by the disciples,*) through which the
Spirit gave those wondrous oracles to the
world! For what good thing did not
that mouth effect? Devils it drave out,
sins it loosed, tyrants it muzzled, philoso-
phers’ mouths it stopped, the world it
brought over to God, savages it persuaded
to learn wisdom, all the whole order of
the earth it altered. Things in Heaven
too it disposed what way it listed (1 Cor.
v. 3, 4), binding whom it would, and loos-
ing in the other world, “according unto
the power given unto it.” (2 Cor. xiii. 10.)
Nor is it that mouth only, but the heart
too 1 would fain see the dust of, which
a man would not do wrong to call the
heart of the world, and a _ fountain of
countless blessings, and a beginning and
element of our life. For the spirit of
life was furnished out of it all, and was
distributed through the members of Christ,
not as being sent forth by arteries, but


2 See Macarius, Hom. 1. and 7, also Schaare Orah. af. Knor-
rium, Kabbala Denudata, t. 1. p. 507, where this interpretation
is carried farther.

3 Alluding to John xiv. 12; xvi. 12.


HoMILY XXXII.]


by a free choice of good deeds. This


heart was so large, as to take in entire
cities, and peoples, and nations. “ For my
heart” he says, “is enlarged.” (ib. vi. 11.)


Yet even a heart thus large, did this
very charity that enlarged it many a time
straiten and oppress. For he says, ‘ Out
of much affliction (@iewr) and anguish
(cuvoy7c) of heart I wrote unto you.” (ib.
ii. 4.) I were desirous to see that heart
even after its dissolution, which burned at
each one that was lost, which travailed a
second time with the children that had
proved abortions (Gal. iv. 19), which’ saw
God,’ (“for the pure in heart,” He says,
“shall see God,’”) (Matt. v. 8) which _be-
came a Sacrifice, (‘for a sacrifice to God
is a contrite heart,”) (Ps. li. 17) which
was loftier than the heavens, which was
wider than the world, which was_ brighter
than the sun’s beam, which was warmer
than fire, which was stronger than adamant,
which sent forth rivers, (“for rivers,” it
says, “of living water shall flow out of
his belly,”) (John vii. 38) wherein was
a fountain springing up, and watering, not
the face of the earth, but the souls of
men, whence not rivers only, but even
fountains of” tears, issued day and night,
which lived the new life, not this of ours,
ad live: he “says, “yet not 1) but


- Christ liveth in me,” (Gal. ii. 20) so Paul’s


heart was His heart, and a tablet of the
Holy Spirit, and a book of grace); which
trembled for the sins of others, (for I
fear, he says, lest by any means “I have be-
stowed labor upon you in vain; (ib. iv. 11) lest
as the serpent beguiled Eve; (2 Cor. xi. 3)
lest when I come I should find you
mae such as I. would’;**)*sGbi- \.xti,)°20)
which both feared for itself, and was confiding
too, (for I fear, he says, “lest by any means
after having preached to others I myself
Shonid> be a castaway, (ey Cor. ‘ix. 27)
And, “Iam persuaded that neither angels
nor powers shall be able to separate us ;’’)
(alluding to Rom. ix. 3) which was counted
worthy to love Christ as no other man loved
Him; which despised death and hell, yet was
broken down by brothers’ tears, (for he says,
‘‘what mean ye to weep and to break mine
heart?”) (Acts xxi. 13) which was most
enduring, and yet could not bear to be absent
from the Thessalonians by the space of an
hour! (1 Thess. ii. 17; iii, ro.) Fain would
I see the dust of hands that were in a chain,
through the imposition of which the Spirit was


1 St. Augustin de Gen. ad Lit. xii. 35. He has many pas-
sages on ‘‘ seeing God.”


2 Acts xx. 19; 2 Cor- ii. 4 cf. Luke xviii. 7; Ps. cxxxiv. 2.


THE “EPISTLE ‘TO: THE “ROMANS. 56


| Ga


furnished, through which the divine writings
were written, (for “behold how large a letter
I have written unto you with mine own
hand:” (Gal. vi. 11) and again, ‘The salu-
tation of me Paul with mine own hand,”)
(1 Cor, xvi. 21) of those hands at the sight
of which the serpent ‘“ fell off into the fire.”
(Acts xxviii. 5.) Fain would I see the dust
of those eyes which were blinded gloriously,
which recovered their sight again for the sal-
vation of the world; which even in the body
were counted worthy to see Christ, which saw
earthly things, yet saw them not, which
saw the things which are not seen, which
saw not sleep, which were watchful at
midnight, which were not effected as eyes
are. I would also see the dust of those
feet, which ran through the world and
were not weary; which were bound in the
stocks when the prison shook, which went
through parts habitable or uninhabited,
which walked on so many journeys. And
why need I speak of single parts? Fain
would I see the tomb, where the armor
of righteousness is laid up, the armor of
light, the limbs which now live, but which
in life were made dead; and in all whereof
Christ lived, which were crucified to
the world, which were Christ’s members,
which were clad in Christ, were a temple
of the Spirit, an holy building, “bound in
the Spirit,’ (Acts xx. 22) riveted to the
fear of God, which had the marks of
Christ. This body is a wall to that City,
which is safer than all towers, and than
thousands of battlements. And with it is
that of Peter. For he honored him while
alive. For he. “went up to see Peten?
(Gal. i. 18) and therefore even when de-
parted grace deigned to give him the same


abode with him. Fain would I see the
spiritual Lion. For as a lion _ breathing
(Gr. sending,) (Cant. ii. 15) forth fire


(xip ageeic) upon the herds of foxes, so rushed
he upon the clan of demons and philosophers,
and as the burst of some_ thunderbolt,
was borne down into the host of the devil.
(Luke xiii. 32.) For he did not even come


to set the battle in array against him,
since he feared so and trembled at him,
as that if he saw his shadow, and _ heard
his voice, he fled even ata distance. And
so did he deliver over to him the _forni-
|cator, though at a distance, and again
snatched him out of his hands (1 Cor.


7, 11); and so others also,


Vird, 2° CORR.
“not to blas-


that they might be taught
3 So all Mss. Sav. trav d6@aAuiwvrwy, and so Ben. translating


it ‘‘as the envious,’’ which must be the meaning if it is the
true reading.


564


THE, WORKS: OF ST. CHRYSOST ORE


{HomiLty XXXII.


pheme.” (1 Tim, i. 20.) And consider how
he sent forth his own liegemen against him,
rousing them, suppling them. And at one time
he says to the Ephesians, ‘We wrestle not
against flesh and blood, but against princi-
palities and powers.” (Eph. vi. 12.) Then
too he puts our prize in heavenly places.
For we struggle not for things of the earth,
he says, but for Heaven, and the things
in the Heavens. And to others, he says,
“Know ye not that we shall judge Angels?
how much more the thjngs of this life?”
(1 Cor. vi. 3.) Let us then, laying all this
to heart, stand nobly; for Paul was a man,
partaking of the same nature with us, and
having everything else in common with us.
But because he showed such great love


toward Christ, he went up above the Heavens,
and stood with the Angels. And so if we too
would rouse ourselves up some little, and
kindle in ourselves that fire, we shall be able
to emulate that holy man. For were this
impossible, he would never have cried aloud.
and said, ‘“‘ Be ye imitators of me, as I am of
Christ.” (@ Cor: saairapaber us) not then
admire him only, or be struck with him only,
but imitate him, that we too may, when we
depart hence, be counted worthy to see him,
and to share the glory unutterable, which
God grant that we may all attain to by
the grace and love toward man of our
Lord Jesus Christ, through Whom, and
with Whom, be glory to the Father, with
the Holy Ghost, now and evermore. Amen.


;
, |
as iy wah :


a ©


INDEXES.


[VOR OF *SUBIECTS.


ABRAHAM, his history a reproof to
Jewish pride, 97; a pattern of
hospitality, 276; his faith, 349,
385, 391, 395; his justification,
385; why circumcised, 389; his
true children, 389, 391; his hos-
pitality, 504; zeal for truth,
504; prayer for Sodom, 546.

Abuse, the best answer to, 242; dis-
graceful, 244; its reaction, 510;
see Reviling.

Acts of the Apostles, little known
in Chrysostom’s time, 1; how
profitable as sequel to the Gos-
pels, I; an inspired book, 2;
important for doctrine, 3;
written by St. Luke, 2; hence
gives most fully the acts of
St. Paul, ib.; may be called,
“Demonstration of the Resur-
rection,” 3, 5; “Polity of Holy
Spirit,” 18; Gospels, history of
Christ, Acts of the Holy Ghost,


a

Adam, fell by means of the Tempt-
er, 322; a type of Christ, 402;
his sin, 464; not equally pun-
ished with Eve, 557.

Adoption, spirit of, 442; incomplete
until the redemption of the
body, 446.

Advent, first, why delayed, 379;
second, 451.

Affliction, uses of, 104; our school-
master, 262; see Zrzbulation.
Allegory, examples and use of, 480,

497.

icice aie efficacy of, 147, 382;

twice blessed to giver and re-


ceiver, 165, 485; a means of| Applaus


putting away sin, 166, 495; may
be done without money, 166; a
ministry, 89; needs much wis-
dom, 9I, 549; encouragement
Wo}, Le

Analogies, between things visible
and invisible, 367, 372, 379, 362;
Sq-, 393: 403) 465. fi

Angels, ever attendant on Christ’s
acts, 14; their joy, 393; their
glory, 399; how employed for
the Gospel, 121; Angel, the, in
the burning bush, the Son of
God, 103.

Anger, the passion of, 300; like a
sword, to be kept for its right
use, 98; against resentment of
insults, 98, 198, 204; to con-


quer, is true greatness, 300; im-
planted in us as a safeguard to
virtue, III; virtuous anger how
shown, ib.; a blind, reckless,
passion, 43, 243; its ill effects
on the body, 43.

Apostles, how changed after the
Resurrection, 1; their dis-
courses, 2; dwell most on
Christ as man, ib.; above all on
the Resurrection, ib.; rest as-
sertions on testimony, 3; taught
by deeds, 4; why they did not
receive the Holy Ghost while
Christ was with them, nor until
ten days after the Ascension,
6; why ordered to tarry in Jeru-
salem, ib.; why they did not ask
Christ to appoint one in place
of Judas, 18; the new apostle
must be an eye-witness, 21;
they overcame the world, 29;
their forbearance and gentle-
ness, 183; their suffering, 455;
accusations against, 512; severe
to their own, gentle to those
without, 78; not always under
preternatural direction, 133;
Christ’s Code of Laws, written
on Twelve Souls, 37; their
miracles greater even than
Christ’s, 77; their holiness not
caused by miracles, 83; their
prerogative to impart the Spirit,
115; their proper work, preach-
ing and prayer, 90; why they
continued to resort to the
temple, 50; and the synagogues,


in Church, reproved,
190, 458.

Arian arguments refuted, 12, note 2;
137, note 3; 72, 112, note 4.

Arrogance, source of, 204.


Asceticism, examples of, 381, 437.


BAPrisM, grace of, 152; in it we re-
ceive the substance of all good,
248; its more essential part the
Spirit, 7; makes men dead to
sin, 405; represents the cross,
409; relation to Christ’s resur-
rection, 409 ; not to be repeated,
410; with us, the baptism with
water and with the Spirit is
one act; with the Apostles two,
ib.; why not administered at
Pentecost (in preference to


567


Easter Eve), ib., and note 3;
sins after, doubly heinous, $;
but there are means of remis-
sion, 9; and recovery, 158; delay
of, excuses for, 8, 152, Sq; many
delay it till their last moments,
9; TZraditio Symboli in, 45,
note 1; teaching after, 46;
form of renunciation in, 9; fol-
lowed by Holy Communion, 10;
baptized, evil lives of the, a
reproach to God, 152; the case
of Apollos and the twelve dis-
ciples of John considered, 246,
sq. and notes.

Baptism of John, 247.

Bible, neglect of, 553; order of its
its books, 336.

Bishop, his proper work, preaching
and prayer,90; ought not to
have his time taken up with
secular matters, ib.; the office
coveted for dignity and honor,
22 sq.; its arduousness, ib.;
simony of preferment-seeking,
24 sq. bond of unity in the
church, 393.

Body, all the members need each
other, 231; not in itself evil,
411; why called “of death,”
431; duties toward, 440; may
become spiritual, 435, 440.

Boldness for the truth, with gen-
tleness, I1I1; not forwardness,
290.


CALLING, not compulsory, 453.

Celibacy, optional, 420; its
quency, 434.

Charity, the perfection of, 41 ; neces-
sity of, 380; nature of, 382;
rarity of, 393-

Christ, equality with the Father, 2;
the Apostles insist chiefly on
his Resurrection, ib.; His
deeds exemplify His words, 4;
meaning of the name, 333;
His twofold generation, 340;
power of His name, 341; His
humble birth, and estate, 348;
His Cross a_ stumbling-block,
343, 348; begs in His members,
384 sq., 452, 457, 485; the Vic-
tim on His Table, 394; His
Resurrection a proof of His
sinlessness, 395; the love shown
in His Death, 3098; its effects,
410 so.; atoned for actual sins


fre-


568


INDEX OF SUBJECTS.


since the fall, 402 ; partaking in
His Death and Burial a guar-
antee for partaking in His Life,
4055, His power shown _ by
men’s helplessness, 430; His
acts between the Resurrection


and Ascension, 4; came and
went during forty days, 5;
why He showed Himself not


to all, ib.; His parting charge
to the Apostles, 4; why He
bade them tarry at Jerusalem,
6; Christ’s Resurrection, evi-
denced by the Acts of the
Apostles, 5, 25; His Resurrec-
tion, a pledge of judgment, 237 ;
His Godhead, 13; is “taken
ALP yal ees Horned at God's
right hand,” ; His mercy to
the Jews, meonece Him to be
286 ;


God, 34; other proofs,
His long suffering and benefi-
cence, 92; His. intercession,


454; imstances of His fore-
knowledge, 466 sq.; the end of
the Law, 472; why He fulfilled
it, 539; His kindness to Judas,
394, 460; sundry images ap-
plied to Him, 518, 538; values
men’s souls as His purchase,
524; makes God’s wisdom
apparent, 535; His example of
patient endurance, 530; He exe-
cutes punishment, 34; His pas-
sion foretold, 55; and the pun-


ishment denounced, 58; “the
Prophet like unto Moses,”
55; and more than Moses,


a5 Miler JeFevses the Ibe Gy
works “by the Spirit of God,”
“sent from God,” 37 sq.;
in what sense He “knew not
that day and hour,’ 12; the
Angel in the burning bush,
103; Giver of the Law, 107;
unwritten sayings of, 214.
Christians, to fight the good fight,
154; and so win more glory,
158; one body, 248 sq.; should
show sympathy and not re-
joice in the punishment of
sinners, 266; should despise
money, and be ready to toil for
others, 273, 274; bound to labor
for conversion of others, 133
sq.; cannot be hurt, because
cannot hurt, 306; herein like
God, ib.; plots against, 511.
Christianity, above Judaism, 68.
Chrysostom, St. John, an incident
of his youth, deliverance from a
great danger, 238 sq.; a story
of a deacon, perhaps C. him-
self, 281; his earnestness for
hist dlocksew245 007/55 6 27 Te Scns
threatens to excommunicate
swearers, 55 sq.; the reform
commenced, 74; his doctrine of
free-will, 365, 446; of repent-
ance, 527; fondness for St.
Paul, 561, 562; succeeded Nec-
tarius as Archbishop of Con-
stantinople, 26th Feb. a.p. 398,
(page) 270.
Church, the,


=D.
(heir)


bought with blood,


269; its true prosperity, 186;
its excellence not numbers but
goodness, 149; her true peace
within, 138.

Churches, why built, 186; duty of
propriétors of estates to build
and endow, 118, 120.

Church-going, not itself
185.

Church-property, how administered
in Christ’s time, go, and note
2

Church-services, for spiritual im-
provement, 186 sq.; irreverent
behavior in, 160 sq.

Circumcision, the Jews’ opinion of
its virtues, 369, note ; two kinds
Of, 3705) the outward useless
without the inward, 388; aimed
at specially, because even the
Sabbath gave way to it, 371:
behind the faith, 388 : does not
make men Abraham’s children,
ib., sq.; necessary for carnal
men, ib.; yet proclaims its own
unavailingness, 389.

Communion with others, its sweet-
ness, 346. Of saints, the basis
of duties to our neighbor, 381,


religion,


393 S4-5 414.
Conceit, described and_ rebuked,
500.


Confession, God acquits upon, 46.

Confessors, 98, 159.

Conscience, a clear one the true
source of joy, 342; in the
Law’s stead, 365; its cheering
power, 397, 423.

Converts, condition of the early,
226.

Covetousness, snare of the devil, 49;
evils of, 414, 425, 495; com-
pared to drunkenness, 438;
care for, 439.

Creation, a witness of God to the
heathen, 352; a great system of
teaching, 354, 350, 361; serving
it, Grecian, 354.

Cross, sign of the, 69; its power,
348; forgiveness through, 351;
a spiritual charm, 392.


DANIEL, in the lion’s den, allego-
rized, 355.

David, why coupled with Abraham,
377; his sin, 466; his psalms,
540; his love, 546.

Deacons, use of the term, 350, 512;
the seven, 90,91; on the num-
ber of, in different Churches,
note 3, p. go.

Deaconess, office of, 549.

Dead, the souls of deceased, aided
by prayers and alms, 140 sq.
Death, of the righteous, 139; the
soul escorted by Angels, lone
those who die in their sins, ib.;
“Pangs of death,” 39; a proof

of Adam’s sin, 402, 404, 420.

Demons, forced to take Christ’s
part, 251, 253; connected with
idolatry and unchastity, 510.

Demoniacs, their appearance de-
scribed, 254.

Desire, not in itself sin, 22


Devil, the, brought in the doctrine
of Fate, etc., 286; see Satan,
Temptation ; why the devil was
made, 49; wiles of, 392; how
to guard against them, 407.

Doctrine, meaning of term, 412.

Dreams, terrify the wicked, 424;
sins committed in, 519.

Dress, sumptuousness of female, re-
proved, 166; simplicity in, 552.

Drunkenness, is disgusting, 438;
leads to other sins, 520.


EASE, more perilous than persecu-
tion, 59.

Easter, great resort to Church at,
186.

Economy and frugality,
“Economy,”
280.

Ecstasy, éxoTacvc, meaning of, 143.

Election, what it implies, 483.

Endurance, a Godlike quality, 354.

Envy, nature and result of, 380, 381.

Ephesus, temple of, 257.

Epistles, reading of in Church, 335;
order and date of, 336.

Eunuch, conversion of the, 226.

Eucharist, 114, 140, 394.

Evil, Manichzan conception of, 16
sq.; not physical, 130

Evils, natural, a benefit, 323.

Evil designs, overruled for good,
295, 322; and to the further-
ance of the Gospel, 305.

Evil passions, the worst of bonds,


201.


doctrine of, 12, 214,


318.

Eyes, to see the things unseen,
Christ’s gift, 313.

Excess makes ugly, moderation
beautiful, 177.


Excommunication, 465.
Exorcism, practised by Jews for
gain, 252.


FAITH, an act of free-will, 181; able
to grasp what reason cannot,
341; umreasoning, 347, 301;
little compared with its re-
ward, 349; men saved by it
under the O. T., ib, ; the mother
of all blessing, 350; scorned as
easy, 303; not a new thing
because foretold, 377; and typi-
fied, ib.; takes away boasting,
3793 establishes the Law, 350,
389; its seeming opposition
thereto a perplexity to the Jews,
380; a life of charity necessary
after it, ib.; not to be ashamed
of, 386; its. power, ib.; lies ina
belief of God’s power, ib.; and
of the promise, 389; its excel-
lence above words, 391; Con-
templated by the Fathers as
fides formata, 407 ; that where-
by men come to salvation, 470 ;
comes by hearing, 479; gives
relationship to saints, 494; a
special sense of the term, 531.

False-Christs and false prophets,
why permitted, 280.

Fasting, religious efficacy of, 176.

Fate, belief in, 319.

Fear, power for conversion of evil


INDEX: OF "SUBJECTS,


569


a.


mew


men, 2
Satan, 358.

Feastings and spectacles, evil of, 35.

Forgiveness of injuries, 92; how to
be shown, 60; duty and neces-
sity of, 394.

Free-will, relation to grace, 245,
3553 proof of, 365, 428; its
power, 492.

Friendship, worldly inducements to ;
not comparable with the Chris-
tian, 248 sq.


a safeguard against


GAINAS, revolt of, 204, note.

Gamaliel, 87, 125.

Gentiles, progress of the Gospel
among, 201; equally accepted
with Jews, 364, 379, 490; have
not the law, 364; how saved,
372; their call, 469; their sal-
vation, how related to the Jews,
489.

Gentleness, compared with passion-
ate temper, 42; more powerful
than vehemence, 44; distin-
guished from cowardice, 299.

Glory, the true and the false. rSt.

Gluttony, penalties of, against
nature, 105, 176.

God, source of all good, 192; uni-
versal presence and universal
providence of, 321; near to all,
235; cannot be imaged by
human thought, 237; His bene-
fits, 238 sq.; danger of abusing
this gift, 354; gratitude and
trust in, 239 sq.; Divine perfec-
tions, 306, 362, 383; more ready
to hear than we to pray, 227 ; is
merciful, but is afflicting also,
154, 361, 400; His patience and
forbearance, 243; does not take
instant vengeance, 199; His
help, 294, 355; how said to
“tempt,’’ 144; delivers His
people, 316 sq.; His word not
to be trifled with, 302.

Gospel, its success, 260, 343; its
adaptation to all, 347.

Grace, power of, 84; supernatural,
132, 230; went before the


distinction, 341, 7; does not
supersede will, 245, 412;
work miracles, given for holy
deeds, 355; time of grace, con-
trasted with earlier times, 363;
needed before and much more
after the Fall, 365; given to
Jews, 372; better than a reward
for works, 387; implies remis-
sion, so fulfilling the promise,
389; past, a guarantee for fu-
ture, 396-398; superabundance
of, 402; ground of higher rules,
420; fruits of, ibid., 434: need-
ful for the lightest good deeds,
446; and from first to last, 361 ;
its universality, 474; how in-
creased, 537.


HEATHEN, religion of, 211, 352; ob-
jection from mean condition
of first converts, 226; why not
all amiable and virtuous hea-


to |


then are converted, 150, 151;
heathen gods demons, 31, 221.

Hell, does not militate against God’s
goodness, 35; why threatened,
366, 420; made known by the
Gospel, 348; proofs of its real-
ity, and why men deny it, 526;
oo haga for wicked Christians,
53°)


Heresies, to be expected, 210; take
their names from men, Marcion,
Arius, etc., 212; why permitted,
280 sq.; often prevail by the
personal virtues of their
authors, 286.

Heretics, their aim always to draw
disciples after them, 270; rea-
son when they should believe,


349-

Hope, a gift of the Spirit, 539; im-
plies love and faith, 446.

Hospitality, shown to: poor and stran-
gers is shown to Christ, 275 sq.;
Abraham a pattern of, 276; a
Christian duty, 277 (see Xezo72.)

House of mourning better than
house of feasting, 261.


| Household, religious care for, 146


sq.

Humility, the greater the gifts, the
greater the, 192; the mother of
good deeds, 499.

Human Nature, capability of, 204.

Hurt, the worst suffered, is from
that we do, 306.


IDOLS, worship of, 352, 353.

Ignorance, of the heathen,
excuse for sin, 427, 428.

Inaction, and activity in evil ways,
alike baneful, 223.

Injuries, patience under, 195

Injustice, an evil to doer, rather
than to the sufferer, 307.

Insults, how to be borne, 300.

Intermediate State, nature of, 396.

‘Tovya, juga, 74, 276.

Isaac, sacrifice of, 339; why Abra-
ham’s true seed, 464.


374-
359; no


| Jacos, lessons from his history, 295
Apostles, 340; destroys earthly | sq.
| James, St., Bishop of Jerusalem, 20,


205.

Jealousy, as a motive, 481.

Jews, their precedence in receiving
the Gospel, 348; their advan-
tages and responsibility, 363,
374; bondage under the law,
363; in practice no better than
Gentiles, 364; their pride, 369;
judgment upon, 487; final sal-
vation of, 490; offended by the
doctrine of Christ’s equality
with the Father, 2; necessity of
forbearance in dealing with
them, ib.; their dreadful punish-
ment, 34 sq.; the famine (Clau-
dius) a warning to them, 164;
how they sent the Gospel to the
Gentiles, 188; enraged by the
faith of the Gentiles, ib.; their
unbelief foretold. 325; no cause |
to be proud of their sacrifices, |
108; or of their Temple, 109.


Job, his example of patience, 348,
303; his sufferings, 454.

Joseph, the patriarch, a pattern of
simplicity, 48; type of Christ,
100; lessons from his history,


295 Sq.
Joseph, husband of the Virgin
Mary, probably died before


Christ’s Resurrection, 20; does
not look upon Christ as man
merely, ib,

Josephus, 32, 35.

Joy in the Lord, and in the world,
compared, 104.

Judaizers, assert necessity of Law
to salvation, disparage the
power of God, 202; why they
abstained from flesh, 521; their
weakness, ib.; gained nothing
from the law, $24.

Judas, election of an Apostle in
place of, 18; his history a topic
of cavilling, ib.; his end a
prophecy of the punishment of
the Jews, 21; Satan entered
into him, but he was himself
the cause, 322.

Judgment, the final, 351, 366, 367;
the power of the anticipation
of, 525; its reality attested by
heathen and devils, 528.

Judgments, temporal, use of, 351;
fires had on the final, 358, 526 ;
furnish analogies to it, 527.

Justification, (vid. Auzth, Righteous-
ness).


KINGs, worshipped by heathen, 348 ;
why called ministers, 512.


LANDLORDs, their responsibilities,
116 sq.; especially to build and
endow Churches, 118, 120.

Laws, a blessing, 36; their object,
423; an aid to God’s law, ah

of Moses, declared to be a
burden, 207; abrogated even

for the Jews, 209.

Lessons in Church, 127; profane
inattention to, ib.; complaint of
sameness reproved, 128.

Levity in Church, 160, 16.

Life, a voyage: our ship the
Church, 318; an evil life a bane
to the best creed; and wrong
life leads to wrong doctrines,
286.

Love, heavenly, compared with
earthly, 312; love of God over-
comes all other feelings, 400;
love a natural tie in all crea-
tures, 358; want of it, the cause
of sin, ib.; should be ungrudg-
ing, 366; and passionate, 367 ;
duties and effects of, 503; ever
paying, ever due, 514; love to


Law


man sanctified by its union
with love to God, ib.; see
Charity.

Luke, St., wrote the Acts, 2; com-


mended by St. Paul, ib., 3; was
partaker of the Spirit, 3; why
he does not relate St. Paul’s
history after the first imprison-
ment at Rome, 326.


syed


Lusts, blind and enfeeble the soul,
180; unnatural, 355, sq.; source
and consequences of, 520.

Luxury ruins body and mind, 222;
defeats its own object, enjoy-
ment, 223; the true, 177, 314.


MaGIc: true miracles contrasted
with, 116; magical practices, 238.

Manichzans, deny Resurrection and
Creation, 15; assail the law,
419, 421; condemned by the
Church, 430; reject the O. T.
and parts of the N. T.
make matter the essence of
evil, ib., 410, 423, 429, 433; and
coeternal with God, 16; their
impious absurdities exposed,
ib.; therefore denied incarna-
tion, ib.; see Zvz/.

Marcionites, attitude
Old Testament, 35.

Marriage, a rich wife not to be
sought, but a godly, 140; a rich
wife not to be desired, 296;
no bar to holiness, 550; no ex-
cuse for worldliness, 384; sec-
ond marriage, excuses of rich
widows for, ib.

Martyrs, 285, 434.

Matthew, his genealogy of Christ,
421; his call, 466.

Ministers, in the Primitive Church,
O,

ieee not always desirable, 229;
argument from Scriptures more
powerful, ib.; success of the
Apostles, itself a miracle, 239;
uses of, 136; not to compel be-
lief, but teach, 125; not all
wrought with same ease, 138;
the true, in contrast with magic,
116; not the cause of the Apos-
tles’ holiness, 83; nor of the
noble devotion of the converts,
73; too much ascribed to
them, ib.; holy words and deeds
are more potent, 84, 85; to
suffer for Christ, better than
miracles, 196; to cast out sin,
greater than to expel a demon,
254; Im excess, overpower, not
convince, 169, 170; of St. Paul,
544, 562.

Moderation, essential to enjoyment,
105; and to beauty, 177.

Monastic life, 49, 85.

Money, love of, at the root of all
idolatry, 258.

Morality of heathen, 93.

Moses, a type of Christ, 101, 107; a
servant of the Lord, 338, 9;
his love, 535.


toward the


NATURE, its gifts, 348.

Nazareth, a mean place, 297.

Night, not for sleep only, but for
devout meditation and prayer,


22
oe/e


OATHS, see Swearing.

Offence, our care must be to give
no just, 281; if taken unjustly,
when are we to forbear or to
persist? 281, 282.


INDEX; OF SUB) EGES:


Old Testament: grace was given by
means of sensible signs, 26.
Olympic games, illustrate Christian

life, 510.
Oppression really hurts the doer ; to
the sufferer it is a benefit, 306.
Ordinations, fasting before, 197.
Original sin, transmissions of, 464.


PASSIONS, the, each has its age;
all to be attacked in turn, 87;
maby, perturbationes, 98.

Pastor, the faithful, inconsolable for
the loss of souls, 271, 272.

Patience under revilings, 92; under
wrongs, 256.

Paul, St., The Acts relate most to
him, 2; by birth a Pharisee,
292; how a Roman citizen,
288 and note; the three days
between his conversion and
baptism, 7; his honest, con-
sistent zeal as a_persecutor,
123; his conversion compared
with the Eunuch’s, 126; cir-
cumstances of his conversion,
the accounts reconciled, 123;
the manifold witnesses to, 284;
why his conversion was de-
laved, 124; a mighty evidence
of the Resurrection, 124; the
persecutor Saul did not lightly
become Paul the Apostle, 283;
no worldly motive for the
change, 284; his fitness to be
an apostle, 131; an unexcep-
tionable witness, 287, 311; his
movements, after his conver-
sion, 134 sq.; preaches “not
where Christ was named,” 180;
his first recorded discourse,
182; compared with St. Ste-
phen’s, 184; labored with his
own hands for his support, 274;
his care that the ministry be
not blamed, 265; his forbear-
and love for Christ, ib.; his
readiness to suffer and to die
for Christ, 267; kept back
nothing profitable, 267; a pat-
tern of gentleness with mag-
nanimity, 300; his charity, 41;
was willing even to perish for
the salvation of others, 125;
much forgiven, he loved much,
132; a pattern of Christian love
and zeal, 133; contention with
Barnabas, an “economy,” 214;
why he circumcised. Timothy,
ib.; practised “economy’’ in
the “purifying” at Jerusa-
lem, 280; his magnanimity,
216; his prison-vigil, and St.
Peter’s, 224; among the Phi-


losophers at Athens, 233; over-
throws heathen philosophy,


235; unbelief grieved him more
than persecution, 242; his night
discourse at Troas, 265; why
he reproves the high-priest, 288 ;
wist not that Ananias was the
high-priest, 289; the Jews’ ma-
lignity against him, 303; be-
cause he believed God, there-
fore he would not tempt Provi-


|


dence, ib.; as the Pilot of the
ship, i.e. of the Church, still
with us, 318; did not prophecy
nor work miracles for display,
319; affected as man by the
sight of the brethren, 320;
twice prisoner at Rome—his
history after the first imprison-
ment, why not related in the
Acts, 326; refutes his enemies
by the Law and the Prophets,
326; his desire to see Rome,
327; said to have converted
Nero’s concubine, 281 ; came to
Rome again a_ prisoner, 327;
eulogy of, ib.; his purity and
depth, ib.; to understand him
and his writings, a pure life
is necessary, ib.; puts his own
name to his Epistles, 6; his
preaching contrasted with that
of the Prophets, 338; his mode
of leading men from lower to
higher things, 340; extent of his
travels, 341, 347; always begins
with grace and peace, 342; and
ends with the same, 561; glo-
ries in the Cross, 348; does
not vilify the Law, 364; his
mode of transition, 385; his
hortatory digressions, 405; es-
pecially in this Epistle, 408 ; his
use ot doxologies, 462, 494;
His marvellous love to Christ,
459; his judgment in dealing
with the Jews, 365, 368, 370;
desires to excuse them, 472,
493; his conformity to the Law
no compromise with Judaism,
459; takes the attitude of a
suppliant, 496; difference in
his treatment of doctrinal and
practical questions, 524; his
fellow-prisoners, 555; tact and
discrimination in his evzcomza,
ib. ; lodged with the worthy only,
361; his glory in life, in the
grave, and in the Resurrection,


562.
Peasantry, neglect of by Christian
proprietors, 115; hence hea-


thenism lingered jong in the
country places (pagans), ib.
Pelagian controversy, 365, 427.
Pentecost, the type, 25.
Persians, Eastern nations generally,


&

Persecution, 159; the Church’s gain,
171; sufferings of women during
the, 159.

Peter, St., how changed after the
Resurrection, 33; foremost on
every emergency, 136; why he
takes the lead, 18 ; acts in noth-
ing imperiously, ib.; the true
Philosopher, 30; his first and
second Sermon compared, 52:
not ignorant of God’s purpose
for the Gentiles, nor averse to
it: the vision (Cornelius) not
for his instruction but for the
Jewish brethren who were less
enlightened, 143 sq. and notes;
his night in the prison, and St.
Paul’s, 172, 224; at Antioch,


INDEX OF SUBJECTS.


571


practised “economy,” aees:| Reeoueiliakion, the first advances


what he gave to Christ, 384;


toward, 301.


preaching at Rome, 344; his/ Reproof, must not be in anger, 99.


title among the Fathers, 547; |


his eminence, 557.

Pharisees, their zeal for the resur-
rection, 3II.

Philosophy, put to shame by the
Gospel, 29; cannot convert
men, 347; relation to idolatry,
353; Christian meaning of, 386,
393; 404, 406.

Piety, decay of in Chrysostom’s
time, 160.

Piato, compared with Apostles, 29,

- 235, hisabsurd and mischievous
doctrines, 30; unable to per-
suade men to virtue, himself
inconsistent, 226; contrasted
with St. Paul, 437, 353; quoted
or referred to, 357, 359; 397;

~ 400, 420, 450.

IlZeovetia, defined and _ illustrated,
307- :

Tlovypoy, well named for roveiv, 48.

Poor, and strangers, in them Christ
comes to us, 275.

Poverty and riches, 307, voluntary,
274.

Praise of man, love of, a senseless
passion, 181; refused by the
saints, I9I.

Prayer, prevailing, 72; persever-
ance in, 20; efficacy of, 231;
set times for, 149; gift of, 447;
how answered, 448 ; to be ac-
companied by works, 561.

Preaching, studied eloquence in,
a snare, and applause during
mischievous, 193.

Predestination, does not lessen re-
sponsibility, 38.

Priesthood, of all Christians, 497.

Prodigality, not generosity, 291; the
prodigal a slave to his own
lusts, ib.

Prophecy, more potent than mira-
cles, 33; its fulfilment, 469;
its obscurity, 480.

Prophets, the: witnesses to Christ’s
death and resurrection, 311;
their condemnation of the Jews,
375; their sufferings, 448 ; fore-
tell the call of the Gentiles,
469, 474; the saving of a rem-
nant, 470.

Proverbs, “evil do, evil fare,’? 84;
“sweet is war to the inexpe-
rienced,” 23.

Providence, some denied that it ex-
tended to things below the
moon, 321.

Public worship, shocking levity of
the young in, 160; then elders
to blame, ib.

Punishment, present impunity more
to be dreaded, 79; brought on
man by himself, 362; propor-
tioned to advantages, 422; a
less evil than sin, 400; eternal,
proved by temporal, 525, 557.


REASONING, relation to faith, 349,
352; to duty, 510.


Resurrection of the body, 311; of
Christ, 395 ; universal, 436.
Reviling, abusive language disgraces

only the utterer, 199, 244; some
glory in, 200; patience under,
2, 98.
Riches and poverty, 306, 307; dan-
_ ger of, 358, 393.

Righteousness, declaration of God’s,
378; identical with blessedness,
387 ; the root of life, 402, 405; a
greater gift than pardon, 403;
conditions of, 474.

Rome, pride of, 339, 341, 343; true
glory of, consists in the posses-
sion of the relics of Peter and
Paul, 562.

Ruler, the true, he that rules him-
self first, 313; physicians of
souls, ib.

Rule, offices of, not to be coveted,
B13.

Rural clergy, description of, 118.


SACRILEGE, a dreadful crime, 77.

Sacrifice, instituted in consequence
of the provocation in Horeb,
108; expiatory, 377; of the eu-
charist, 394, 500; of self, 496;
of the Gentiles, 543; blessed-
ness of making, 407.

Sailors, their recklessness, 317.

Saints, their life interwoven of pros-
perous and adverse, 315, 448;
their presence a safeguard and
benefit, 318; the benediction of,
a great good, 319; local me-
morials of, 552.

Satan, his service harder than God’s,
2; his wages, 43; wars against
the soul, 198; his tempting
does not excuse the tempted,
77; bodily diseases, his work,
150; his designs overruled for
good, 322; even in the case of
Adam, and there especially, ib. ;
he serves to rouse us and keep
us on the alert, 323.

Scriptures, sufficient to produce
faith, 126: to slight them is to
insult God, 127; The Lessons
in Church, ib.; inexhaustible
riches of, 127; a storehouse of
spiritual medicines, 187; use
of, as a charm against devils,
540; ignorance of, a great evil,
217, 335: ; 3

Self-praise, how consistent with hu-
mility, 266.

Senses, testimony of, 13.

Servants, Christian care for, 277. _

“ Signa,” év Toic aiyvol avrov éuBare,
fe ; y
Signs, useless without the reality,

388.

Simplicity, is wisdom, 48.

Sin, called to remembrance, 80;
engenders a habit of, 255; re-
mission of by Christ, 185; pun-
ishes itself, 361; a worse evil
than punishment, 400; how


Adam’s_ affected all, 402;
caused death of Christ, 410;
wrought the death of the body,
411; after baptism, 412; ascer-
tained by the law, 422; how
checked, 425.

Slaves, set at liberty in the Primitive
Church, 73.

Slavery, recognized as lawful, 511.

Socrates, a story of, 93; vainglori-
ous and insincere, 226; his last
words, 353-

Soul, neglect of, 217; its beauty,
218.

Spirit, the Holy, the Acts may be
called a History of, 7; his ope-
ration in the Gospels, and in the
Acts, ib.; not an impersonal en-
ergy or operation, ib.; descend-
ed on the hundred and twenty,
25. equal with the Father and
the Son, 26, 144,175; He is not
a created Angel, 326; gift of,
436; our need of His aid, 446;
His intercession, 447.

Stationes, Wednesday and Friday
Fast, 149, note 1.

sar for Christ, blessedness of,

4.

Swearing, exhortation against, 53, 60,
68, 74,79, 86; prevalence of,
434; Chrys. threatens to excom-
municate offenders for, 53, sq. ;
oaths the food of wrath, 60;
origin of oaths in corruption of
manners, 61; honesty needs no
oaths, 63; to impose an oath,
as evil as to take it, 61; oath-
taking at the Altar prohib-
ited, 62; by touching the Sacred
Volume on the Holy Table, 62;
those who swear most are least
believed, 63; Christ forbids all
oaths, ib.; swearing a mere
habit, 69; how to call upon God
aright, ib.; why the ancients
were allowed to take oaths, 70;
not a thing indifferent, 75;
God’s judgment against false-
swearers, 79; oaths, Satan’s
snare, 86.

Symeon, not taken by Chrys. to be
Simon Peter, 206.


TEACHING, the best is by deeds,
192.

Temper, diversities of, are gifts for
the Church’s service, 213.

Temptation, see Satan, Adam.
When we are tempted, the fault
is our own, 322, sq.; not to be
sought, 171.

Testament, Old and New, confirm
each other, 153.

Theatres, mischief of, 68, 262, 270;
promote irreverent behavior in
Church, 16t.

Theodorus, 238, 252.

‘Thekla, Acts of Paul and, 167.

Timothy, circumcision of, 506; relics
of, 553-

Tree of Knowledge, a type of the
cross, 402.

Tribulations benefit the soul, 221,


572


INDEX OF SUBJECTS.


321; sent to rouse the faithful,


260.
Types, a mode of prophecy, 339.


UNCIRCUMCISION, received the Gos-
pel before the circumcision, 388.
See Gevtiles.

Unction, with the Spirit, not with


oil, 338.
Union is strength, especially in
prayer, 231; how to secure, 232.


VANITY, its pernicious fruits, 4753
in spiritual matters, 476; its
cure, 477

Vices, how they counterfeit virtues,


pee
Vigils, celebration of, 24, 186,


Virginity, not to be matter of pride, | Word, the, precious in affliction, 262.


192.
Virtue, pleasures of, 424.


WATCHFULNESS, need of, 7. :

Wealth, contempt of, in the Primi-
tive Church, 73; Christian use
of, 45-

Widows, rich, excuses of, for second
marriage, 296.

Will, power of, 181, 218. See Free-
will,

Witnesses (Martyrs), all Christians
are called to be, 285; by a holy
life, 286.

Women, extravagance of, 166,
176; sufferings of the faithful,
in persecution, 159.


THE END.


Worship, true spirit of, 344; devel-
opment of, 447.

Wrath, accursed, t10; fit of a ma-
niac, ib.; a man in a passion a
hideous spectacle, 199; passion-
ate men like demoniacs, 255.

Writers, the Sacred, address them-
selves to matters of immediate
importance, 2.


XENON, Zevodoyeiov, the Church’s
hospital for poor strangers, 277.


YOUNG, irreverent behavior of in
Church, 161.


ZEAL, Christian, 134.


ee


XXvil. 41>.
XXVili. I2 .
SUL eO
Sed hgy Acta
>, 60 Al (a ee
KAKA ls
5 od ll 6
XXXIl. 10

XXXvii. 28 .
XXXiIX. I-20
IR eee
od eS
AO es! fs
sd hilay Stee) Ne
live iS, 24) s
xlviil. 16.
ioe ae
RIepEAGp ths
ii) oe
Tian AN ae
SVT,
XVI. 325.
BRC ers,
RKO ee oe
Kaeo LO


Ke LG) 1c
HEV: XVIII. 5


PRX L4 ss


<1. LO!
lest 3
XV. 32 :


XVi. XVii. .


Deut. iv.28 . .
VilkcAi ss
Wily al aie


Misr 02)


xviii. 18
XXXii. 15
XXXil. 21
OS. yil. 2).
TRceak sty
Jud. xxi. 5-10


Senos 24).


Se SO
aces 30
- + 239]
See ME
- + 322
teas CELL


fills (5) ee aap a 322
Tot 116) ye eg 296
Miele sips f= “LOF
eee) = 99). 3959500
MeO cw 3) 13225 304.
vem ieee st ioc. 8200
Migs = <= 435
IS EZON Ni ye E77
Sik GEG) Gee ae ael®
US! Ss 53S
PVs ee eyes | GO.
RUMI ee ts) 277,
EVID RL Ze wt, 540
POU mm sates |. 1737


; : 104 |

295
e205
» + 295,
Fukg . VE


a 516
se SMe


- + 473|
ae Or
te WSO
ae eee |
o, DLS
== 322
Bits. 20s
; 126


= LG


INDEX OF TEXTS.


T Samak td)
ii. 30 .
xii. 3, 5
xiv. 24
XVil. 34
Sa 7)
Wilt eee


2 Sam.
: xv. 26


XViil. 33 -


x1x. 20


1 Kings xvil. 17
XViil. 21


xix. IO


xix. 14


xix. 18


xxi. 19


2 Kings ii. to


XTX. XO:


Esth. vi. 2-11
Mili ai ae -
1 TO<y fs
XXXili. 6
VES Ve eee te


LV 7 ee oe
Vis Oats
Villian Sees
1X2 LO 2s
mat ae
acs ie


MI: To ag
SB LO
saben ae


xs UO
8 ONG.
XXXvii. 25
xlv. 17
vee ve


Iie "7,
Ixxiii. 6
ee ares
Ixxviii. 50
XCTO Le ie
ECVE cre
XCVIleciaee
ClV¥. Seen ae
CV.) 15).
Cx
exe
cxix. 46
CXIK:-62.0.
CXIX, 7D) an
CXXXVIi. 4
| Prov. ix. 10
xiii. 8
XVili. 3.
MUX. Ddbs
Xxiil. 29,


i
IIo


172
104
374
500
166
IIt


SII
176


Prov. xxviii. 1.
Eccles. vil. 2.
Vii. 24
RSasa LO
1x0) |<
5 ear) ees ag
RIXs
KIM TO
Xxx. IO


i. pais :


AVOID a.


Xviii. I-10
eos h Spee
0.6.4 Ye

DD. 3
Bek Sng.
rib epg 4


Xs Zine
Wan. i.


UWi27

Vl. 24
Hos. ii. 23.

1b Stevi ie She
dfeltlate 2h) 5


Amos v.25 .«
Mic. i. IT

Vinge re.
gheHoye tis 71, | ey ie


EECHERVGe <) | sae


Mealeareryies vc te
il.
iv. 6.
Ecclus. i.


> ea (ee es
SX 27s
XXiil. IO.
Xxv. I

XXXI1. 20.


Bel and Drag. ver.


Matt. 1. I


1. 20 os
Ay a Ce
ne ae
v. 4-10
WeiQ)s

v. 16

V. 22


XVII. -


PAGE


319)| Matty. 25 sas


. .
. .
. .


391; |


104


ty Ne


_


Via7 eee
We 30) ene


V. 40
Vi5375 She
W145) uae


Vie 335 ae
VIS ye
Vicor ar ce
Vo kee
VILL IS) Le
Vill.


x. 10

x. 14

x. 18

> ero We
> oY Plan
x 20ers
x Aries
>t Wey Ae
Zl. 26° <0%
xil. 39.
> ab bab 6 ai BE
xii. 45
xiii, 13.
xiii. 17
xiii. 41, 42
xiii. 47
xvi. 19
XVI. 23


xviii. 20 .
x1X,' 20) 3
xX, Bt
XXi. 44


xxiii. 2
XXiv. I4
XXIV. 21
XXiv. 22
XXiv. 29 .
xxiv. 36
£X¥. 1;.25
XXV. 9
XXV. I2
XXV. 4I
xxv. 46 .
xxvi. 69-72
XXVII. 15 -


XXVIl. 42, 53
vi II
vi. 26
x. 30. .


PAGE
- 425
- 53, 69
426, 509
as 4


we
in


574 IN DES OF “pags:


PAGE | (Passages beside the direct PAGE


Mark ix. 44 . . 414, 526| exposition.) pace | Rom. xii. 3. . .501, 503| Gal. ii. 6, 9
Boma pain ce) eee ROO LACES Tari’ s te! op eee Ki. TOs. 7s ae ee? ii. 8,9
AIO Oey LiL Ise 22) enenatene = 58 Xs D5 =" Greet 11.9 .

Niele He tarres te li. 24 57 xl. 20. . . . 30! il. 20.

WEST, 725 tes. as aes 3 Liss g2 3 xiii, T¢4 . . + 440 Nee Olin vente
LUO i. ee 6 i ike 37) Deere Woe XIV. I, 25. . sage Nor uoree ewan Aird
VAG RUE. Fs. 0 GO iil. 6. a lis, eet X1V.)9, 10.) ea7aeo Web Panis s! | is
Wik Seen a os Bente lps) lil. 12 ZH, Hip GS) Ve 15. = «eee OS ey Eee rae /
WIE GAN suns) te) 255 iv. 16 ae Pe 450 XV. 2O\ 2 ate ol SLO vi. 14. . 312, 348,
Wi BV eae bog METS) IVA AUN EM ues tea AUS XV. 22-29. . . 327 vi. 17... 98, 241,
TAU eas SORTER Fee) Vite go ee Re. POT Corl. By ys) eee Eph. i. 3 Fone
Xap Masyarakat 6 VAL eALO Rs ah ie 22M 1 B30 ye ot A ee eee 1.8. .

Sep 2Od eos oe DOO Villa 27s aurea 9 ly 2B ee soley oe iii. I

Taq ew ti Xe 7s eee eee 20d: MA 2 eens iv. 10

RISA ue re evar yeuiss 622 ib Rs a ee am Bey Wei) 4 o65 9 LS iv. 26

RAL) ths ve OO. Mey GA Doct teed pai ca, WY SIE Vie 2 les re, eaten v. I

2 blip TIS. iy SES Meneilt ee SU ehh aan Vie, 3ie 5 i) tenet eat aie) he

CG Io Lg te G2 Sa HY Dieu Naito ol wali Mb Bo wm ols soul iy Boy

sail) Se Ao Be) anavitoyl ICO Soto eran is WME a oe oO BS 11S 7 eae oes
KV a Clee em SOD Zbl AI) TORY ASG We ls Ss So BS LV..04< ee e EOC
ST Eh S BNO isp RVs ees BO Vil. T5225. 508) Cole ts 24) ae eameeicege
Sqn Wey) ge Pan WN od NTT Vii MEO say 349 ii. 20-23 f
MAK 27 oie G45 S20) nati St go Va) WHS) Villy 2 nena Oy Miles 28s

PERM ea?) ek ert ey ez DEVI I ss py ota BAO 1s, [Aves beeen eee liebe

SS AI 6 ee 6. “Kel SAGAR Go 5 Bb 6 LG NPN. gy eps | Sete Me Fe LG)

Jl TS See cee RE Xvie 20 Kg; Ay edie ATE es Sraiieelo
aut lies ey os Ip pete Xvil. 31. Xp ge glo to SS ili. I
ill. 11 XVlll. 3. 5 ote Non Gi) ae OI VG, 1G).
iy Te 25 kee ZO XI G2: By eke Sh Ts | 2a eSS aly err
iv. 22 10 xxi. 6 xii, 31. . » 503}1 Tim. i. £3, 16.

4


XS Og
Zod (8) of
XX1l. 18.
Sahl 11


IVINS 2, scoumaeiencan Au, 1. 0,9. :


<

Bey

Go
NN


<

OV

Oo

SHEN NN NOOO FPN OLN NOOO
Go UriGs & Od HOO GI FH HOD
Oe eH OLEH NONNL NEM
G20 ULUIW O™N NWO DAW AW OONWO

tat
<
Wn
=|
a
\O
Go
<4
oat


vi. 60 Sab Ws rie Ge 444 v

i XXVill. 20 . XV. 54 446 | v. 16
vii. 28 33 | Rom. i. 4 XVi. 4 230 v. 20
vii. 46 8 i. II SOME Damo G) ay nso) Vv. 23

Vill. 44. 24 ib 13) 2'GOL.MIGDE ye! fies a sPG | We Oe
xe gis 3 ei, hig 493 vi. IO
xii. 6 Bz i. 20 AVES) . sa ee ice AG Vi. 13
at 2 12 ii. 2 4 ING SOMEG po Sie | 2 Amy tL, & v8
Xili. 2 32 1H, Se al 4 v. 10 237 il. 9 moe,
xiii. 34 38 1,23... «| eee We eg Na ot a. ae ili. 2 oe
Paik BE Gk ae A Ill. 29,30. . . 474 We Beg 9 5 B9h HSS lll. 15 coats
BV 1 Pez 701 705) 25 VeZi ss x eeO viii. 18 Sih 2s ive 6's, <shas BQOs
anyet MeVEy Nae Ale 6 IN Ug sd 6 os 370 Vill 20) year Liew 17 sonia
EMG oe do ABE Wag a hte he tel Sa meeO2 bs, 2 S30 MMi dolor
ANCA, omen ie 3 Wie flO ss = .eaBo ix. 6 502 NAR Che See oe
Wb 2 eo aie 27 Sill? OF. | OD Ibe 48 | Philem. ver. 13
RVs Danes teu ach en WLS Wb Ae\e al > va NOW DONS ue mee ey; lelelos sy. Wily 12

Sia, Ue as ey UL RNAI OO) WAG eS eer wa sah AO Midge) 20 alte ESS vill. 13
1 a 2 wale OG Se meGe a. LEAS) Rav EN latent close bili ix. 20-28.

RVUs tees fe, sn! 1339) Ik. Gale. awdihy 228 xii. 6 Se 16 OA gO eas
PMI ROM ee aH ike Boren. yt od xii. 8 - 345, 447 x. 28, 29. 8, 413,
Kev eRe eTOs 1530 Sait | aig. Sy alone XWiOr:; Wsee eboo 5S cane Meet Ph bc
S Sine SiN Wea. 16. on ee XH TGs oot aie eae 2.9 11 ay aula iv (Oe) XA. 24s

Xe 22M Gree 6 Ke DOM cer more Gralehloy |. Pad. cereale SU ye

SOG IGN 5 HALOS ely) SIS MS pes youth eee Ie TON: er LOS xili. 24

RK he etn 4 Xi LOMe see ae LO7 Bre ee sy 6 Lavi) Gs Th (6,


X20 een ee 3 Mie Ee te Scat Sh Ria Es IV emus


i.


“mid @ Moe?
(


GRAN bert. .'., MAR 1 8 1982


PLEASE DO NOT REMOVE
CARDS OR SLIPS FROM THIS POCKET
———————


UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO LIBRARY


EER


BR A Select library of the Nicene
60 and post-Nicene fathers of
S46 the Christian church


pie etree bp abe


eR es jwdbgiaed of


Heated
i aby i) f


+
batts


ae


Hane


a we


Hy


7 eS


Seatas


helehia nts!
A ate
fy


i
«


reve
Hi


bt


he
ae
Hess
ae
satay
bi 2


pts


odd
Poca
Hpk


1


“
ri


? re
- * ioe icin i
aeeaaiae fe
are


rains


ie
:
Maver it id
sh f
eon ie:
.


Uaegt
Bt, et
hab


ol
ah


ane
ae
Be %)


ey
is


mss


ab aan!
Have


Lai
PN be Sehe
$93


i ee


a Hy
t Sent
mie F


ais
2 habe
Ei ctide tent


st ik:
Se


en
Ab aM
WPSY
TPCESS


i


ne Cia
{i iprts vey
fret


t Phas
EP e
PAD Hath


1


}
sped


aN i
Alay sf

SARE fate

sao PA PALA AEA,

: tenes (iebig td


Bar
ha


iit
a


naecattenn
ana
wah

Resin


hy


thee
bye ports load


4 Tin
cee


PAE SRE
1


to bel
yet
:


SPE
rede Ss ans eS oe


a
ith


f


ii
i


sats !


i


seh ahe
Witte


ne an


tye i
a MSA Ag)


Ue i eMoes
Pay chs Pirie Na
Wohgt ee aA ES
