================================================================================
TOWER OF BABEL LIBRARY
================================================================================
Title: Studies in Islamic Mysticism
Creator: Reynold A. Nicholson
Edition: 1921 (Cambridge University Press)
Source: Internet Archive (https://archive.org/details/studiesinislamyst00nichuoft)
Public domain: First published 1921; public domain.
Artifact ID: nicholson-studies-in-islamic-mysticism-1921
================================================================================

STUDIES

IN

ISLAMIC MYSTICISM

CAMBRIDGE  UNIVERSITY  PRESS

C.  F.  CLAY,  MANAGER
LONDON :  FETTER  LANE,  E.G.  4

NEW  YORK  :  THE  MACMILLAN  CO.

BOMBAY \

CALCUTTA  I  MACMILLAN  AND  CO.,  LTE.

MADRAS )

TORONTO :  THE  MACMILLAN  CO.  OF

CANADA,  LTD.
TOKYO :  MARUZEN-KABUSHIKI-KAISHA

ALL  RIGHTS  RESERVKI)

STUDIES

IN

ISLAMIC  MYSTICISM

BY

REYNOLD  ALLEYNE  NICHOLSON
LITT.D.,  LL.D.

LECTURER  IN  PERSIAN  IN  THE  UNIVERSITY  OF  CAMBRIDGE
FORMERLY  FELLOW  OF  TRINITY  COLLEGE

CAMBRIDGE

AT  THE  UNIVERSITY  PRESS
1921

TO

EDWARD  GRANVILLE  BROWNE

WHOSE  TEACHING  AND  EXAMPLE  FIRST

INSPIRED  ME  TO  PURSUE  THE  STUDY  OF

ORIENTAL  LITERATURE

I  *.

PREFACE

As  was  explained  in  the  preface  to  my  Studies  in  Islamic
Poetry,  the  following  essays  conclude  a  series  of  five,  which
fall  into  two  groups  and  are  therefore  published  in  separate
volumes.  While  mysticism,  save  for  a  few  casual  references,
found  no  place  in  the  studies. on  the  Lubdbu  'l-Albdb  of  'Awfi
and  the  Luzumiyydt  of  Abu  l-'Ala  al-Ma'arri,  in  these  now
brought  together  it  has  taken  entire  possession  of  the  field.
Ibnu  1-Farid,  indeed,  is  an  exquisite  poet;  and  the  picture
of  Abu  Sa'id  ibn  Abi  '1-Khayr,  drawn  by  pious  faith  and
coloured  with  legendary  romance,  may  be  looked  upon  as
a  work  of  art  in  its  way.  But  on  the  whole  the  literary
interest  of  the  present  volume  is  subordinate  to  the  religious
and  philosophical.  I  have  tried  to  make  the  reader  acquainted
with  three  Sufis  famous  in  the  East  and  worthy  of  being
known  in  Europe.  Most  of  what  has  hitherto  been  written
concerning  Abu  Sa'id  begins  and  ends  with  the  quatrains
passing  as  his,  though  (for  the  chief  part,  at  any  rate)  they
were  neither  composed  nor  recited  by  him.  As  to  Jili,  the
masterly  sketch  in  Dr  Muhammad  Iqbal's  Development  of
Metaphysics  in  Persia  stands  almost  alone.  Ibnu  '1-Farid
had  the  misfortune  to  be  translated  by  Von  Hammer,  and
the  first  intelligent  or  intelligible  version  of  his  great  Td'iyya
appeared  in  Italy  four  years  ago.  It  will  be  seen  that  the
subjects  chosen  illustrate  different  aspects  of  Sufism  and
exhibit  racial  contrasts,  of  which  perhaps  the  importance
has  not  yet  been  sufficiently  recognised.  Abu  Sa'id,  the
free-thinking  free-living  dervish,  is  a  Persian  through  and
through,  while  Ibnu  '1-Farid  in  the  form  of  his  poetry  as  well
as  in  the  individuality  of  his  spiritual  enthusiasm  displays  the
narrower  and  tenser  genius  of  the  Semite.  Nearly  a  third
of  this  volume  is  concerned  with  a  type  of  Sufism,  which—

vi  Preface

as  represented  by  Ibnu  'l-'Arabf  and  Jflf — possesses  great
interest  for  students  of  medieval  thought  and  may  even  claim
a  certain  significance  in  relation  to  modern  philosophical  and
theological  problems.  Mysticism  is  such  a  vital  element  in
Islam  that  without  some  understanding  of  its  ideas  and  of
the  forms  which  they  assume  we  should  seek  in  vain  to
penetrate  below  the  surface  of  Mohammedan  religious  life.
The  forms  may  be  fantastic  and  the  ideas  difficult  to  grasp;
nevertheless  we  shall  do  well  to  follow  them,  for  in  their
company  East  and  West  often  meet  and  feel  themselves  akin.
I  regret  that  I  have  not  been  able  to  make  full  use  of
several  books  and  articles  published  during  the  final  stages
of  the  war  or  soon  afterwards,  which  only  came  into  my  hands
when  these  studies  were  already  in  the  press.  Tor  Andrae's
Die  person  Muhammeds  in  lehre  und  glauben  seiner  gemeinde
(Upsala,  1917)  contains  by  far  the  best  survey  that  has  yet
appeared  of  the  sources,  historical  evolution  and  general
characteristics  of  the  Mohammedan  Logos  doctrine.  This,  as
I  have  said,  is  the  real  subject  of  the  Insdnu  'l-Kdmil.  Its
roots  lie,  of  course,  in  Hellenism.  Andrae  shows  how  the
notion  of  the  6elo<t  avdpwrro*;  passed  over  into  Islam  through
the  Shf'ites  and  became  embodied  in  the  Imam,  regarded  as
the  living  representative  of  God  and  as  a  semi-divine  person-
ality on  whom  the  world  depends  for  its  existence.  Many
Shf'ites  were  in  close  touch  with  §unsm,  and  there  can  be  no
doubt  that,  as  Ibn  Khaldun  observed,  the  Shf'ite  Imam  is  the
prototype  of  the  §ufistic  Qutb.  It  was  inevitable  that  the
attributes  of  the  Imam  and  Qutb  should  be  transferred  to  the
Prophet,  so  that  even  amongst  orthodox  Moslems  the  belief
in  his  pre-existence  rapidly  gained  ground.  Particularly  in-
structive to  students  of  the  Insdnu  'l-Kdmil  is  Andrae's
account  of  the  Logos  doctrine  of  Ibnu  'l-'Arabf,  whose
influence  is  manifest  in  every  page  that  Jili  wrote.  In  this
connexion  another  book  by  another  Swedish  scholar —
H.  S.  Nyberg's  Kleiner e  Schriften  des  Ibn  al-Aratri  (Leiden,
1919) — provides  new  and  valuable  material.  The  introduction,
to  which  I  have  now  and  then  referred  in  the  footnotes,  not
only  elucidates  the  mystical  philosophy  of  the  Insdnu  'l-Kdmil

Preface  vii

but  enables  us  to  trace  in  detail  the  indebtedness  of  Jili  to
his  great  predecessor.  In  the  i6th  and  I7th  centuries  the
Insdnu  'l-Kdmil  exerted  a  powerful  influence  upon  Indonesian
Sufism,  which  has  been  studied  by  the  Dutch  Orientalists
D.  A.  Rinkes,  B.  J.  O.  Schrieke,  and  H.  Kraemer.  I  should
like  to  call  attention  to  the  account  given  by  the  last-named
scholar  in  Een  Javaansche  primbon  uit  de  zestiende  eeuw
(Leiden,  1921),  p.  40  foil,  and  p.  83  foil.

Some  months  after  my  work  had  gone  to  the  press,  I
received  from  Prof.  C.  A.  Nallino  an  off-print  of  his  article
//  poema  mistico  arabo  d'Ibn  al-Fdrid  in  una  recente  traduzione
italiana1,  from  which  I  learned  that  a  prose  translation  by
Sac.  Ignazio  Di  Matteo  of  Ibnu  '1-Farid's  most  celebrated  ode,
the  Td'iyyatu  'l-Kubrd,  had  been  published  in  1917  at  Rome.
As  this  book  was  reproduced  in  autograph  for  private
circulation,  it  would  have  been  inaccessible  to  me,  if  the
author  had  not  kindly  presented  me  with  a  copy.  He  replied
to  Nallino  in  a  paper  entitled  Sulla  mia  interpretazione
del  poema  mistico  d'Ibn  al-Fdri<j,  (RDSO.,  1920,  vol.  vm.
479-5°°)>  which  was  immediately  followed  by  a  second
article  from  Nallino,  Ancora  su  Ibn  al-Fdrii  e  sulla  mis-
tica  musulmana  (ibid.  vol.  vm.  501-562).  Having  myself
attempted  to  translate  the  Td'iyya,  I  am  impressed  with  the
merit  of  Di  Matteo's  version  rather  than  inclined  to  dwell
on  its  faults.  He  has  given  us,  for  the  first  time,  a  careful
and  tolerably  correct  rendering  of  the  original;  and  that  is
no  slight  achievement.  The  articles  by  Nallino,  which  include
a  critical  examination  of  numerous  passages  in  the  poem,  are
the  most  important  contribution  that  any  European  Oriental-
ist has  so  far  made  to  the  study  of  Ibnu  '1-Farid.  In  an  essay
consisting  largely  of  translations,  I  could  but  indicate  (pp.
193-5  infra)  my  views  on  the  main  question  which  he  has
discussed  in  his  friendly  controversy  with  Di  Matteo.  To  him,
as  to  me,  it  seems  clear  that  the  view  put  forward  by  Di
Matteo  is  erroneous.  Neither  the  form  nor  the  substance  of
the  Td'iyya  suggests  that  it  was  inspired  by  Ibnu  'l-'Arabi,
though  some  traces  of  his  influence  may  perhaps  be  found  in

1  Published  in  Rivista  degli  studi  orientali  (1919),  vol.  vm.  1-106.

viii  Preface

it1.  It  differs  in  kind  from  poems  indubitably  so  inspired,  such
as  the  'Ayniyya  of  Jili.  Above  all,  it  is  a  mystic's  auto-
biography, a  poet's  description  of  his  inner  life,  and  the
terms  which  it  employs  belong  to  the  psychological  vocabulary
of  $ufism,  with  few  exceptions.  I  have  no  quarrel  with  those
who  call  Ibnu  '1-Farid  a  pantheist ;  but  his  pantheism  (unlike
that  of  his  commentators)  is  essentially  a  state  of  feeling,  not
a  system  of  thought.  The  poem,  however,  requires  explana-
tion, and  I  do  not  think  it  can  be  interpreted  without  reference
to  the  corresponding  philosophical  doctrine.  In  other  words,  if
we  are  to  elicit  any  definite  meaning  from  the  symbols  which
shadow  forth  a  consciousness  of  mystical  union,  we  must
somehow  connect  them  with  metaphysical  propositions.  But
although  mysticism  is  not  an  allegory,  still  less  is  it  a  theology
or  philosophy.  Hence  the  sayings  of  "God-intoxicated"  men
will  not  serve  as  a  sure  criterion  of  their  attitude  towards
religion.  Moslems  themselves,  as  a  rule,  want  better  evidence
of  heresy  than  this.

I  desire  to  express  my  gratitude  to  Prof.  C.  A.  Nallino  and
Sac.  Ignazio  Di  Matteo  for  their  gifts  of  books  and  for  the
courtesy  which  accompanied  them;  to  Mr  A.  G.  Ellis  for  the
loan  of  his  copy  of  the  InsdnU  'l-Kdmil ;  and  to  the  authorities
of  the  India  Office  Library  for  placing  at  my  disposal  the
manuscripts  mentioned  on  p.  77  infra.  Especial  thanks  are
due  to  Mr  Rhuvon  Guest,  who  most  generously  sent  me  his
unpublished  translation  of  the  Td'iyya  of  Ibnu  '1-Farid  and
allowed  me  to  use  it  for  the  purpose  of  correcting  and  im-
proving my  own,  before  the  latter  was  in  print.  Mr  Guest's
version,  while  keeping  very  close  to  the  original,  is  thoughtful
and  judicious,  and  I  found  it  of  great  service  in  dealing  with
passages  which  to  me  seemed  obscure.  If  I  have  sometimes
preferred  my  interpretation  to  his,  he  has  at  least  as  often

1  There  is  no  trustworthy  basis  (cf.  p.  164  infra)  for  the  statement  that
Ibnu  '1-Farid  was  acquainted  with  Ibnu  'l-'Arabf.  The  latter  is  said  to  have
asked  the  poet's  permission  to  write  a  commentary  on  his  Td'iyya,  and  to
have  received  the  reply  that  the  Futiihdlu  'l-Makkiyya  was  a  commentary
on  it  (Maqqarl,  Leiden  ed.,  i.  570,  16-18);  this,  however,  is  the  kind  of
story  that  could  scarcely  fail  to  be  invented.  The  Fut&hdt  was  completed
in  A. H.  629,  only  three  years  before  the  death  of  Ibnu  '1-Fdrid.

Preface  ix

convinced  me  that  his  was  more  likely  to  be  the  right  one.
Besides  thanking  the  scholars  who  have  helped  me  in  the
second  part  of  these  studies,  I  wish  to  acknowledge  the
appreciative  criticism  which  the  first  volume  has  received.
Both  Noldeke  and  Goldziher  have  declared  their  agreement
with  the  view  there  taken  of  the  character  of  Ma'arri.  The
remarks  of  my  old  teacher,  Prof.  Noldeke,  are  so  interesting
that  I  cannot  refrain  from  quoting  them:

In  der  Gesammtauffassung  des  Dichters  und  Denkers  muss  ich
Ihnen  durchweg  beistimmen.  Zunachst  darin,  dass  M.  kein
Muslim  mehr  war,  sondern  als  einzigen,  allerdings  festen  Punct
aus  der  religiosen  Ueberlieferung  das  Vorhandensein  eines  all-
machtigen  Gottes  behielt,  der  in  seiner  Willkiir  so  ziemlich  dem
koranischen  glich.  Dabei  halte  ich  es  immerhin  fur  moglich,  dass
M.  hie  und  da  auch  sonst  an  Einzelheiten  der  Lehre  Muhammeds
festhielt,  je  nach  verschiedenen  Zeiten  und  Stimmungen.  Dass
die  Widerspriiche  innerhalb  der  Sammlung  nicht  alle  auf  absicht-
liche  Tauschung  herauskommen,  mochte  ich  damit  betonen.
Welche  Weltanschauung  und  welche  Dogmatik  ist  ohne  innere
Widerspriiche?  Das  christliche  Dogma  habe  ich  hier  vor  Allem
im  Auge ;  ich  meine  die  Dogmatik  aller  christlichen  Confessionen.
...Was  man  auch  an  M.  aussetzen  mag,  man  muss  vor  seiner
Selbstandigkeit  doch  die  grosste  Achtung  haben.  Wie  eigen
beriihren  uns  nr.  117-119,  worin  die  Fiirsten  als  Diener  und
Besoldete  des  Volkes  erscheinen,  bei  einem  Orientalen !  (Friedrich
der  Grosse  dachte  wenigstens  theoretisch  auch  so.)  So  fern^uns
oder  mir  (da  ich  mich  doch  als  strenger  Rationalist  ihm  verwandt
fuhle)  seine  iibertriebene  Askese  liegt,  die  z.  B.  nicht  beriick-
sichtigt,  dass  "Die  grossen  Fische  fressen  stets  die  kleinen,"
dass  die  Singvogel  grosstenteils  von  Insecten  leben  und  dazu,
dass  wir  Menschen  von  den  Tieren  direct  oder  indirect  auf-
gefressen  wiirden,  wenn  wir  sie  nicht  vielfach  toteten,  so  muss
man  doch  auch  in  der  Hinsicht  vor  ihm  Achtung  haben.  Wenn
er  den  Wein  verabscheut,  so  muss  man  bedenken,  dass  dieser
damals  wie  jetzt  (namentlich  bei  den  Persern)  ganz  besonders
dazu  diente,  rasch  sinnlos  betrunken  zu  werden  (cfr.  Gen.  xliii.  34,
"nD£H).  Der  Standpunct  war  also  verniinf tiger  als  der  der
americanischen  Gesetzgebung,  die  das  Kind  mit  dem  Bade
ausschiittet.  Wie  verstandig  ist  M.  auch  darin,  das  er  nicht  an
dem  fast  zum  Dogma  der  islamischen  Ueberlieferung  gewordenen
Satze  festhielt,  dass  die  Menschen  in  fruheren  Zeiten  besser
gewesen  waren  als  die  Zeitgenossen  (nr.  162,  4  als  zweifelhaft,
146,  3  bestimmt  ausgesprochen) !  Vermutlich  wollte  er  damit
besonders  den  Vorzug  der  "Genossen  des  Propheten"  treifen.

x  Preface

Prof.  Noldeke  laid  me  under  a  further  obb'gation  by
reading  the  text  of  the  pieces  selected  from  the  Luzumiyydt
and  proposing  a  number  of  emendations.  These  are  given
below,  together  with  some  which  I  owe  to  the  kindness  of
Prof.  Bevan.  Misprints  are  included,  and  the  English  version
has  been  corrected  in  a  few  places  where,  as  Prof.  Bevan
pointed  out,  the  original  was  mistranslated  or  not  fully  under-
stood.

P.  66,  No.  20,  first  line. Read

"Ah,  let  us  go,  whom  nature  joined  of  old  in  friendship  fast."

P.  79,  No.  52,  eighth  line. Read

"With  blackness  of  stony  wastes,  parched  desolate  highlands."

P.  loi,  note  4.  "The  dark  raiment"  (^JJajUl  <L£)  refers  to  Death.  "Er
(Abu  Muslim)  hatte  der  Dynastic  treu  gedient :  darauf  bekleidete  die  ihn  mit
der  Farbe  der  Finsterniss"  (N.).

P.  109,  No.  124.  Although  I  have  deliberately  rendered >^X^  >^LO t
by  "words  are  wounds,"  that  rendering  gives  too  wide  an  application  to
the  Arabic  phrase.  As  the  context  shows,  ^»^UC)|  has  here  its  technical
meaning  and  refers  to  the  dialectic  of  the  mutakallimun  (scholastic
theologians) .

P.  116,  No.  144,  lines  5-6. Read

"  Be  just  and  live  on  earth  what  can?
And  none  is  more  unjust  than  Man."
In  the  original,  ^3^9  stands  for  ubS$\  JJ^*  (B.).

P.  I2i,  No.  163,  third  line. Read

"Thou  deem'st  thy  being  here  calamity."
P.  123,  No.  171,  third  line. Read

"If  nonsense  be  all  the  coin  we  exchange,  then  better."
P.  132,  No.  192,  last  line. Read

"To  succour,  and  shall  surpass  in  excellence  Hajib's  bow."
Note  2  should  be  deleted. For  "Hajib's  bow"  see  Naqd'id,  462  (B.).
P.  141,  seventh  line  from  foot. By  an  oversight,  "Jahiz"  has  been
written  instead  of  "Abu  'Abdallah  al-Khwarizmi."

P.  145,  note  i .  The  animal  called  by  the  Arabs  jLyAJI  and  by  the  Persians
j^j  is  not  the  lynx  but,  as  Prof.  Noldeke  reminds  me,  the  hunting-leopard
(cynaelurus),  commonly  known  in  Europe  as  the  cheetah.
P.  157,  note  2,  last  line. Read  ilJ  for

P.  165.  note  2,  first  line. Read  -^£A*  for
P.  167,  No.  240,  first  verse. Read
"  Say  to  wine,  which  is  a  foe  to  (men's)  understandings,  ever  drawing
against  them  the  swords  of  a  warrior."

Preface  xi

Noldeke  writes:  "240,  i  1st  vJ^w  doch  wohl  richtig,  da  toj  schwerlich
als  Intransitiv  gebraucht  werden  kann.  ^\  wird  als  Fern,  gebraucht,  Ibn

^y^  «  »  j

Qotaiba,  'Uyun,  277,  2,  wie  es  ja  regelrechter  Plural  von  i^yj  ist  (Baidawl
zu  Sura  xx,  56,  128);  und  so  passt  das  t^J  gut."

P.  178,  No.  264,  first  verse. For  "my  nose"  read  "noses."

P.  191,  No.  301,  second  verse.  Read  "howbeit  akin  to  them  are  stones
that  were  kicked."

P.  192,  No.  303,  second  verse. Read

"  But  pardon  me,  O  my  God  !  At  Mecca  shall  I  throw  off
Amongst  pilgrims  newly  come  the  weeds  of  a  widowed  frame."

Prof.  Bevan  justly  observes  that  ^T.JLy  in  conjunction  with  ^US  can
scarcely  have  any  other  meaning  than  "a  woman  who  is  wearing  the  black
garments  of  mourning."  Moreover,  although  «.J.b.  when  followed  by  .JLfr,

can  be  used  of  "  throwing  on  (a  garment),"  it  properly  means  "to  throw  off."
I  suggest  that  ^^JUr  denotes  here  the  poet's  body,  which  —  as  bereaved  of
sight,  strength,  and  all  its  pleasures—  he  compares  to  a  woman  clad  in
mourning,  while  ^>Lo  refers  to  the  garments  which  would  be  laid  aside
on  assuming  the  ihrdm.

P.  204,  No.  326,  lines  3-4.  The  general  sense  is  given  correctly,  but
I  should  have  noticed  that  the  words  ^^^Lfc.1^^  jLo*JU  allude  to  two
short  Stir  as  of  the  Koran,  viz.  Stir  a  i  (cf.  the  Commentary  of  Baydawi,  ed.
Fleischer,  p.  3,  1.  6)  and  Stira  cxn.  These  are  contrasted  with  the  two  long
Suras  mentioned  in  note  i.

P.  216,  No.  30,  v.  8. For XaJU  read

P.  220,  No.  40,  v.  16. For  iju  read  ijju  (B.).

P.  228,  No.  69,  v.  3. For  lyJLJL*.  read  lyXJU.  (B.).

P.  229,  No.  72,  v.  8.  J,x>l».  (B.)  is  better  than  jc«U..

P.  237,  No.  107,  v.  5. Read  ^  ^  15^'  "irn  Zorne"  (N-)-

J  0  f  J  &  '

P.  240,  No.  115,  v.  3. For  A^  read  ^9-

P.  246,  No.  143,  v.  2. For  Llsj  read  l^Y^  (N-)-

P.  248,  No.  149,  v.  4. For  -J&M  read

-J&M

Ibid. For &\&read  cJU. Cf.  Wellhausen,  Scholien  zum  Diwan

Hudail,  277,  5  (ZDMG.,  xxxix,  479)  and  Lisdn,  x,  211,  4  fr.  foot  and  foil.
"Die  Bedeutung  scheint  'Wachtel'  zu  sein"  (N.).

P.  251,  No.  163,  v.  2. For  jut>*  rea

xii  Preface

P.  251,  No.  167,  v.  i. For jgM^^  read

P.  253,  No.  174,  v.  6. For

P.  255,  No.  181,  v.  3.  For J(^  read 1^.  "ihre  Geheimnissc  mit

Wissen  aufdeckt  =klar  erkennt.  -JU.  und  !«,  bilden  ja  naturliche  Gegen-
satze"(N.).

P.  262,  No.  210,  v.  4. For  v^^J.^  read  J.^L*  (B.).

P.  265,  No.  225,  v.  2. For

»"-I

P.  266,  No.  229,  v.  6.  For
P.  268,  No.  238,  v.  i.  For
P.  269,  No.  240,  v.  i.  For  ^j

j

P.  274,  No.  262,  v.  2.

P.  274,  No.  264,  v.  i. For  ou*jj|  mzd  vJu^l  (N.).

P.  277,  No.  274,  v.  7.  There  is,  of  course,  a  word-play  here,  as^JLli  can
also  mean  "the  male  ostrich"  and  iLolxi  "the  female  ostrich."  Noldeke
suggests  that  the  sense  may  be,  "  Fear  the  prayer  of  an  oppressed  man  on
behalf  of  his  wife."

P.  279,  No.  284,  v.  i. Read Jju  for  Jjtf.

P.  282,  No.  302,  v.  4. Read  Ul^5  for  UjjJ  (the  rhyme-word).

P.  286,  No.  318,  v.  i. If  ifjtfr  •  t>e  retained,  its  subject  is  the  individual

implied  by  the  preceding  words.  The  reading  ifjtf,"t  gives  an  easier  and
more  natural  sense.

Even  the  minutiae  in  this  list  will  be  carefully  noted,
I  hope,  by  students  of  the  Luzumiyydt.  Success  in  mastering
the  difficulties  of  Arabic  poetry  depends  on  the  conviction
that  no  detail  is  small  enough  to  be  neglected.

REYNOLD  A.  NICHOLSON.
March,  1921.

CONTENTS
CHAPTER  I

PAGE

ABtf  SA'fD  IBN  ABI  'L-KHAYR  i

CHAPTER  II

THE  PERFECT  MAN 77

ESSENCE,  ATTRIBUTE,  AND  NAME ...  89

THE  DESCENT  OF  THE  ABSOLUTE ...  94

THE  ESSENCE  AS  GOD 97

THE  HEAVENLY  MAN 103

THE  MACROCOSM . . . . . .  121

THE  RETURN  TO  THE  ESSENCE ....  125

RELIGION,  REVELATION,  AND  PROPHECY . .  130

APPENDIX  I.  JILI'S  'Ayniyya 143

APPENDIX  II.  SOME  NOTES  ON  THE  Fususu  'l-Hikam .  149

CHAPTER  III

THE  ODES  OF  IBNU  'L-FARID ....  162

INDEX  OF  NAMES  AND  TITLES ....  267

INDEX  OF  SUBJECTS 272

INDEX  OF  TECHNICAL  TERMS,  ETC. ...  278

CHAPTER  I

SA'fD  IBN  ABI  'L-KHAYR

ABIJ  SA'ID  and  Omar  Khayyam  are  associated  in  the  history
of  Persian  literature  by  the  circumstance  that  each  of  them  is
the  reputed  author  of  a  famous  collection  of  rubd'iyydt  in  which
his  individuality  has  almost  disappeared.  That  these  collec-
tions are  wholly,  or  even  mainly,  the  work  of  Abu  Sa'id  and
Omar  no  one  who  examines  the  evidence  is  likely  to  assert:
they  should  rather  be  regarded  as  anthologies — of  which  the
nucleus,  perhaps,  was  formed  by  the  two  authors  in  question
— containing  poems  of  a  particular  type  composed  at  various
periods  by  many  different  hands.  It  is  possible,  no  doubt,
that  Omar's  view  of  life  and  his  general  cast  of  thought  are
more  or  less  reflected  in  the  quatrains  attributed  to  him,  but
we  can  learn  from  them  nothing  definite  and  distinctive.  The
same  considerations  apply  with  equal  force  to  the  mystical
rubd'is  passing  under  the  name  of  Abu  Sa'id.  In  his  case,
however,  we  possess  excellent  and  copious  biographical
materials  which  make  us  intimately  acquainted  with  him  and
throw  a  welcome  light  on  many  aspects  of  contemporary
Persian  mysticism.

The  oldest  of  these  documents  is  a  short  treatise  on  his  life
and  sayings,  which  is  preserved  in  a  manuscript  of  the  British
Museum  (Or.  249).  It  bears  neither  title  nor  indication  of
authorship,  but  Zhukovski  in  his  edition  of  the  text  (Petro-
grad,  1899)  identifies  it  with  the  Hdldt  u  Sukhundn-i  Shaykh
Abu  Sa'id  ibn  Abi  'l-Khayr,  a  work  composed  about  a  century
after  Abu  Sa'id's  death  by  one  of  his  descendants  whose  name
is  unknown.  He  was  a  cousin  of  Muhammad  ibnu  '1-Munaw-
war,  the  great-great-grandson  of  Abu  Sa'id.

Using  the  Hdldt  u  Sukhundn  as  a  foundation,  Muhammad
ibnu  1-Munawwar  compiled  a  much  larger  biography  of  his
ancestor  which  he  entitled  Asrdru  'l-tawhid  fi  maqdmdti  'l-
Shaykh  Abi  Sa'id  (ed.  by  Zhukovski,  Petrograd,  1899)  and
dedicated  to  the  Ghurid  prince,  Ghiyathu'ddin  Muhammad

N.  S. II  I

2  Studies  in  Islamic  Mysticism  [CH.

ibn  Sam  (ob.  A.D.  1203).  The  author,  like  Abu  Sa'id  himself,
was  a  native  of  Mayhana  or  Mihna  in  Khurasan.  From  his
earliest  youth  it  had  been  a  labour  of  love  for  him  to  gather
the  sayings  of  the  Saint  and  to  verify  the  records  and
traditions  which  were  handed  down  in  his  family  and  were
still  fresh  in  the  minds  of  his  fellow-townsmen.  The  task  was
undertaken  not  a  moment  too  soon.  In  A.D.  1154  the
Turcoman  tribe  of  the  Ghuzz  swept  over  the  borders  of
Khurasan  and  carried  fire  and  sword  through  that  flourishing
province.  Everywhere  the  population  was  massacred;  the
author  tells  us  that  115  descendants  of  Abu  Sa'id,  young  and
old,  were  tortured  to  death  in  Mayhana  alone,  and  that  no
memorial  of  him  was  left  except  his  tomb.  Religion,  he  says,
fell  into  utter  ruin;  the  search  after  Truth  ceased,  unbelief
became  rampant ;  of  Islam  only  the  name,  and  of  Sufism  only
the  form  survived.  Impelled  by  divine  grace,  he  complied
with  the  request  of  some  novices  that  he  should  write  an
account  of  the  spiritual  experiences  and  memorable  sayings
of  Shaykh  Abu  Sa'id,  for  the  encouragement  of  those  who
desired  to  enter  upon  the  Path  (tariqa)  and  for  the  guidance  of
those  who  were  travelling  on  the  road  of  the  Truth  (haqiqa)1.
Abu  Sa'id  died  in  A.D.  1049,  and  the  Asrdru  'l-tawhid  was
probably  completed  not  less  than  120  or  more  than  150  years
later.  As  Zhukovski  points  out,  it  is  almost  the  first  example
in  Persian  of  a  separate  work  having  for  its  subject  the  life  of
an  individual  mystic.  The  portrait  of  Abu  Sa'fd  amidst  the
circle  of  §ufis  and  dervishes  in  which  he  lived  is  drawn  with
extraordinary  richness  of  detail,  and  gains  in  vividness  as  well
as  in  value  from  the  fact  that  a  great  part  of  the  story  is  told
by  himself.  Although  the  Mohammedan  system  of  oral
tradition  by  which  these  autobiographical  passages  have  been
preserved  forbids  us  to  suppose  that  we  have  before  us  an
exact  transcript  of  Abu  Sa'id's  words  as  they  were  spoken
to  the  original  reporter,  there  is  no  reason  to  doubt  that  in
most  cases  the  substance  of  them  is  given  correctly.  His  own
veracity  is  not  incontestable,  but  this  question,  which  leads
at  once  into  the  darkest  abysses  of  psychology,  I  must  leave
in  suspense.

1  Asrdr,  4,  16 — 6,  5.

l]  Abu  Sa'id  ibn  Abi  'l-Khayr  3

The  Hdldt  u  Sukhundn  and  the  Asrdru  'l-tawhid  render  the
more  recent  biographies  of  Abu  Sa'id  all  but  superfluous1.  A
certain  amount  of  new  material  is  found  in  the  Supplement  to
Faridu'ddin  'Attar's  Tadhkiratu  'l-Awliyd  (vol.  n  of  my
edition,  pp.  322-337)  and  Jami's  Nafahdtu  'l-Uns  (ed.  by
Nassau  Lees,  No.  366) 2.

For  the  sake  of  clearness,  I  have  divided  the  following
study  into  three  sections,  of  which  the  first  deals  with  the  life
of  Abu  Sa'id,  the  second  with  his  mystical  sayings  and
doctrines,  and  the  third  with  miracles -and  other  matter
belonging  to  his  legend.

I.

Abu  Sa'id  Fadlu'llah  was  born  at  Mayhana,  the  chief  town
of  the  Khawaran  district  of  Khurasan,  on  the  ist  of  Muharram,
A.H.  357  (December  7th,  A.D.  967).  His  father  Abu  '1-Khayr,
known  in  Mayhana  as  Babii  Bu  '1-Khayr,  was  a  druggist,  "a
pious  and  religious  man,  well  acquainted  with  the  sacred  law
of  Islam  (shari'a)  and  with  the  Path  of  Sufism  (tariqa)*."  He
and  other  Sufis  were  in  the  habit  of  meeting  every  night  in
the  house  of  one  of  their  number.  Whenever  a  strange  Sufi
arrived  in  the  town,  they  would  invite  him  to  join  them,  and
after  partaking  of  food  and  finishing  their  prayers  and
devotions  they  used  to  listen  to  music  and  singing  (sqmd').
One  night,  when  Babii  Bu  1-Khayr  was  going  to  meet  his
friends,  his  wife  begged  him  to  take  Abu  Sa'id  with  him  in
order  that  the  dervishes  might  look  on  him  with  favour;  so
Bu  '1-Khayr  let  the  lad  accompany  him.  As  soon  as  it  was  time
for  the  music  to  begin,  the  singer  (qawwdl)  chanted  this
quatrain :

God  gives  the  dervish  love — and  love  is  woe;

By  dying  near  and  dear  to  Him  they  grow.

The  generous  youth  will  freely  yield  his  life,

The  man  of  God  cares  naught  for  worldly  show.

1  In  referring  to  these  two  works  I  shall  use  the  abbreviations  H  =  Hdldt
and  A  =Asrdr.  Since  A  includes  almost  the  whole  of  H,  I  have  usually  given
references  to  the  former  only.

2  The  oldest  notice  of  Abu  Sa'fd  occurs  in  the  Kashf  al-Mahjtib  of  his
contemporary,  Hujwiri,  who  mentions  him  frequently  in  the  course  of  that
work. See  especially  pp.  164-6  of  the  translation.  3  A  13,  4.

4  Studies  in  Islamic  Mysticism  [CH.

On  hearing  this  song  the  dervishes  fell  into  ecstasy  and  kept
up  the  dance  till  daybreak.  The  qawwdl  sang  the  quatrain
so  often  that  AM  Sa'fd  got  it  by  heart.  When  he  returned
home,  he  asked  his  father  the  meaning  of  the  verses  that  had
thrown  the  dervishes  into  such  transports  of  joy.  "Hush!"
said  his  father,  "you  cannot  understand  what  they  mean:
what  does  it  matter  to  you?"  Afterwards,  when  Abu  Sa'id
had  attained  to  a  high  spiritual  degree,  he  used  sometimes
to  say  of  his  father,  who  was  then  dead,  "I  want  Babii  Bu
'1-Khayr  to-day,  to  tell  him  that  he  himself  did  not  know  the
meaning  of  what  he  heard  on  that  night1."

Abu  Sa'id  was  taught  the  first  rudiments  of  Moslem
education — to  read  the  Koran — by  Abu  Muhammad  'Ayyari,
an  eminent  divine,  who  is  buried  at  Nasa2.  He  learned
grammar  from  Abu  Sa'id  'Ayyari  and  the  principles  of  Islam
from  Abu  '1-Qasim  Bishr-i  Yasin,  both  of  Mayhana.  The  latter
seems  to  have  been  a  remarkable  man.

I  have  already  referred  to  the  mystical  quatrains  which
Abu  Sa'id  was  fond  of  quoting  in  his  discourses  and  which  are
commonly  thought  to  be  his  own.  Against  this  hypothesis  we
have  his  definite  statement  that  these  quatrains  were  com-
posed by  other  Sufis  and  that  Bishr-i  Yasin  was  the  author
of  most  of  them3.  From  Bishr,  too,  Abii  Sa'id  learned  the
doctrine  of  disinterested  love,  which  is  the  basis  of  §ufism.

1  A  13,  9.  *  H  8,  io.  A  14,  16.

*  H  54,  3.  The  following  is  a  translation  of  the  text  as  it  stands  in
Zhukovski's  edition:  "Whenever  I  have  addressed  poetry  to  any  one,  that
which  falls  from  my  lips  is  the  composition  of  venerable  Stiffs  ('azizdn),  and
most  of  it  is  by  Shaykh  Abu  '1-Qasim  Bishr."  I  am  not  sure  that  instead

of  the  first  clause  (^l Al*X>  jjL* \j£a  jJ* L«)  we  ought  not  to  read

^1  4IA5O  js&  j-$S*  \+-  The  statement  will  then  run:  "I  have  never
composed  poetry.  That  which  falls  from  my  lips,  etc."  In  another  passage
(A  263,  io)  it  is  stated  on  the  authority  of  the  writer's  grandfather  (Abu
Sa'id's  grandson)  that  of  all  the  poetry  attributed  to  Abu  Sa'fd  only  one
verse  and  one  rubd'i,  which  are  cited,  were  his  own  composition,  the
remainder  being  quoted  from  his  spiritual  directors.  The  credibility  of  this
is  not  affected  by  the  explanation  that  he  was  too  absorbed  in  ecstasy  to
think  about  versifying.  In  addition  to  the  single  rubd'i,  of  which  Abu  Sa'id
is  expressly  named  as  the  author,  H  and  A  contain  twenty-six  which  he
is  said  to  have  quoted  on  different  occasions.  Of  the  latter,  two  occur  in
Ethe's  collection  (Nos.  35  and  68).

I]  Abu  Sa'id  ibn  Abi  yl-Khayr  5

One  day  Abu  '1-Oa.sim  Bishr-i  Yasin  (may  God  sanctify  his
honoured  spirit !)  said  to  me:  "O  Abu  Sa'id,  endeavour  to  remove
self-interest  (tama1)  from  thy  dealings  with  God.  So  long  as  that
exists,  sincerity  (ikhlds)  cannot  be  attained.  Devotions  inspired  by
self-interest  are  work  done  for  wages,  but  devotions  inspired  by
sincerity  are  work  done  to  serve  God.  Learn  by  heart  the  Tradition
of  the  Prophet — God  said  to  me  on  the  night  of  my  Ascension,  0
Mohammed!  as  for  those  who  would  draw  nigh  to  Me,  their  best  means
of  drawing  nigh  is  by  performance  of  the  obligations  which  I  have  laid
upon  them.  My  servant  continually  seeks  to  win  My  favour  by  works
of  supererogation  until  I  love  him;  and  when  I  love  him,  I  am  to  him
an  ear  and  an  eye  and  a  hand  and  a  helper:  through  Me  he  hears,  and
through  Me  he  sees,  and  through  Me  he  takes."  Bishr  explained  that
to  perform  obligations  means  "to  serve  God,"  while  to  do  works
of  supererogation  means  "to  love  God";  then  he  recited  these
lines :

Perfect  love  proceeds  from  the  lover  who  hopes  naught  for  himself;
What  is  there  to  desire  in  that  which  has  a  price?
Certainly  the  Giver  is  better  for  you  than  the  gift :
How  should  you  want  the  gift,  when  you  possess  the  very
Philosopher's  Stone1?

On  another  occasion  Bishr  taught  his  young  pupil  how  to
practise  "recollection"  (dhikr).  "Do  you  wish,"  he  asked  him,
"to  talk  with  God? "  "Yes,  of  course  I  do,"  said  Abu  Sa'id.
Bishr  told  him  that  whenever  he  was  alone  he  must  recite  the
following  quatrain,  no  more  and  no  less :
Without  Thee,  O  Beloved,  I  cannot  rest;
Thy  goodness  towards  me  I  cannot  reckon.
Tho'  every  hair  on  my  body  becomes  a  tongue,
A  thousandth  part  of  the  thanks  due  to  Thee  I  cannot  tell.

Abu  Sa'id  was  constantly  repeating  these  words.  "By  the
blessing  which  they  brought,"  he  says,  "the  Way  to  God  was
opened  to  me  in  my  childhood."  Bishr  died  in  A.H.  380
(A.D.  990).  Whenever  Abu  Sa'id  went  to  the  graveyard  of
Mayhana  his  first  visit  was  always  paid  to  the  tomb  of  the
venerated  teacher  who  had  given  him  his  first  lesson  in
Sufism2.

1  A  16,  9.  a  A  16,  20.

6  Studies  in  Islamic  Mysticism  [CH.

If  we  can  believe  Abu  Sa'id  when  he  declares  that  in  his
youth  he  knew  by  heart  30,000  verses  of  pre-Islamic  poetry,
his  knowledge  of  profane  literature  must  have  been  extensive1.
After  completing  this  branch  of  education,  he  set  out  for
Merv  with  the  purpose  of  studying  theology  under  Abu
'Abdallah  al-Husri,  a  pupil  of  the  famous  Shafi'ite  doctor,
Ibn  Surayj.  He  read  with  al-Husrf  for  five  years,  and  with
Abu  Bakr  al-Qaffal  for  five  more2.  From  Merv  he  moved  to
Sarakhs,  where  he  attended  the  lectures  of  Abu  'All  Zahir3
on  Koranic  exegesis  (in  the  morning),  on  systematic  theology
(at  noon),  and  on  the  Traditions  of  the  Prophet  (in  the
afternoon)4.

Abu  Sa'id's  birth  and  death  are  the  only  events  of  his  life
to  which  a  precise  date  is  attached.  We  know  that  he  studied
at  Merv  for  ten  years,  and  if  we  assume  that  his  W under jahre
began  at  the  usual  time,  he  was  probably  between  25  and  28
when  he  first  came  to  Sarakhs.  Here  his  conversion  to  Sufism
took  place.  He  has  described  it  himself  in  the  following
narrative,  which  I  will  now  translate  without  abridgement.
I  have  relegated  to  the  foot  of  the  page,  and  distinguished  by
means  of  square  brackets,  certain  passages  that  interrupt  the
narrative  and  did  not  form  part  of  it  originally.

Abu  Sa'fd  said  as  follows5:

At  the  time  when  I  was  a  student,  I  lived  at  Sarakhs  and  read
with  Abu  'Alf,  the  doctor  of  divinity.  One  day,  as  I  was  going  into
the  city,  I  saw  Luqman  of  Sarakhs  seated  on  an  ash-heap  near  the
gate,  sewing  a  patch  on  his  gaberdine".  I  went  up  to  him  and

0  [This  Luqmcin  was  one  of  the  "intelligent  madmen  "  ('uqald'u  'l-majdnin)6.
At  first  he  practised  many  austerities  and  was  scrupulous  in  his  devotions.
Then  of  a  sudden  he  experienced  a  revelation  (kashf)  that  deprived  him  of
his  reason.  Abu  Sa'id  said:  "In  the  beginning  Luqman  was  a  man  learned

1 H  8,  20. A  17,  16.  a  H  9,  i.  A  17,  18;  22,  6.

»  Died  A.H.  389  (A.D.  999). See  Subkf,  Tabaqdtu  'l-Shdfi'iyya  al-Kubrd,
Cairo,  A.H.  1324,  H.  223. Yaqut,  Mu'jamu  'l-Bulddn,  iv.  72,  12.
«  A  22,  14.

*  H  10,  14 — 12.  7. A  23,  6 — 26,  10.  There  is  not  much  to  choose  between
the  two  versions. I  have  generally  preferred  the  latter,  which  adds  some
interesting  details,  although  it  is  not  quite  so  tersely  and  simply  written.

•  Concerning  this  numerous  class  of  Mohammedan  mystics  see Paul
Loosen,  Die  weisen  Narren  des  Naisdburl  (Strassburg,  1912).

I]  Abu  Sa'id  ibn  Abi  'l-Khayr  7

stood  looking  at  him,  while  he  continued  to  sew6.  As  soon  as  he
had  sewn  the  patch  on,  he  said,  "O  Abu  Sa'id !  I  have  sewn  thee
on  this  gaberdine  along  with  the  patch."  Then  he  rose  and  took
my  hand,  leading  me  to  the  convent  (khdnaqdh)  of  the  Sufis  in
Sarakhs,  and  shouted  for  Shaykh  Abu  '1-Fadl  Hasan,  who  was
within.  When  Abu  1-Fadl  appeared,  Luqman  placed  my  hand  in
his,  saying,  "  O  Abu  '1-Fadl,  watch  over  this  young  man,  for  he  is
one  of  youc."  The  Shaykh  took  my  hand  and  led  me  into  the
convent.  I  sat  down  in  the  portico  and  the  Shaykh  picked  up  a
volume  and  began  to  peruse  it.  As  is  the  way  of  scholars,  I  could
not  help  wondering  what  the  book  was.  The  Shaykh  perceived
my  thought.  "  Abu  Sa'id ! "  he  said,  "  all  the  hundred  and  twenty-
four  thousand  prophets  were  sent  to  preach  one  word.  They  bade
the  people  say  'Allah '  and  devote  themselves  to  Him.  Those  who
heard  this  word  with  the  ear  alone,  let  it  go  out  by  the  other  ear;
but  those  who  heard  it  with  their  souls  imprinted  it  on  their  souls
and  repeated  it  until  it  penetrated  their  hearts  and  souls,  and  their
whole  being  became  this  word.  They  were  made  independent  of
the  pronunciation  of  the  word,  they  were  released  from  the  sound
and  the  letters.  Having  understood  the  spiritual  meaning  of  this
word,  they  became  so  absorbed  in  it  that  they  were  no  more
conscious  of  their  own  non-existence1."  This  saying  took  hold  of  me

in  the  law  and  pious,  but  afterwards  he  ceased  to  perform  the  duties  of
religion.  When  he  was  asked  how  this  change  had  come  to  pass,  he  replied :
'  The  more  I  served  God,  the  more  service  was  required  of  me.  In  my  despair
I  cried,  "O  God!  kings  set  free  a  slave  when  he  grows  old.  Thou  art  the
Almighty  King.  Set  me  free,  for  I  have  grown  old  in  Thy  service."  I  heard
a  voice  that  said,  "Luqman !  I  set  thee  free." '  "  The  sign  of  his  freedom  was
that  his  reason  was  taken  away  from  him.  Abu  Sa'id  used  often  to  say  that
Luqman  was  one  whom  God  had  emancipated  from  his  commandments.]

6  [Abu  Sa'id  was  standing  in  such  a  position  that  his  shadow  fell  on
Luqman's  gaberdine.]

e  [Shaykh  Abu  '1-Fadl  was  exceedingly  venerable.  When,  after  the  death
of  Abu  '1-Fadl,  Abu  Sa'id  became  an  adept  in  mysticism,  he  was  asked  what
was  the  cause  of  his  having  attained  to  such  a  degree  of  perfection.  He
answered.  "  The  cause  was  a  look  that  Shaykh  Abu  '1-Fadl  gave  me.  I  was
a  student  of  theology  under  Shaykh  Abu  'All.  One  day,  when  I  was  walking
on  the  bank  of  a  stream,  Shaykh  Abu  '1-Fadl  approached  from  the  opposite
direction  and  looked  at  me  out  of  the  corner  of  his  eye.  From  that  day  to
this,  all  my  spiritual  possessions  are  the  result  of  that  look."]

1  This  rendering  of  Abu  '1-Fadl's  admonition  agrees  with  H  n,  5  foil.,
where  the  text  is  given  most  fully.

8  Studies  in  Islamic  Mysticism  [CH.

and  did  not  allow  me  to  sleep  that  night.  In  the  morning,  when  I
had  finished  my  prayers  and  devotions,  I  went  to  the  Shaykh
before  sunrise  and  asked  permission  to  attend  Abu  'All's  lecture
on  Koranic  exegesis.  He  began  his  lecture  with  the  verse,  Say
Allah!  then  leave  them  to  amuse  themselves  in  their  folly'1.  At  the
moment  of  hearing  this  word  a  door  in  my  breast  was  opened,  and
I  was  rapt  from  myself.  The  Imam  Abu  'Ali  observed  the  change
in  me  and  asked,  "Where  were  you  last  night?"  I  said,  "With
Abu  '1-Fadl  Hasan."  He  ordered  me  to  rise  and  go  back  to  Abu
'1-Fadl,  saying,  "It  is  unlawful  for  you  to  come  from  that  subject
(Sufism)  to  this  discourse."  I  returned  to  the  Shaykh,  distraught
and  bewildered,  for  I  had  entirely  lost  myself  in  this  word.  When
Abu  '1-Fadl  saw  me,  he  said:  "Abu  Sa'id!

mastak  shuda'i  hami  naddni  pas  u  pish2.
Thou  art  drunk,  poor  youth! Thou  know'st  not  head  from  tail."

"O  Shaykh ! "  I  said,  "what  is  thy  command? "  He  said,  "Come
in  and  sit  down  and  devote  thyself  wholly  to  this  word,  for  this
word  hath  much  work  to  do  with  thee."  After  I  had  stayed  with
him  for  a  long  time,  duly  performing  all  that  was  required  by  this
word,  he  said  to  me  one  day,  "  O  Abu  Sa'id !  the  doors  of  the  letters
of  this  word3  have  been  opened  to  thee.  Now  the  hosts  (of  spiritual
grace)  will  rush  into  thy  breast,  and  thou  wilt  experience  diverse
kinds  of  self-culture  (adab)."  Then  he  exclaimed,  "  Thou  hast  been
transported,  transported,  transported!  Go  and  seek  a  place  of
solitude,  and  turn  aside  from  men  as  thou  hast  turned  aside  from
thyself,  and  behave  with  patience  and  resignation  to  God's  will."
I  abandoned  my  studies  and  came  home  to  Mayhana  and  retired
into  the  niche  of  the  chapel  in  my  own  house.  There  I  sat  for  seven
years,  saying  continually,  "Allah!  Allah!  Allah!"  Whenever
drowsiness  or  inattention  arising  from  the  weakness  of  human
nature  came  over  me,  a  soldier  with  a  fiery  spear — the  most
terrible  and  alarming  figure  that  can  possibly  be  imagined —
appeared  in  front  of  the  niche4  and  shouted  at  me,  saying,  "  O  Abu
Sa'id,  say  Allah ! "  The  dread  of  that  apparition  used  to  keep  me

1  Kor.  6,  91.

*  Though  printed  as  prose  in  both  texts,  this  line  appears  to  belong  to  a
rubd'i,  since  it  is  written  in  one  of  the  metres  peculiar  to  that  form  of  verse.

'  According  to  H:  "the  doors  of  the  spiritual  gifts  (a*.^I»)  of  this
word."  ^

4  H  has  merely:  "a  terrible  figure  appeared  in  front  of  the  niche."

I]  Abu  Sa'id  ibn  Abi  'l-Khayr  9

burning  and  trembling  for  whole  days  and  nights,  so  that  I  did  not
again  fall  asleep  or  become  inattentive;  and  at  last  every  atom  of
me  began  to  cry  aloud,  "Allah !  Allah !  Allah ! "

Countless  records  of  mystical  conversion  bear  witness  to
the  central  fact  in  this  description — the  awakening  of  the
soul  in  response  to  some  unsuspected  stimulus,  by  which,  as
Arnold  says,

A  bolt  is  shot  back  somewhere  in  the  breast,

opening  a  way  for  the  flood  of  transcendental  consciousness
to  burst  through.  The  accompanying  ecstasy  is  a  normal
feature,  and  so  is  the  abandonment  of  past  occupations,  habits,
ambitions,  and  the  fixing  of  every  faculty  upon  that  supreme
reality  which  is  henceforth  the  single  object  of  desire.  All
these  phenomena,  however  sudden  they  may  seem,  are  the
climax  of  an  interior  conflict  that  perhaps  only  makes  itself
known  at  the  moment  when  it  is  already  decided.  Probably
in  Abu  Sa'id's  case  the  process  was  at  least  to  some  extent
a  conscious  one.  He  had  been  long  and  earnestly  engaged  in
the  study  of  theology.

I  possessed  many  books  and  papers,  but  though  I  used  to  turn
them  over  and  read  them  one  after  the  other,  I  was  never  finding
any  peace.  I  prayed  to  God,  saying,  "O  Lord,  nothing  is  revealed
to  my  heart  by  all  this  study  and  learning:  it  causes  me  to  lose
Thee,  O  God !  Let  me  be  able  to  do  without  it  by  giving  me  some-
thing in  which  I  shall  find  Thee  again1. 'X

Here  Abu  Sa'id  acknowledges  that  he  sought  spiritual  peace,
and  that  all  his  efforts  to  win  it  from  intellectual  proofs  ended
in  failure.  The  history  of  that  struggle  is  unwritten,  but  not
until  the  powers  of  intellect  were  fully  tried  and  shown  to  be
of  no  avail,  could  mightier  forces  drawn  from  a  deeper  source
come  overwhelmingly  into  action.  As  regards  the  perpetual
iteration  of  the  name  Allah,  I  need  hardly  remind  my  readers
that  this  is  a  method  everywhere  practised  by  Moslem
mystics  for  bringing  about  fand,  i.e.  the  passing-away  from
self,  or  in  Pascal's  phrase,  "oubli  du  monde  et  de  tout  hormis
Dieu."

1  A  50,  12.

io  Studies  in  Islamic  Mysticism  [CH.

We  have  seen  that  the  first  act  of  Abu  Sa'fd  after  his
conversion  was  to  enquire  of  Shaykh  Abu  '1-Fadl  what  he
must  do  next.  That  is  to  say,  he  had  implicitly  accepted  Abu
'1-Fadl  as  his  spiritual  director,  in  accordance  with  the  rule
that  "if  any  one  by  means  of  asceticism  and  self-mortifica-
tion shall  have  risen  to  an  exalted  degree  of  mystical  experience,
without  having  a  Pir  to  whose  authority  and  example  he  submits
himself,  the  Sufis  do  not  regard  him  as  belonging  to  their
community1."  In  this  way  a  continuous  tradition  of  mystical
doctrine  is  secured,  beginning  with  the  Prophet  and  carried
down  through  a  series  of  dead  Pirs  to  the  living  director  who
forms  the  last  link  of  the  chain  until  he  too  dies  and  is
succeeded  by  one  of  his  pupils.

Abu  Sa'id's  lineage  as  a  Sufi  is  given  in  the  following
table:

Mohammed,  the  Prophet

'All  (ob.  A.D.  661)

I
Hasan  of  Basra  (ob.  A.D.  728)

I

Habib  'Ajami  (ob.  A.D.  737)

I

Dawud  Ja'f  (ob.  A.D.  781)

i

Ma'riif  Karkhi  (ob.  A.D.  815)

I
Sari  Saqati  (ob.  A.D.  867)

'  I
Junayd  of  Baghdad  (ob.  A.D.  909)

I

Murta'ish  of  Baghdad  (ob.  A.D.  939)

I

AbiS  Nasr  al-Sarraj  of  Jus  (ob.  A.D.  988)

I
Abu  '1-Fadl  Hasan  of  Sarakhs

Abu  Sa'fd  ibn  Abi  '1-Khayr
1  A  55,  15.

I]  Abu  Sa'id  ibn  Abi  'l-Khayr  1 1

The  appearance  of  Mohammed  and  his  son-in-law  at  the
head  of  a  list  of  this  kind  fits  in  with  the  fiction — which  was
necessary  for  the  existence  of  Sufism  within  Islam — that  the
Sufis  are  the  legitimate  heirs  and  true  interpreters  of  the
esoteric  teaching  of  the  Prophet.  Hasan  of  Basra,  Habib
*  Ajami,  and  Dawud  Ta'i  were  ascetics  and  quietists  rather  than
mystics.  Even  if  we  take  the  ninth  century  as  a  starting-
point,  it  must  not  be  supposed  that  any  fixed  body  of  doctrine
was  handed  down.  Such  a  thing  is  foreign  to  the  nature  of
Sufism,  which  essentially  is  not  a  system  based  on  authority
and  tradition,  but  a  free  movement  assuming  infinitely
various  forms  in  obedience  to  the  inner  light  of  the  individual
soul.  Before  the  time  of  Abu  Sa'id,  certain  eminent  theoso-
phists — Junayd,  for  instance — had  founded  schools  which
owed  their  origin  to  controversies  over  particular  questions
of  mystical  theory  and  practice,  while  at  a  later  period  Sufism
branched  off  into  great  organisations  comparable  to  the
Christian  monastic  orders.  Everywhere  we  find  divergent
tendencies  asserting  themselves  and  freely  developing  a
vigorous  life.

There  is  no  difficulty  in  believing  that  Abu  Sa'id,  after
passing  through  the  spiritual  crisis  which  has  been  described,
returned  to  Mayhana  and  spent  some  time  in  solitary  medita-
tion, though  doubts  are  suggested  by  the  statement,  which
occurs  in  the  two  oldest  biographies,  that  his  seclusion
(khalwat)  lasted  for  seven  years.  According  to  the  Hdldt  u
Sukhundn,  at  the  end  of  this  period — Shaykh  Abu  '1-Fadl
having  died  in  the  meanwhile — he  journeyed  to  Amul  in
order  to  visit  Shaykh  Abu  '!-' Abbas  Qassab1.  The  Asrdr,
however,  mentions  a  second  period  during  which  he  practised
the  most  severe  austerities,  first  at  Sarakhs  under  the  care  of
Shaykh  Abu  '1-Fadl  and  then,  for  seven  years2,  in  the  deserts
and  mountains  of  Mayhana,  until  at  the  age  of  40  he  attained
to  perfect  saintship.  These  numbers  can  only  be  regarded  as
evidence  of  a  desire  to  make  him  exemplify  a  theoretically
symmetrical  scheme  of  the  mystic's  progress  towards  per-
fection, but  it  is  none  the  less  probable  that  for  many  years
1  H  12,  7.  2  A  41,  3.

12  Studies  in  Islamic  Mysticism  [CH.

after  his  conversion  Abu  Sa'id  was  painfully  treading  the  via
purgativa ,  which  Sufis  call ' '  the  Path ' '  (tariqa) .  His  biographers
give  an  interesting  account  of  his  self-mortification  (mujd-
hada).  The  details  are  derived  either  from  his  public  dis-
courses or  from  the  testimony  of  eye-witnesses1.

The  author  of  the  Asrdr  relates  that  after  seven  years  of
solitary  retirement  Abu  Sa'id  came  back  to  Shaykh  Abu
'1-Fadl,  who  gave  him  a  cell  opposite  his  own,  in  order  that  he
might  keep  him  always  under  observation,  and  prescribed
such  moral  and  ascetic  discipline  as  was  necessary2.  When
some  time  had  passed,  he  was  transferred  to  the  cell  of  Abu
'1-Fadl  himself  and  subjected  to  still  closer  supervision
(murdqabat-i  ahwdl).  We  are  not  told  how  long  he  remained
in  the  convent  at  Sarakhs.  At  last  Abu  '1-Fadl  bade  him  return
to  Mayhana  and  take  care  of  his  mother.  Here  he  lived  in
a  cell,  apparently  in  his  father's  house,  though  he  also
frequented  several  cloisters  in  the  neighbourhood,  especially
one  known  as  "The  Old  Cloister"  (Ribdt-i  Kuhan)  on  the  Merv
road3.  Among  the  ascetic  exercises  in  which  he  was  now
constantly  engaged  the  following  are  recorded4:

He  showed  excessive  zeal  in  his  religious  ablutions,
emptying  a  number  of  water- jugs  for  every  single  wutfu'.

He  was  always  washing  the  door  and  walls  of  his  cell.

He  never  leaned  against  any  door  or  wall,  or  rested  his
body  on  wood  or  on  a  cushion,  or  reclined  on  a  couch.

All  the  time  he  wore  only  one  shirt,  which  gradually
increased  in  weight  because,  whenever  it  was  torn,  he  would
sew  a  patch  on  it.  At  last  it  weighed  20  maunds.

He  never  quarrelled  with  any  one  nor  spoke  to  any  one,
except  when  necessity  forced  him  to  do  so.

He  ate  no  food  by  day,  and  broke  his  fast  with  nothing
more  than  a  piece  of  bread.

He  did  not  sleep  by  day  or  night  but  shut  himself  in  his
cell,  where  he  had  made  an  excavation  in  the  wall,  just  high
and  broad  enough  to  stand  in,  which  could  be  closed  by  means

1  H  1 8,  17.  About  200  of  Abu  Sa'id's  discourses  were  in  circulation  when
the  Hdldt  u  Sukhundn  was  written  (H  55,  21).

1  A  26,  10;  27,  2.  *  A  27,  17;  30,  7.  *  A  27,  18.

I]  Abu  Sa'id  ibn  Abi  yl-Khayr  13

of  a  door.  He  used  to  stand  here  and  close  the  door  and  occupy
himself  with  recollection  (dhikr),  stuffing  his  ears  with  cotton-
wool in  order  that  no  disturbing  sound  might  reach  him,  and
that  his  attention  might  remain  concentrated.  At  the  same
time  he  never  ceased  to  watch  over  his  inmost  self  (murd-
qabat-i  sirr),  in  order  that  no  thought  except  of  God  might
cross  his  mind1.

After  a  while  he  became  unable  to  bear  the  society  or  even
the  sight  of  men.  He  wandered  alone  in  desert  and  mountainous
places  and  would  often  disappear  for  a  month  or  more.  His
father  used  to  go  in  search  of  him  and  find  out  where  he  was
from  labourers  or  travellers  who  had  seen  him.  To  please  his
father,  he  would  come  home,  but  ere  long  he  would  feel  the
presence  of  human  creatures  to  be  unendurable  and  would
again  flee  to  mountains  and  wildernesses,  where  he  was
sometimes  seen  roaming  with  a  venerable  old  man  clad  in
white  raiment.  Many  years  afterwards,  when  Abu  Sa'id  had
risen  to  eminence,  he  declared  to  those  who  questioned  him
that  this  old  man  was  the  prophet  Khadir2.

Although  he  was  carefully  watched,  Abu  Sa'id  contrived
to  escape  from  his  father's  house  night  after  night.  On  one
occasion  his  father  (who  felt  a  natural  anxiety  as  to  the  object
of  these  nocturnal  excursions)  followed  him,  unperceived,  at
a  little  distance.

My  son  (he  relates)  walked  on  until  he  reached  the  Old  Cloister
(Ribdt-i  Kuhari).  He  entered  it  and  shut  the  gate  behind  him,
while  I  went  up  on  the  roof.  I  saw  him  go  into  a  chapel,  which  was
in  the  ribdt,  and  close  the  door.  Looking  through  the  chapel
window,  I  waited  to  see  what  would  happen.  There  was  a  stick
lying  on  the  floor,  and  it  had  a  rope  fastened  to  it.  He  took  up  the
stick  and  tied  the  end  of  the  rope  to  his  foot.  Then,  laying  the  stick
across  the  top  of  a  pit  that  was  at  the  corner  of  the  chapel,  he  slung
himself  into  the  pit  head  downwards,  and  began  to  recite  the
Koran.  He  remained  in  that  posture  until  daybreak,  when,  having
recited  the  whole  Koran,  he  raised  himself  from  the  pit,  replaced
the  stick  where  he  had  found  it,  opened  the  door,  came  out  of
the  chapel,  and  commenced  to  perform  his  ablution  in  the  middle

1  A  28,  8.  2  A  28,  15.

14  Studies  in  Islamic  Mysticism  [CH.

of  the  ribdt.  I  descended  from  the  roof,  hastened  home,  and  slept
until  he  came  in1.

The  following  passage  illustrates  another  side  of  Abu
Sa'id's  asceticism.  He  said,

One  day  I  said  to  myself,  "  Knowledge,  works,  meditation — I
have  them  all;  now  I  want  to  become  absent  from  them  (ghaybati
az  in}."  On  consideration  I  saw  that  the  only  way  to  attain  this
was  by  acting  as  a  servant  to  the  dervishes,  for  when  God  wishes  to
benefit  a  man,  He  shows  to  him  the  path  of  self-abasement.  Accordingly
I  made  it  my  business  to  wait  upon  them,  and  I  used  to  clean  their
cells  and  privies  and  lavatories.  I  persevered  in  this  work  for  a
long  time,  until  it  became  a  habit.  Then  I  resolved  to  beg  for  the
dervishes,  which  seemed  to  me  the  hardest  thing  I  could  lay  upon
myself.  At  first,  when  people  saw  me  begging,  they  would  give
me  a  piece  of  gold,  but  soon  it  was  only  copper,  and  by  degrees  it
came  down  to  a  single  raisin  or  nut.  In  the  end  even  this  was
refused.  One  day  I  was  with  a  number  of  dervishes,  and  there  was
nothing  to  be  got  for  them.  For  their  sake  I  parted  with  the  turban
I  had  on  my  head,  then  I  sold  one  after  the  other  my  slippers,  the
lining  of  my  jubba,  the  cloth  of  which  it  was  made,  and  the  cotton
quilting2.

During  the  period  of  ascetic  discipline  which  he  underwent
at  Mayhana,  Abu  Sa'id  sometimes  visited  Sarakhs  for  the
purpose  of  receiving  spiritual  guidance  from  Shaykh  Abu
'1-Fadl.  His  biographer  says  that  he  travelled  on  his  bare  feet,
but  if  we  may  trust  'Abdu  '1-Samad,  one  of  his  disciples,  he
usually  flew  through  the  air ;  it  is  added  that  this  phenomenon
was  witnessed  only  by  persons  of  mystical  insight3.  According
to  the  Asrdr,  he  returned  to  Abu  '1-Fadl  for  another  year's
training  and  was  then  sent  by  him  to  Abu  'Abd  al-Rahman
al-Sulami,  who  invested  him  with  the  patched  frock  (khirqa)
that  proclaims  the  wearer  to  be  a  recognised  member  of  the
brotherhood  of  Stiffs4.  Al-Sulami  of  Nishapiir  (ob.  A.D.  1021), ,
a  pupil  of  Abu  '1-Qasim  al-Nasrabadf ,  was  a  celebrated  mystic.
He  is  the  author  of  the  Tdbaqdtu  'l-Sufiyya — biographies  of
the  early  Sufi  Shaykhs — and  other  important  works.

On  Abu  Sa'id's  return,  Shaykh  Abu  '1-Fadl  said  to  him,

1  A  32,  4.  »  A  34,  5.  »  A  35,  4.  «  A  35,  15.

I]  Abu  Scfid  ibn  Abi  'l-Khayr  15

"Now  all  is  finished.  You  must  go  to  Mayhana  and  call  the
people  to  God  and  admonish  them  and  show  them  the  way
to  the  Truth."  He  came  back  to  Mayhana,  as  his  Director
enjoined,  but  instead  of  contenting  himself  with  Abu  '1-FadTs
assurance  that  all  was  now  finished,  he  increased  his  austerities
and  was  more  assiduous  than  ever  in  his  devotions.  In  the
following  discourse  he  refers  to  the  veneration  which  the  people
began  to  manifest  towards  him  at  this  time1.

When  I  was  a  novice,  I  bound  myself  to  do  eighteen  things :
I  fasted  continually ;  I  abstained  from  unlawful  food ;  I  practised
recollection  (dhikr)  uninterruptedly;  I  kept  awake  at  night;  I
never  reclined  on  the  ground ;  I  never  slept  but  in  a  sitting  posture ;
I  sat  facing  the  Ka'ba;  I  never  leaned  against  anything;  I  never
looked  at  a  handsome  youth  or  at  women  whom  it  would  have  been
unlawful  for  me  to  see  unveiled;  I  did  not  beg;  I  was  content  and
resigned  to  God's  will ;  I  always  sat  in  the  mosque  and  did  not  go
into  the  market,  because  the  Prophet  said  that  the  market  is  the
filthiest  of  places  and  the  mosque  the  cleanest.  In  all  my  acts
I  was  a  follower  of  the  Prophet.  Every  four-and-twenty  hours  I
completed  a  recitation  of  the  Koran.  In  my  seeing  I  was  blind,
in  my  hearing  deaf,  in  my  speaking  dumb.  For  a  whole  year
I  conversed  with  no  one.  People  called  me  a  lunatic,  and  I  allowed
them  to  give  me  that  name,  relying  on  the  Tradition  that  a  man's
faith  is  not  made  perfect  until  he  is  supposed  to  be  mad.  I
performed  everything  that  I  had  read  or  heard  of  as  having  been
done  or  commanded  by  the  Prophet.  Having  read  that  when  he
was  wounded  in  the  foot  in  the  battle  of  Uhud,  he  stood  on  his
toes  in  order  to  perform  his  devotions — for  he  could  not  set  the
sole  of  his  foot  upon  the  ground — I  resolved  to  imitate  him,  and
standing  on  tiptoe  I  performed  a  prayer  of  400  genuflexions.  I
modelled  my  actions,  outward  and  inward,  upon  the  Sunna  of  the
Prophet,  so  that  habit  at  last  became  nature.  Whatever  I  had
heard  or  found  in  books  concerning  the  acts  of  worship  performed
by  the  angels,  I  performed  the  same.  I  had  heard  and  seen  in
writing  that  some  angels  worship  God  on  their  heads.  Therefore  I
placed  my  head  on  the  ground  and  bade  the  blessed  mother  of  Abu
Tahir  tie  my  toe  with  a  cord  and  fasten  the  cord  to  a  peg  and  then

1  A  36,  8.

1 6  Studies  in  Islamic  Mysticism  [CH.

shut  the  door  behind  her.  Being  left  alone,  I  said,  "  O  Lord !  I  do
not  want  myself:  let  me  escape  from  myself!"  and  I  began  a
recitation  of  the  whole  Koran.  When  I  came  to  the  verse,  God  shall
suffice  thee  against  them,  for  He  heareth  and  knoweth  all1,  blood
poured  from  my  eyes  and  I  was  no  longer  conscious  of  myself.
Then  things  changed.  Ascetic  experiences  passed  over  me  of  a
kind  that  can  be  described  in  words 2,  and  God  strengthened  and
aided  me  therein,  but  I  fancied  that  all  these  acts  were  done  by  me.
The  grace  of  God  became  manifest  and  showed  me  that  this  was
not  so,  and  that  these  were  the  acts  of  divine  favour  and  grace.
I  repented  of  my  belief  and  realised  that  it  was  mere  self-conceit.
Now  if  you  say  that  you  will  not  tread  this  path  because  it  is  self-
conceit,  I  reply  that  your  refusal  to  tread  it  is  self-conceit.  Until
you  have  undergone  all  this,  its  self-conceit  will  not  be  revealed  to
you.  Self-conceit  appears  only  when  you  fulfil  the  Law,  for  self-
conceit  lies  in  religion,  and  religion  is  of  the  Law.  To  abstain  from
religious  acts  is  infidelity,  and  to  perform  such  acts  self-consciously
is  dualism.  If  "thou"  exists  and  "He"  exists,  "two"  exists;  and
that  is  dualism.  You  must  put  your  "self"  away  altogether.

I  had  a  cell  in  which  I  sat,  and  sitting  there  I  was  enamoured
of  passing-away  from  myself.  A  light  flashed  upon  me,  which
utterly  destroyed  the  darkness  of  my  being.  God  Almighty
revealed  to  me  that  I  was  neither  that  nor  this :  that  this  was  His
grace  even  as  that  was  His  gift.  So  it  came  to  pass  that  I  said :

When  I  mine  eyes  have  opened,  all  Thy  beauty  I  behold ;

When  I  tell  Thee  my  secret,  all  my  body  is  ensouled.

Methinks,  unlawful  'tis  for  me  to  talk  with  other  men,

But  when  with  Thee  I  am  talking,  ah !  the  tale  is  never  told.
Then  the  people  began  to  regard  me  with  great  approval.  Dis-
ciples gathered  round  me  and  were  converted  to  Sufism.  My
neighbours  too  showed  their  respect  for  me  by  ceasing  to  drink
wine.  This  proceeded  so  far  that  a  melon-skin  which  I  had  thrown
away  was  bought  for  twenty  pieces  of  gold.  One  day  when  I  was
riding  on  horseback,  my  horse  dropped  dung.  Eager  to  gain  a
blessing,  the  people  came  and  picked  up  the  dung  and  smeared
their  heads  and  faces  with  it.  After  a  time  it  was  revealed  to  me
that  I  was  not  the  real  object  of  their  veneration.  A  voice  cried
from  the  corner  of  the  mosque,  7s  not  thy  Lord  enough  for  thee*?

1  Kor.  2,  131.  -  Keading  O)Ufr.  3  Kor.  41,  53.

I]  Abu  Stfid  ibn  Abi  9l-Khayr  17

A  light  gleamed  in  my  breast,  and  most  veils  were  removed.  The
people  who  had  honoured  me  now  rejected  me,  and  even  went
before  the  cadi  to  bear  witness  that  I  was  an  infidel.  The  inhabitants
of  every  place  that  I  entered  declared  that  their  crops  would  not
grow  on  account  of  my  wickedness.  Once,  whilst  I  was  seated  in
the  mosque,  the  women  went  up  on  to  the  roof  and  bespattered
me  with  filth ;  and  still  I  heard  a  voice  saying,  7s  not  thy  Lord  enough
for  thee?  The  congregation  desisted  from  their  prayers,  saying,
"We  will  not  pray  together  so  long  as  this  madman  is  in  the
mosque."  Meanwhile  I  was  reciting  these  verses:

I  was  a  lion — the  fierce  pard  was  ware
Of  my  pursuit. I  conquered  everywhere.
But  since  I  drew  Thy  love  close  to  my  heart,
Lame  foxes  drive  me  from  my  forest-lair.

This  joyous  transport  was  followed  by  a  painful  contraction  (qabd).
I  opened  the  Koran,  and  my  eye  fell  on  the  verse,  We  will  prove  you
with  evil  and  with  good,  to  try  you;  and  unto  Us  shall  ye  return1,  as
though  God  said  to  me,  "  All  this  which  I  put  in  thy  way  is  a  trial.
If  it  is  good,  it  is  a  trial,  and  if  it  is  evil,  it  is  a  trial.  Do  not  stoop
to  good  or  to  evil,  but  dwell  with  Me!"  Once  more  my  "self"
vanished,  and  His  grace  was  all  in  all2.

After  the  death  of  his  father  and  mother— which  the
biographer  leaves  undated,  only  observing,  in  the  spirit  of  a
true  Sufi,  that  these  events  removed  the  obstacle  of  filial
affection  from  his  path — Abu  Sa'id  is  said  to  have  roamed  for
seven  years  in  the  deserts  between  Mayhana  and  Baward
(Abiward)  and  between  Merv  and  Sarakhs3.  He  then  returned
to  Mayhana.  By  this  time  Shaykh  Abu  '1-Fadl,  to  whom  he
had  hitherto  confided  all  his  perplexities,  was  dead.  Feeling
that  he  required  a  spiritual  Director,  Abu  Sa'id  set  out  for
Amul  in  Tabaristan,  whither  many  Sufis  were  flocking  in
consequence  of  the  fame  of  Shaykh  Abu  '!-' Abbas  Qassab.
He  was  accompanied  by  Ahmad  Najjar  and  Muhammad  Fadl,
his  disciple  and  lifelong  friend,  who  is  buried  at  Sarakhs.  They
journeyed  to  Baward  and  thence  along  the  Gaz  valley
(Darra-i  Gaz)  to  Nasa4.  At  Shah  Mayhana5,  a  village  in  this

1  Kor.  21,  36.  2  H  19,  6. A  37,  8.  3  A  40,  19.  4  A  43,  9.

5  According  to  the  Asrdr,  44,  9,  the  inhabitants  of  Baward  called  the

N.  S.  II  2

1 8  Studies  in  Islamic  Mysticism  [CH.

valley,  having  performed  their  ablutions  and  prayers  on  the
rocky  bank  of  a  stream,  they  were  approaching  the  tomb  of
Abu  'Ali  ^j*-^  (?),  which  it  was  their  purpose  to  visit,  when
they  saw  a  lad  driving  an  ox  and  ploughing,  and  on  the  edge  of
the  field  an  old  man  sowing  millet-seed.  The  old  man  seemed
to  have  lost  his  wits,  for  he  was  always  looking  towards  the
tomb  and  uttering  loud  cries.

"We  were  deeply  moved,"  said  Abu  Sa'fd,  "by  his  behaviour.
He  came  to  meet  us  and  salaamed  and  said, '  Can  you  lift  a  burden
from  my  breast? '  '  If  God  will,'  I  replied.  '  I  have  been  thinking,'
he  said,  'if  God,  when  He  created  the  world,  had  created  no
creatures  in  it;  and  if  He  had  filled  it  full  of  millet  from  East  to
West  and  from  earth  to  heaven ;  and  if  then  He  had  created  one
bird  and  bidden  it  eat  one  grain  of  this  millet  every  thousand
years;  and  if,  after  that,  He  had  created  a  man  and  had  kindled  in
his  heart  this  mystic  longing  and  had  told  him  that  he  would  never
win  to  his  goal  until  this  bird  left  not  a  single  millet-seed  in  the
whole  world,  and  that  he  would  continue  until  then  in  this  burning
pain  of  love — I  have  been  thinking,  it  would  still  be  a  thing  soon
ended ! '  The  words  of  the  old  peasant  (said  Abu  Sa'id)  made  all  the
mystery  plain  to  me1."

Nasa,  which  the  travellers  skirted  but  did  not  enter,  was
known  amongst  Sufis  by  the  name  of  "Little  Syria"  (Shdm-i
kuchak),  because  it  boasted  as  many  tombs  of  saints  as  Syria
of  prophets.  The  author  of  the  Asrdr  says  that  in  his  time  the
cemetery  overlooking  the  town  contained  400  sepulchres  of
great  Shaykhs  and  holy  men2.  The  prevailing  belief  that  the
sanctity  of  the  place  protected  it  from  devastation  he
declares  to  have  been  verified  by  what  he  himself  witnessed

village  Shamina  (tUg.«Ur)  or  Shahina  (A^fcli),  but  changed  its  name  to
Shah  Mayhana  (A^O  dlw)  on  the  suggestion  of  Abu  Sa'fd.  This  story
appears  to  indicate  that  dUy^«  was  pronounced  Mihna,  and  that  the  pro-
nunciation Mayhana  (which  I  have  adopted  in  deference  to  Yaqiit)  is  not

•  •

the  original  one.  In  this  case  A^A  and  Al^o,  the  two  names  of  the  town,

may  be  compared  with  such  parallel  forms  as  ^jl^y* ,  O^-VS"* ,  y+
etc. Sam'anf  gives .A^  (Mlhani)  as  the  pronunciation  of  the  nisba.
1  A  44,  12.  »  A  46,  7.

I]  AM  Sa'id  ibn  Abi  9l-Khayr  19

during the massacres and  ravages  of  more than  thirty
years.

Every  calamity  that  threatened  Nasa  has  been  averted  by  the
favour  and  kindness  of  God  and  by  the  blessings  of  the  tombs  of
departed  Shaykhs  and  by  the  prayers  of  the  living.  Even  now  (he
continues),  when  religion  in  Khurasan  is  almost  extinct  and
scarcely  any  vestige  of  Sufism  is  left,  there  are  still  in  Nasa  many
excellent  Shaykhs  and  Sufis,  richly  endowed  with  inward  ex-
periences, as  well  as  numerous  hidden  saints  who  exert  a  powerful
and  beneficent  influence1.

In  the  upper  part  of  the  town,  adjoining  the  cemetery,
stood  a  convent  for  Sufis,  the  Khanaqah-i  Sarawi.  It  had
recently  been  founded  by  the  famous  mystic,  Abu  'All
Daqqaq  of  Nishapur  (ob.  A.D.  1015).  The  legend  concerning  its
foundation  was  that  Abu  'All  had  a  dream  in  which  the
Prophet  ordered  him  to  build  a  house  for  Sufis,  and  not  only
pointed  out  the  site  but  also  drew  a  line  showing  its  dimen-
sions. Next  morning,  when  Abii  'All  went  to  the  place
indicated,  he  and  all  those  who  were  with  him  saw  a  line
distinctly  marked  on  the  ground;  and  upon  this  line  the  outer
wall  of  the  convent  was  raised2.  When  Abu  Sa'id  arrived  at
Yaysama3,  a  village  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Nasa,  he  went  to
visit  the  tomb  of  Ahmad  'All  Nasawi4.  Meanwhile  Shaykh
Ahmad  Nasr5,  who  was  then  in  charge  of  the  convent  at
Nasa,  put  out  his  head  from  his  cell  and  said  to  the  Sufis
seated  in  the  portico,  "The  royal  falcon  of  the  mystic  Way
(shdhbdz-i  tariqd)  is  passing!  Whoever  wants  to  catch  him
must  go  to  Yaysama6."

While  passing  through  the  village,  Abu  Sa'id  and  his

1  A  46,  n.  2  A  45,  14.

3  In  the  Nafahdtu  'l-Uns  (ed.  by  Nassau  Lees),  p.  327,  2,  where  this
passage  is  quoted,  the  name  of  the  village  is  written  4^,«.o  (Basma).

4  A  pupil  of  Abu  'Uthman  Hiri.  It  is  stated  in  theAsrdr,  48,  i,  that  his
name  is  given  by  Abii  'Abd  al- Rahman  al-Sulami  in  the  Tabaqdtu  'l-Stifiyya
as  Muhammad  'Ulayyan  al-Nasawi,  but  that  in  Nasd  he  is  generally  known
by  the  name  of  Ahmad  'AH. According  to  the  British  Museum  MS.  of  the
Tdbaqdt,  f.  96  a,  his  name  is  Muhammad  b. ' Ali  and  he  is  generally  known  as
Muhammad  b.  'Ulayyan.

6  Cf.  Nafahdtu  'l-Uns,  No.  357.  «  A  47,  10,

2O  Studies  in  Islamic  Mysticism  [CH.

friends  noticed  a  butcher  who  wore  a  fur  gaberdine  (pustin)
and  was  seated  in  his  shop,  with  pieces  of  meat  hanging  in
front  of  him.  He  came  forward  to  greet  the  strangers,  and
bade  an  apprentice  follow  them  and  see  where  they  lodged.
They  found  quarters  in  a  mosque  beside  the  river,  and  when
they  had  performed  their  ablutions  and  prayers  the  butcher
appeared,  bringing  some  viands  of  which  they  partook.

"After  we  had  done,"  said  Abu  Sa'id,  "he  asked  whether  any
of  us  could  answer  a  question.  My  friends  pointed  to  me.  He  then
said,  'What  is  the  duty  of  a  slave  and  what  is  the  duty  of  a  labourer
for  hire? '  I  replied  in  terms  of  the  religious  law.  He  asked,'  Is  there
nothing  else? '  I  remained  silent.  With  a  stern  look  he  exclaimed,
'  Do  not  live  with  one  whom  thou  hast  divorced ! '  meaning  that
since  I  had  discarded  exoteric  knowledge  (ilm-i  zdhir),  I  must  not
have  any  further  dealings  with  it.  Then  he  added, '  Until  thou  art
free,  thou  wilt  never  be  a  slave1,  and  until  thou  art  an  honest  and
sincere  labourer,  thou  wilt  never  receive  the  wages  of  everlasting
bliss.'"2

To  digress  a  little,  as  the  leisurely  style  of  Oriental
biography  permits,  it  will  be  remembered  that  on  his  con-
version to  $ufism  Abu  Sa'fd  immediately  abandoned  the
study  of  theology  and  jurisprudence  in  which  he  had  spent  so
much  of  his  youth.  He  collected  all  the  volumes  that  he  had
read,  together  with  his  own  note-books,  buried  them,  and
erected  over  them  a  mound  of  stone  and  earth  (dukdni) .  On
this  mound  he  planted  a  twig  of  myrtle,  which  took  root  and
put  forth  leaves,  and  in  the  course  of  time  became  a  large
tree.  The  people  of  Mayhana  used  to  pluck  boughs  from  it,
hoping  thereby  to  win  a  blessing  for  their  new-born  children,
or  in  order  to  lay  them  on  their  dead  before  interment.  The
author  of  the  Asrdr,  who  had  often  seen  it  and  admired  its
beautiful  foliage,  says  that  it  was  destroyed,  with  other  relics
of  the  saint,  during  the  invasion  of  Khurasan  by  the  Ghuzz3.
When  Abu  Sa'fd  buried  his  books,  it  was  suggested  that  he
might  have  done  better  to  give  them  to  some  one  who  would

1  I.e.,  thou  wilt  never  serve  God  truly  until  thou  art  free  from  'self.'
1  A  49,  4-

*  A  50,  i.

I]  Abu  Sa'id  ibn  Abi  U-Khayr  21

profit  by  reading  them.  "I  wished,"  he  said,  " that  my  heart
should  be  entirely  void  of  the  consciousness  of  having
conferred  an  obligation  and  of  the  recollection  of  having
bestowed  a  gift1."  Once  he  was  heard  wailing  in  his  cell  the
whole  night  long.  Next  morning  he  explained  that  he  had
been  visited  with  a  violent  toothache  as  a  punishment  for
having  dipped  into  a  tome  which  he  took  away  from  a
student2.

Here  are  two  more  of  his  sayings  on  the  same  topic:
"Books!  ye  are  excellent  guides,  but  it  is  absurd  to  trouble
about  a  guide  after  the  goal  has  been  reached."  "The  first
step  in  this  affair  (Sufism)  is  the  breaking  of  ink-pots3  and  the
tearing-up  of  books  and  the  forgetting  of  all  kinds  of  (intel-
lectual) knowledge4."

We  left  Abu  Sa'id  on  his  way  to  Amul.  He  is  said  to  have
resided  there  for  one  year5  in  the  convent  of  which  Shaykh
Abu  '!-' Abbas  Qassab  was  the  head.  The  Shaykh  gave  him  a
cell  in  the  assembly-room  (jamaat-khdna),  facing  the  oratory6
reserved  for  himself,  where  he  had  sat  for  forty-one  years  in
the  midst  of  his  disciples7.  It  was  the  custom  of  Shaykh  Abu
'!-' Abbas,  when  he  saw  a  dervish  performing  supererogatory
prayers  at  night,  to  say  to  him,  "Sleep,  my  son!  All  the
devotions  of  your  Director  are  performed  for  your  sake,  for
they  are  of  no  use  to  him  and  he  does  not  need  them  himself  " ;
but  he  never  said  this  to  Abu  Sa'id,  who  used  to  pray  all  night
and  fast  all  day.  During  the  night  Abu  Sa'id  kept  his  eyes
continually  fixed  upon  his  navel,  and  his  mind  upon  the
spiritual  "states"  (ahwdl)  and  acts  of  the  Shaykh.  One  day
the  Shaykh  had  some  blood  let  from  his  arm.  At  night  the
bandage  slipped  off,  uncovering  the  vein,  so  that  his  garment
was  stained  with  blood.  As  he  came  out  of  the  oratory,  Abu
Sa'id,  who  was  always  on  the  watch  to  serve  him,  ran  up  to

1  A  51,  18.  2  A  52,  7.

3  Reading  j~£=>  for  u*« jib.  *  A  51,  14.

5  Two  and  a  half  years,  according  to  another  tradition  which  has  less
authority  (A  52,  17).

6  Zdwiya-gdh. It  seems  to  have  been  a  place  surrounded  by  a  railing  or
lattice,  since  it  is  compared  in  the  text  to  a  penfold  (ha?ira).

7  A  53,  i.

22  Studies  in  Islamic  Mysticism  [CH.

him.  washed  and  bandaged  his  arm,  and  taking  from  him  the
toiled  garment  offered  his  own,  which  the  Shaykh  put  on,
while  AW  Sa'fd  dad  himself  in  a  khashan1  that  he  had.  Then
he  washed  and  cleaned  the  Shaykh's  garment,  hung  it  on  the
rope  (k*N)  to  dry,  rubbed  and  folded  it,  and  brought  it  to  the
Shaykh.  "  It  is  thine,  "said  the  Shaykh,  "put  it  on!"  "Nay,"
cried  Abti  Sa'fd,  "let  the  Shaykh  put  it  on  me  with  his  own
bleated  hand  I"

This  was  the  second  gaberdine  (khirqa)  with  which  Abu
Sa'fd  was  invested,  for  he  had  already  received  one  from  Abu
•Abd  al-RaJmian  al-Sulamf  of  Nfshapur2.

Here  the  author  of  the  Asrdr  introduces  a  disquisition  on
the  meaning  of  such  investiture8,  with  the  object  of  refuting
those  who  hold  that  a  $iiff  ought  not  to  accept  a  khirqa  from
more  than  one  Pfr.  In  the  first  place,  he  describes  the  endow-
ments in  virtue  of  which  the  Pfr  is  privileged  to  invest  a
disciple  with  the  khirqa.  The  Pfr  should  be  worthy  of  imitation,

he  should  have  a  perfect  knowledge,  both  theoretical  and
practical,  of  the  three  stages  of  the  mystical  life — the  Law,
the  Path,  and  the  Truth ;  he  should  also  be  entirely  purged  of
fleshly  attributes  (fifdt-i  bashariyya),  so  that  nothing  of  his
lower  "self"  (nafs)  remains  in  him.  When  such  a  Pfr  has
become  thoroughly  acquainted  with  a  disciple's  acts  and
thoughts  and  has  proved  them  by  the  test  of  experience  and,
through  spiritual  insight,  knows  that  he  is  qualified  to  advance
beyond  the  position  of  a  famulus  (maqdm-i  khidmat) — whether
his  being  thus  qualified  is  due  to  the  training  which  he  has
received  from  this  Pfr  or  to  the  guidance  and  direction  of
another  Pfr  possessing  a  like  authority— then  he  lays  his  hand
fie  disciple's  head  and  invests  him  with  the  khirqa.  By
the  act  of  investiture  he  announces  his  conviction  that  the
disciple  U  fit  to  associate  with  the  $uffs,  and  if  he  is  a  person
-dit  and  renown  amongst  them,  his  declaration  carries
the  same  weight  as,  in  matters  of  law,  the  testimony  of  an

tr*m  *•  properly  the  name  of  a  grass  from  which  coarse  garments

•  Set  p.  1 4  t*f»a.

*— 59,  3- Cl.  the  fourth  chapter  of  Hujwfri's  Kashf  al-Mahjtb.
PI*  45^47.  to  ay  translation.

l]  Abu  Sa'fd  ibn  Abi  yl-Khayr  23

honest  witness  and  the  sentence  of  an  incorruptible  judge.
Accordingly,  whenever  an  unknown  dervish  comes  into  a
convent  or  wishes  to  join  a  company  of  Sufis,  they  ask  him,
"Who  was  the  Pir  that  taught  thee1?"  and  "From  whose
hand  didst  thou  receive  the  khirqa!  "  Sufis  recognise  no
relationship  but  these  two,  which  they  regard  as  all-important.
They  do  not  allow  any  one  to  associate  with  them,  unless  he
can  show  to  their  satisfaction  that  he  is  lineally  connected  in
both  these  ways  with  a  fully  accredited  Pir.

Having  insisted  that  the  whole  Path  of  Sufism  turns  upon
the  Pir  (maddr-i  tariqa  bar  pir  ast2),  the  author  of  the  Asrdr
comes  to  the  question  in  dispute — "Is  it  right  to  receive
investiture  from  the  hands  of  more  than  one3?  "  He  answers,
in  effect,  "  Yes,  it  is  right,  provided  that  the  second  investiture
is  not  accompanied  with  the  intention  of  annulling  the  first4."
His  argument  is  a  universal  principle,  which  can  be  stated  in
a  few  words.  Ultimately  and  essentially  all  things  are  one.
Difference  and  duality  are  phenomena  which  disappear  when
unity  is  reached.  The  sayings  of  the  great  mystics  differ  in
expression,  but  their  meaning  is  the  same.  There  are  many
religions,  but  only  one  God;  diverse  ways,  but  only  one  goal.
Hence  those  who  raise  an  objection  against  the  double
investiture  proclaim  themselves  to  be  still  on  the  plane  of
dualism,  which  the  Pirs  have  transcended.  In  reality,  all
Sufis,  all  Pirs,  and  all  khirqas  are  one.  Amidst  these  sublime
truths  it  is  rather  a  shock  to  meet  with  the  remark  that  the
novice  who  receives  two  khirqas  resembles  a  man  who  calls
two  witnesses  to  attest  his  competence5.

On  his  departure  from  Amul,  Abu  Sa'id  was  directed  by

1  Pir-i  suhbat,  i.e.,  the  Pir  to  whom  one  stands  in  the  relation  of  disciple
(sahib).  The  pir-i  suhbat  of  Abu  Sa'fd  was  Abu  '1-Fadl  Hasan  of  Sarakhs
(A  26,  10).  Abu  Sa'id  used  to  call  him  '  Pir,'  while  he  spoke  of  Abu  '!-'  Abbas
Qassab  simply  as  '  the  Shaykh '  (A  43,  18).  The  second  question  implies  that
a  Pir  might  confer  the  khirqa  upon  a  novice  whom  he  had  not  personally
trained.

2  A  56,  i.

3  The  khirqa  with  which  the  novice  is  invested  by  a  Pir  is  named  "the
khirqa  of  origin"  (khirqa-i  asl)  or  "  the  khirqa  of  blessing"  (khirqa-i  tabarruk).

A  57,  7,  where  lp|  jXjj  should  be  read  in  place  of

4  A  59,  i.  *  A  57,  12.

24  Studies  in  Islamic  Mysticism  [CH.

Shaykh  Abu  '!-' Abbas  Qassab  to  return  once  more  to  May-
hana1.  This  event  approximately  coincides  with  the  beginning
of  a  new  period  in  his  spiritual  history.  The  long  discipline  of

1  'ath,  broken  by  fleeting  visions  and  ecstasies,  brought  him
at  last  into  the  full  and  steady  splendour  of  illumination.  The
which  had  hitherto  been  lifted  only  to  fall  again,  was
now  burst  asunder.  Henceforth  no  barrier  (hijdb)  in  the  shape
of  "self" — that  insidious  obstacle  which  it  is  the  whole
business  of  the  via  purgativa  to  remove — could  even  tem-
porarily shut  off  his  consciousness  of  the  Unseen.  While
conversing  with  Abu  'All  Daqqaq,  Abii  Sa'fd  asked  him
whether  this  experience  was  ever  permanent.  "No,"  said
Abti  'AH.  Abu  Sa'fd  bowed  his  head,  then  he  repeated  the
question  and  received  the  same  answer,  whereupon  he  bowed

icad  as  before.  On  being  asked  for  the  third  time,  Abu
'AM  replied,  "If  it  ever  is  permanent,  it  is  extremely  rare."
Abii  Sa'fd  dapped  his  hands  joyfully  and  exclaimed  several
times,  "This" — referring  to  his  own  case — "is  one  of  these
rarities1."  Continuous  though  his  illumination  may  have
been,  it  was  not  of  uniform  intensity,  but  was  subject  to  the
fluctuations  which  are  described  in  the  technical  language  of
$unsm  as  contraction  (qabd)  and  expansion  (bast)3.  Often,
when  he  fell  into  the  former  state,  he  would  go  about  asking
questions  of  every  one,  in  the  hope  of  hearing  some  words
that  might  relieve  his  oppression4.  When  qabi  was  violent,  he
would  visit  the  tomb  of  Shaykh  Abu  '1-Fa^l  Hasan  at  Sarakhs.

•  Idest  son,  Abu  T^hir,  relates  that  one  day  Abu  Sa'id,
while  preaching,  began  to  weep,  and  the  whole  congregation
wept  with  him.  Giving  orders  that  his  horse  should  be
saddled,  he  immediately  set  out  for  Sarakhs,  accompanied  by
all  who  were  present.  As  soon  as  they  entered  the  desert,  his
feeling  of  "contraction"  was  dispelled.  He  began  to  speak
freely,  while  those  around  him  shouted  with  joy.  On  arriving
at  Sarakhs  he  turned  aside  from  the  highroad  in  the  direction

1  A  50  •  A  62,  9.

•  Concerning  these  terms  see  my  translation  of  the  Kashf  al-Mahjtib.
PP  374-37$-
«  A  62.  18

I]  Abu  Sa'id  ibn  Abi  yl-Khayr  25

of  the  tomb  of  Shaykh  Abu  '1-Fadl  Hasan  and  bade  the
qawwdl  sing  this  verse :

Here  is  the  mansion  of  delight,  the  home  of  bounty  and  of  grace !
All  eyes  towards  the  Ka'ba  turn,  but  ours  to  the  Beloved's  face.

During  the  qawwdl' s  chant  Abu  Sa'id  and  the  dervishes  with
bare  heads  and  feet  circumambulated  the  tomb,  shrieking
ecstatically.  When  quiet  was  restored,  he  said,  "Mark  the
date  of  this  day,  for  you  will  never  see  a  day  like  this  again."
Afterwards  he  used  to  tell  any  of  his  disciples  who  thought
of  making  the  pilgrimage  to  Mecca  that  they  must  visit  the
tomb  of  Shaykh  Abu  '1-Fadl  Hasan  and  perform  seven  cir-
cumambulations  there1.

It  is  stated  on  the  authority  of  Abu  Sa'id's  grandson,
Shaykhu  '1-Islam  Abu  Sa'id,  who  was  the  grandfather  of
Muhammad  ibnu  '1-Munawwar,  the  compiler  of  iheAsrdr,  that
Abu  Sa'id  attained  to  perfect  illumination  at  the  age  of  forty2.
That  statement  may  be  approximately  correct,  though  we
cannot  help  regarding  as  suspicious  its  combination  with  the
theory  founded  on  a  passage  in  the  Koran3,  that  no  one  under
forty  years  of  age  ever  attained  to  the  rank  of  prophecy  or
saintship,  excepting  only  Yahya  ibn  Zakariyya  (John  the
Baptist)  and  Jesus.  At  this  point  the  biographer  concludes  the
first  chapter  of  his  work,  describing  Abu  Sa'id's  conversion
and  novitiate,  and  enters  on  the  mature  period  of  his  mystical
life — the  period  of  illumination  and  contemplation.

In  the  foregoing  pages  we  have  been  mainly  concerned
with  his  progress  as  an  ascetic.  We  are  now  to  see  him  as
Theosophist  and  Saint.  It  must  be  added,  however,  that  in
this  higher  stage  he  did  not  discontinue  his  austerities.  He
took  pains  to  conceal  them,  and  all  our  information  about
them  is  derived  from  allusions  in  his  public  speeches  or  from
the  exhortations  which  he  addressed  to  novices.  According  to
his  disciples,  after  becoming  an  adept  there  was  no  rule  or
practice  of  the  Prophet  that  he  left  unperformed4.

From  this  time  (circa  A.H.  400  =  A.D.  1009)  until  his  death,
which  occurred  in  A.H.  440  =  A.D.  1049,  the  materials  avail-

1  A  64,  6.  2  A  61,  i.  3  Kor.  46,  14.  4  A  65,  9.

26  Studies  in  Islamic  Mysticism  [CH.

able  for  Abu  Sa'fd's  biography,  consisting  for  the  most  part  of
miscellaneous  anecdotes,  are  of  such  a  kind  that  it  is  impossible
to  give  a  connected  account  of  events  in  their  chronological
order.  Concerning  his  movements  we  know  nothing  of
importance  beyond  the  following  facts:

(a)  He  left  Mayhana  and  journeyed  to  Nfshapur,  where
he  stayed  for  a  considerable  time.

(b)  Shortly  before  quitting  Nfshapur  he  paid  a  visit  to
Abu  '1-Hasan  Kharaqanf  at  Kharaqan1.

(c)  Finally,  he  returned  from  Nishapur  to  Mayhana.
The  anecdotes  in  the  second  chapter  of  the  Asrdr  form

three  groups  in  correspondence  with  this  local  division :

1.  Nfshapur  (pp.  68-174).

2.  Kharaqan  (pp.  175-190).

3.  Mayhana  (pp.  191-247).

Various  circumstances  indicate  that  his  residence  in
Nfshapur  was  a  long  one,  probably  extending  over  several
years,  but  we  find  no  precise  statement2,  and  the  evidence
that  can  be  obtained  from  his  reported  meetings  with  famous
contemporaries  is  insufficient,  in  my  opinion,  to  serve  as  a
basis  for  investigation.  His  visit  to  Kharaqan  supplies  a
terminus  ad  quern,  for  Abu  '1-Hasan  Kharaqam  is  known  to
have  died  in  A.H.  425  =  A.D.  1033-4.  Unless  the  stories  of  his
friendship  with  Qushayrf  are  inventions,  he  can  hardly  have
settled  in  Nfshapur  before  A.H.  415  =  A.D.  1024, smce  Qushayrf
(born  A.H.  376  =  A.D.  986)  is  described  at  the  date  of  Abu
Sa'fd's  arrival  as  a  celebrated  teacher  with  numerous  pupils.

For  the  reasons  mentioned  above,  we  must  now  content
ourselves  with  the  barest  outline  of  a  narrative  and  seek
compensation  in  episodes,  incidents,  and  details  which  often
reveal  the  personality  and  character  of  Abu  Sa'fd  in  a  sur-

1  A  village  near  Bistam.  According  to  Sam'Anf  and  YAqiit,  the  correct
nciation  is  Kharaqan.  Khurqan,  the  spelling  preferred  by  Mr  Le
Strange  (Eastern  Caliphate,  pp.  23  and  366),  has  less  authority.

•  The  words  "He  was  one  year  in  Nishapur"  (A  94,  4)  refer,  as  the
context  makes  plain,  only  to  the  first  year  of  his  stay  in  that  city.  Possibly
the  period  of  his  residence  there  was  not  continuous.  It  is  worth  notice  that,
according  to  H  72,  17,  he  usually  spent  the  winter  at  Mayhana  and  the
summer  at  Nfshapur.

I]  Abu  Sa'id  ibn  Abi  'l-Khayr  27

prising  manner  and  at  the  same  time  let  us  see  how  the
monastic  life  was  lived  and  by  what  methods  it  was  organ-
ised.

When  Abu  Sa'id  set  out  for  Nishapur,  he  did  not  travel
alone,  but  was  attended  by  the  disciples  whom  he  had  already
gathered  round  him  at  Mayhana,  while  many  new  converts
joined  the  party  at  Tus.  Here  he  preached  to  crowded
assemblies  and  moved  his  audience  to  tears.  On  one  of  these
occasions  an  infant  fell  from  the  gallery  (bam),  which  was
thronged  with  women.  Abu  Sa'id  exclaimed,  "Save  it!"  A
hand  appeared  in  the  air  and  caught  the  child  and  placed  it
unhurt  on  the  floor.  The  spectators  raised  a  great  cry  and
scenes  of  ecstasy  ensued.  "I  swear,"  says  Sayyid  Abu  'All,
who  relates  the  story,  "that  I  saw  this  with  my  own  eyes.  If
I  did  not  see  it,  may  both  my  eyes  become  blind1 ! "  At  Xiis
Abu  Sa'id  is  said  to  have  passed  by  a  number  of  children
standing  together  in  the  street  of  the  Christians  (kuy-i
tarsdydri)  and  to  have  pointed  out  one  of  them  to  his  com-
panions, saying,  "If  you  wish  to  look  at  the  prime  minister
of  the  world,  there  he  is ! "  The  boy,  whose  future  eminence
was  thus  miraculously  foretold,  and  who,  forty  years  after-
wards, repeated  those  prophetic  words  to  a  great-grandson  of
Abu  Sa'id,  was  the  illustrious  statesman  Nizamu  '1-Mulk  (born

A.D.  IOl8)2.

On  entering  Nishapur  Abu  Sa'id  was  met  by  an  influential
patron  of  the  Sufis,  Khwaja  Mahmiid-i  Murid,  who  installed
him  and  his  disciples  in  the  monastery  (khdnaqdh)  of  Abu  'All
Tarasusi  in  the  street  of  the  carpet-beaters  (?)3,  which  seems
to  have  been  his  headquarters  as  long  as  he  remained  in
Nishapur4.  His  preaching  and,  above  all,  the  extraordinary
powers  of  telepathy  which  he  displayed  in  public  made  many
converts  and  brought  in  large  sums  of  money5.  Hasan-i

1  A  69,  14.

2  A  70,  8. Cf.  A  115,  16. According  to  another  version  (A  233,  5  foil.),
the  prophecy  was  made  after  Abu  Sa'id's  return  from  Nishapur  to  Mayhana,
where  he  was  visited  by  Nizamu  '1-Mulk,  who  was  then  a  young  student.

8  A  73,  4.  The  MSS.  give  the  name  of  the  street  as  ^bj£»  ^  j&  \^^

or  Ok*^3  ^J^  (A  73.  14;  "9,  15)- Cf.  w5b  ^J^  (A  463.  9)-

4  This  convent  was  destroyed  by  the  Ghuzz  who  sacked  Nishapur  in
A.H.  548=A.D.  1154  (A  195,  n).  5  A  84,  10.

28  Studies  in  Islamic  Mysticism  [CH.

Mu'addib — afterwards  his  principal  famulus  and  major-domo
— relates  his  own  experience  as  follows :

When  people  were  proclaiming  everywhere  in  Nishapur  that
a  $uff  Pir  had  arrived  from  Mayhana  and  was  preaching  sermons
in  the  street  of  the  carpet-beaters  and  was  reading  men's  secret
thoughts,  I  said  to  myself — for  I  hated  the  Sufis — "How  can  a
$iifi  preach,  when  he  knows  nothing  about  theology?  How  can
he  read  men's  thoughts,  when  God  has  not  given  knowledge
of  the  Unseen  to  any  prophet  or  to  any  other  person?  "  One  day
I  went  to  the  hall  where  he  preached,  with  the  intention  of  putting
him  to  the  proof,  and  sat  down  in  front  of  his  chair.  I  was  hand-
somely dressed  and  had  a  turban  of  fine  Jabari  stuff  wound  on  my
head.  While  the  Shaykh  was  speaking,  I  regarded  him  with  feelings
of  hostility  and  disbelief.  Having  finished  his  sermon,  he  asked  for
clothes  on  behalf  of  a  dervish.  Every  one  offered  something.  Then
he  asked  for  a  turban.  I  thought  of  giving  mine,  but  again  I
reflected  that  it  had  been  brought  to  me  from  Amul  as  a  present
and  that  it  was  worth  ten  Nishapuri  dinars,  so  I  resolved  not  to
give  it.  The  Shaykh  made  a  second  appeal,  and  the  same  thought
occurred  to  me,  but  I  rejected  it  once  more.  An  old  man  who  was
seated  beside  me  asked,  "  O  Shaykh !  does  God  plead  with  His
creatures?  "  He  answered,  "  Yes,  but  He  does  not  plead  more  than
twice  for  the  sake  of  a  Tabari  turban.  He  has  already  spoken  twice
to  the  man  sitting  beside  you  and  has  told  him  to  give  to  this
dervish  the  turban  which  he  is  wearing,  but  he  refuses  to  do  so,
because  it  is  worth  ten  pieces  of  gold  and  was  brought  to  him
from  Amul  as  a  present."  On  hearing  these  words,  I  rose,  trembling,
and  went  forward  to  the  Shaykh  and  kissed  his  foot  and  offered
my  turban  and  my  whole  suit  of  clothes  to  the  dervish.  Every
feeling  of  dislike  and  incredulity  was  gone.  I  became  a  Moslem
anew,  bestowed  on  the  Shaykh  all  the  money  and  wealth  I  pos-
sessed, and  devoted  myself  to  his  service1.

While  Abti  Sa'fd  was  enthusiastically  welcomed  by  the
Stiffs  of  Nfshapur,  he  met  with  formidable  opposition  from
the  parties  adverse  to  them2,  namely,  the  Karramfs3,  whose

•  A7

1  He  compares  his  reception  to  that  of  a  dog  who  on  entering  a  parish
he  is  unknown  is  set  upon  and  mauled  by  all  the  dogs  belonging  to  it
(A  26s

•  The  Kan-amis  interpreted  the  Koran  in  the  most  literal  sense. See
Macdonald,  Muslim  Theology,  p.  170  foil.

I]  Abu  Scfid  ibn  Abi  'l-Khayr  29

chief  was  Abu  Bakr  Ishaq,  and  the  Ashdb-i  ra'y  (liberal
theologians)  and  Shfites  led  by  Qadi  Sa'id.  The  leaders  of
those  parties  drew  up  a  written  charge  against  him,  to  the
following  effect:

A  certain  man  has  come  hither  from  Mayhana  and  pretends  to
be  a  Sufi.  He  preaches  sermons  in  the  course  of  which  he  recites
poetry  but  does  not  quote  the  Traditions  of  the  Prophet.  He  holds
sumptuous  feasts  and  music  is  played  by  his  orders,  whilst  the
young  men  dance  and  eat  sweetmeats1  and  roasted  fowls  and  all
kinds  of  fruit.  He  declares  that  he  is  an  ascetic,  but  this  is  neither
asceticism  nor  Sufism.  Multitudes  have  joined  him  and  are  being
led  astray.  Unless  measures  be  taken  to  repair  it,  the  mischief
will  soon  become  universal.

The  authorities  at  the  court  of  Ghazna,  to  whom  the  document
was  sent,  returned  it  with  the  following  answer  written  on  the
back:  "Let  the  leaders  of  the  Shafi'ites  and  Hanafites  sit  in
council  and  inquire  into  his  case  and  duly  inflict  upon  him
whatever  penalty  the  religious  law  demands."  This  answer
was  received  on  a  Thursday.  The  enemies  of  Abu  Sa'id
rejoiced  and  immediately  held  a  meeting  and  determined
that  on  Saturday  he  and  all  the  Sufis  should  be  gibbeted  in
the  market-place.  His  friends  were  anxious  and  alarmed  by
rumours  of  what  was  impending,  but  none  dared  tell  him,
since  he  desired  to  have  nothing  communicated  to  him,  and  in
fact  always  knew  by  miraculous  intuition  all  that  was  going
on.

When  we  had  performed  the  afternoon  prayers  (says  Hasan-i
Mu'addib),  the  Shaykh  called  me  and  asked,  "How  many  are  the
Sufis?"  I  replied,  "A  hundred  and  twenty — eighty  travellers
(musdfir)  and  forty  residents  (muqim)."  "To-morrow,"  said  he,
"what  will  you  give  them  for  dinner?"  "Whatever  the  Shaykh
bids,"  I  replied.  "You  must  place  before  each  one,"  said  he,  "a
lamb's  head  and  provide  plenty  of  crushed  sugar  to  sprinkle  on  the
lamb's  brains,  and  let  each  one  have  a  pound  of  khalifati  sweets,
and  see  that  there  is  no  lack  of  aloes-wood  for  burning  and  rose-
water  for  spraying  over  them,  and  get  well-laundered  linen  robes.

1  Lawzina  and  gawzina.  For  the  former  see  Dozy.  The  latter  is  said  to  be
a  sweetmeat  made  of  walnut  kernels.

30  Studies  in  Islamic  Mysticism  [en.

Lay  the  table  in  the  congregational  mosque,  in  order  that  those
who  slander  me  behind  my  back  may  behold  with  their  own  eyes
the  viands  that  God  sends  from  the  unseen  world  to  his  elect."
Now,  at  the  moment  when  the  Shaykh  gave  me  these  directions,
there  was  not  a  single  loaf  in  the  store-room  of  the  convent,  and
in  the  whole  city  I  did  not  know  any  one  of  whom  I  could  venture
to  beg  a  piece  of  silver,  because  these  rumours  had  shaken  the  faith
of  all  our  friends;  nor  had  I  courage  to  ask  the  Shaykh  how  I
should  procure  the  things  which  he  required.  It  was  near  sunset.
I  left  him  and  stood  in  the  street  of  the  carpet-beaters,  utterly  at
a  loss  what  to  do,  until  the  sun  had  almost  set  and  the  merchants
were  closing  their  shops  and  going  home.  When  the  hour  of
evening  prayer  arrived  and  it  was  now  dark,  a  young  man  running
to  his  house — for  he  was  late — saw  me  as  I  stood  there,  and  cried,
"  O  Hasan !  what  are  you  doing? "  I  told  him  that  the  Shaykh  had
given  me  certain  orders,  that  I  had  no  money,  and  that  I  would
stay  there  till  morning,  if  necessary,  since  I  durst  not  return.
Throwing  back  his  sleeve,  he  bade  me  put  my  hand  in.  I  did  so
and  drew  forth  a  handful  of  gold,  with  which  I  returned  in  high
spirits  to  the  convent.  On  making  my  purchases,  I  found  that  the
sum  was  exactly  right — not  a  dirhem  too  much  or  too  little.  Early
next  morning  I  got  the  linen  robes  and  laid  the  table  in  the
congregational  mosque,  as  the  Shaykh  had  directed.  He  came
thither  with  all  his  disciples,  while  many  spectators  occupied  the
galleries  above.  Now,  when  Qadf  Sa'id  and  Ustad  Abu  Bakr
Karrami  were  informed  that  the  Shaykh  had  prepared  a  feast  for
the  $uffs  in  the  mosque,  Qadf  Sa'id  exclaimed,  "Let  them  make
merry  to-day  and  eat  roast  lamb's  head,  for  to-morrow  their  own
heads  will  be  devoured  by  crows  " ;  and  Abu  Bakr  said,  "  Let  them
grease  their  bellies  to-day,  for  to-morrow  they  will  grease  the
scaffold. "  These  threats  were  conveyed  to  the  Stiff s  and  made  a
painful  impression.  As  soon  as  they  finished  the  meal  and  washed
their  hands,  the  Shaykh  said  to  me,  "Hasan!  take  the  Sufis'
prayer-rugs  to  the  chancel  (maq$ura)  after  Qdclf  $a'id  (who  was  the
official  preacher),  for  to-day  we  will  perform  our  prayers  under  his
leadership."  Accordingly,  I  carried  twenty  prayer-rugs  into  the
chancel  and  laid  them  in  two  rows;  there  was  no  room  for  any
more.  Qacli  $i'id  mounted  the  pulpit  and  delivered  a  hostile
address;  then  he  came  down  and  performed  the  service  of  prayer.

i]  Abu  Sa'td  ibn  Abi  'l-Khayr  31

As  soon  as  he  pronounced  the  final  salutation  (saldm),  the  Shaykh
rose  and  departed,  without  waiting  for  the  customary  devotions
(sunna).  Qadi  Sa'id  faced  towards  him,  whereupon  the  Shaykh
looked  at  him  askance.  The  Qadi  at  once  bowed  his  head.  When  the
Shaykh  and  his  disciples  returned  to  the  convent,  he  said,  "  Hasan !
jo  to  the  Kirmani  market-place.  There  is  a  confectioner  there  who
las  fine  cakes  made  of  white  sesame  and  pistachio  kernels.  Buy
;n  maunds'  worth.  A  little  further  on  you  will  find  a  man  who
sells  raisins.  Buy  ten  maunds'  worth  and  clean  them.  Tie  up  the
cakes  and  raisins  in  two  white  cloths  (du  izdr-i  futa-i  kdfuri)  and
put  them  on  your  head  and  take  them  to  Ustad  Abu-  Bakr  Ishaq
and  tell  him  that  he  must  break  his  fast  with  them  to-night."
I  followed  the  Shaykh's  instructions  in  every  particular.  When  I
gave  his  message  to  Abu  Bakr  Ishaq,  the  colour  went  out  of  his
face  and  he  sat  in  amazement,  biting  his  fingers.  After  a  few
minutes  he  bade  me  be  seated  and  having  summoned  Bu  '1-
Qasimak,  his  chamberlain,  despatched  him  to  Qadi  Sa'id.  "Tell
him,"  said  he,  "  that  I  withdraw  from  our  arrangement,  which  was
that  to-morrow  we  should  bring  this  Shaykh  and  the  Sufis  to  trial
and  severely  punish  them.  If  he  asks  why,  let  him  know  that  last
night  I  resolved  to  fast.  To-day,  while  riding  on  my  ass  to  the
congregational  mosque,  I  passed  through  the  Kirmani  market-
place and  saw  some  fine  cakes  in  a  confectioner's  shop.  It  occurred
to  me  that  on  returning  from  prayers  I  would  send  to  purchase
them  and  break  my  fast  with  them  to-night.  Further  on,  I  saw
some  raisins  which  I  thought  would  be  very  nice  with  the  cakes,
and  I  resolved  to  buy  some.  When  I  came  home,  I  had  forgotten
all  about  the  matter  and  I  had  not  spoken  of  it  to  any  one.  Now
Shaykh  Abu  Sa'id  sends  me  the  same  cakes  and  raisins  which  I
noticed  this  morning  and  desired  to  buy,  and  bids  me  break  my
fast  with  them!  I  have  no  course  but  to  abandon  proceedings
against  a  man  who  is  so  perfectly  acquainted  with  the  thoughts  of
his  fellow-creatures."  The  chamberlain  went  to  Qadi  Sa'id  and
returned  with  the  following  message:  "I  was  on  the  point  of
sending  to  you  in  reference  to  this  affair.  To-day  the  Shaykh  was
present  when  I  conducted  public  worship.  No  sooner  had  I  pro-
nounced the  salutation  than  he  went  off  without  performing  the
sunnat.  I  turned  towards  him,  intending  to  ask  how  his  neglect
of  devotions  on  a  Friday  was  characteristic  of  ascetics  and  Sufis

32  Studies  in  Islamic  Mysticism  [CH.

and  to  make  this  the  foundation  of  a  bitter  attack  upon  him.  He
looked  askance  at  me.  I  almost  fainted  with  fear.  He  seemed  to
be  a  hawk  and  I  a  sparrow  which  he  was  about  to  destroy.  I
struggled  to  speak  but  could  not  utter  a  word.  To-day  he  has
shown  to  me  his  power  and  majesty.  I  have  no  quarrel  with  him.
If  the  Sultan  has  issued  an  edict  against  him  you  were  responsible.
You  were  the  principal  and  I  was  only  a  subordinate."  When  the
chamberlain  had  delivered  this  message,  Abu  Bakr  Ishaq  turned
to  me  and  said:  "Go  and  tell  your  Shaykh  that  Abu  Bakr  Ishaq
Karramf  with  20,000  followers,  and  Qadi  Sa'id  with  30,000,  and
the  Sultan  with  100,000  men  and  750  war  elephants,  made  ready
for  battle  and  tried  to  subdue  him,  and  that  he  has  defeated  all
their  armies  with  ten  maunds  of  cake  and  raisins  and  has  routed
right  wing,  left  wing,  and  centre.  He  is  free  to  hold  his  religion,  as
we  are  free  to  hold  ours.  Ye  have  your  religion  and  I  have  my
religion1."

I  came  back  to  the  Shaykh  (said  Hasan-i  Mu'addib)  and  told
him  all  that  had  passed.  He  turned  to  his  disciples  and  said,
"  Since  yesterday  ye  have  been  trembling  for  fear  that  the  scaffold
would  be  soaked  with  your  blood.  Nay,  that  is  the  lot  of  such  as
Husayn-i  Mansur  Hallaj,  the  most  eminent  mystic  of  his  time  in
East  and  West.  Scaffolds  drip  with  the  blood  of  heroes,  not  of
cowards."  Then  he  bade  the  qawwdl  sing  these  lines:

With  shield  and  quiver  meet  thine  enemy !

Vaunt  not  thyself  but  make  thy  vaunt  of  Me.

Let  Fate  be  cool  as  water,  hot  as  fire,

Do  thou  live  happy,  whichsoe'er  it  be !

The  qawwdl  sang  and  all  the  disciples  began  to  shout  and  fling  their
gaberdines  away.

After  that  day  no  one  in  Nishapur  ventured  to  speak  a  word  in
disparagement  of  the  $uffs2.

The  story  may  not  be  entirely  fictitious.  It  shows,  at  any
rate,  that  Moslems  ascribe  a  miraculous  character  to  telepathic
powers,  nor  does  it  exaggerate  the  awe  inspired  by  a  holy
man  who  displays  them  effectively.  Most  of  Abu  Sa'fd's
recorded  miracles  are  of  this  kind.  That  Mohammedan  saints
have  often  been  thought-readers  seems  to  me  beyond  question,

1  Kor.  109,  6.  »  A  84,  10 — 91,  17.

I]  Abu  Said  ibn  Abi  'l-Khayr  33

whatever  doubts  one  may  feel  as  to  a  great  part  of  the
evidence  preserved  in  their  legends.  Whether  Abu  Sa'id  was
actually  threatened  with  legal  prosecution  or  not,  we  can  well
believe  that  the  orthodox  parties  were  scandalised  by  his
luxurious  manner  of  living  and  by  the  unlicensed  practices  in
which  he  and  his  disciples  indulged.  He  made  no  attempt  to
rebut  the  charges  brought  against  him,  and  from  numerous
anecdotes  related  by  those  who  held  him  in  veneration  it  is
clear  that  if  the  document  said  to  have  been  sent  to  Ghazna
be  genuine,  his  accusers  set  down  nothing  but  what  was
notoriously  true.  They  gained  sympathy,  if  not  active  support,
from  many  Sufis  who  perceived  the  danger  of  antinomianism
and  desired  above  all  things  to  secure  the  position  of  Sufism
within  Islam.  Of  this  party  the  chief  representative  in
Nishapiir  was  Abu  '1-Qasim  Qushayri,  well  known  as  the
author  of  al-Risdlatu  'l-Qushayriyya  fi  'ilmi  'l-tasawwuf,
which  he  composed  in  A.H.  437  =  A.D.  1045-6  with  the  avowed
object  of  demonstrating  that  the  history  and  traditions  of
Sufism  are  bound  up  with  strict  observance  of  the  Moham-
medan religious  law.

The  biographer  gives  an  interesting  but  probably  un-
truthful account  of  Abu  Sa'id's  public  and  private  relations
with  Qushayri,  who  is  depicted  as  having  been  induced  by
personal  experience  of  his  miraculous  intuition  to  repent  of
the  hostile  feelings  with  which  he  regarded  the  new-comer.
During  the  first  year  of  Abu  Sa'id's  stay  in  Nishapiir,  his
prayer-meetings  were  attended  by  seventy  disciples  of
Qushayri,  and  finally  he  himself  agreed  to  accompany  them.
While  Abu  Sa'id  was  preaching,  Qushayri  reflected:  "This
man  is  inferior  to  me  in  learning  and  we  are  equal  in  devotion :
whence  did  he  get  this  power  of  reading  men's  thoughts?  "
Abii  Sa'id  at  once  paused  in  his  discourse  and  fixing  his  eye
on  Qushayri  reminded  him  of  a  certain  ritual  irregularity  of
which  he  had  been  guilty  in  private  on  the  preceding  day.
Qushayri  was  dumbfounded.  Abu  Sa'id,  as  soon  as  he  left
the  pulpit,  approached  him  and  they  embraced  each  other1.
Their  harmony,  however,  was  not  yet  complete,  for  they

1  A  94,  3-

N.  S.  II  a

34  Studies  in  Islamic  Mysticism  [CH.

differed  in  the  great  controversy,  which  had  long  been  raging,
whether  audition  (samd')  was  permissible;  in  other  words,
"Did  the  religious  law  sanction  the  use  of  music,  singing,  and
dancing  as  a  means  of  stimulating  ecstasy1? "  One  day
Qushayrf,  while  passing  Abu  Sa'id's  convent,  looked  in  and
saw  him  taking  part  with  his  disciples  in  an  ecstatic  dance.
He  thought  to  himself  that,  according  to  the  Law,  no  one  who
dances  like  this  is  accepted  as  a  witness  worthy  of  credit.
Next  day  he  met  Abu  Sa'id  on  his  way  to  a  feast.  After  they
had  exchanged  salutations,  Abu  Sa'id  said  to  him,  "When
have  you  seen  me  seated  amongst  the  witnesses?  "  Qushayri
understood  that  this  was  the  answer  to  his  unspoken  thought2.
He  now  dismissed  from  his  mind  all  unfriendly  feelings,  and
the  two  became  so  intimate  that  not  a  day  passed  without  one
of  them  visiting  the  other3,  while  on  Qushayri' s  invitation
Abii  Sa'fd  conducted  a  service  once  a  week  in  the  former's
convent4.

These  anecdotes  and  others  of  the  same  tendency  may  be
viewed,  not  as  records  of  what  happened,  but  rather  as
illustrations  of  the  fact  that  in  balancing  the  rival  claims  of
religious  law  and  mystical  truth  Qushayrf  and  Abii  Sa'id
were  inclined  by  temperament  to  take  opposite  sides.  In
every  case,  needless  to  say,  the  legalist  is  worsted  by  the
theosophist,  whose  inner  light  is  his  supreme  and  infallible
authority.  The  following  stories,  in  which  Qushayrf  plays  his
usual  role,  would  not  have  been  worth  translating  unless  they
had  incidentally  sketched  for  us  the  ways  and  manners  of  the
dervishes  whom  Abu  Sa'fd  ruled  over.

One  day  Shaykh  Abu  Sa'id  with  Abu  '1-Qasim  Qushayrf  and
a  large  number  of  §iifi  disciples  were  going  through  the  market-
place of  Nishapur.  A  certain  dervish  let  his  eye  fall  on  some  boiled
turnips  set  out  for  sale  at  the  door  of  a  shop  and  felt  a  craving  for
them.  The  Shaykh  knew  it  by  clairvoyance  (firdsa).  He  pulled  in

1  See,  for  example,  my  abstract  of  the  contents  of  the  Kitdb  al-Luma' ,

69  foil.,  and  Hujwirf,  Kashf  al-Mafrjiib,  393  foil. It  is  certain  that  Qushayri

did  not  condemn  samd'  outright.  He  seems  to  have  held  the  view,  which  was

favoured  by  many  §ufis  that  samd'  is  bad  for  novices,  but  good  for  adepts.

i chard  Hartmann,  Al-Kuschairts  Darstellung  des  $4f (turns,  134  foil.

1  A  95,  15.  •  A  97,  10.  •  A  106,  8.

I]  Abu  Sa'id  ibn  Abi  9l-Khayr  35

the  reins  of  his  horse  and  said  to  Hasan,  "Go  to  that  man's  shop
and  buy  all  the  turnips  and  beetroot  that  he  has  and  bring  them
along."  Meanwhile  he  and  Qushayri  and  the  disciples  entered  a
neighbouring  mosque.  When  Hasan  returned  with  the  turnips  and
beetroot,  the  dinner-call  was  given  and  the  dervishes  began  to  eat.
The  Shaykh  joined  them,  but  Qushayri  refrained  and  secretly
disapproved,  because  the  mosque  was  in  the  middle  of  the  market-
place and  was  open  in  front.  He  said  to  himself,  "  They  are  eating
in  the  street ! "  The  Shaykh,  as  was  his  custom,  took  no  notice.
Two  or  three  days  afterwards  he  and  Qushayri  with  their  disciples
were  present  at  a  splendid  feast.  The  table  was  covered  with  viands
of  all  sorts.  Qushayri  wished  very  much  to  partake  of  a  certain
dish,  but  he  could  not  reach  it  and  was  ashamed  to  ask  for  it.  He
felt  extremely  annoyed.  The  Shaykh  turned  to  him  and  said,
"Doctor,  when  food  is  offered,  you  refuse  it,  and  when  you  want
it,  it  is  not  offered."  Qushayri  silently  begged  God  to  forgive  him
for  what  he  had  done1.

One  day  Qushayri  unfrocked  a  dervish  and  severely  censured
him  and  ordered  him  to  leave  the  city.  The  reason  was  that  the
dervish  admired  Isma'ilak-i  Daqqaq,  one  of  Qushayri's  disciples,
and  had  requested  a  certain  friend  to  make  a  feast  and  invite  the
singers  (qawwdldri)  and  bring  Isma'ilak  with  him.  "Let  me  enjoy
his  company  this  evening  (he  pleaded)  and  shout  in  ecstasy  at  the
sight  of  his  beauty,  for  I  am  on  fire  with  love  for  him."  The  friend
consented  and  gave  a  feast  which  was  followed  by  music  and
singing  (samd').  On  hearing  of  this,  Qushayri  stripped  the  dervish
of  his  gaberdine  and  banished  him  from  Nishapur.  When  the  news
came  to  the  convent  of  Shaykh  Abu  Sa'id,  the  dervishes  were
indignant,  but  they  said  nothing  about  it  to  the  Shaykh,  knowing
that  he  was  acquainted  by  clairvoyance  with  all  that  passed.  The
Shaykh  called  Hasan-i  Mu'addib  and  bade  him  make  ready  a  fine
banquet  and  invite  the  reverend  Doctor  (Qushayri)  and  all  the
Sufis  in  the  town.  "You  must  get  plenty  of  roast  lamb,"  he  said,
"and  sweetmeats,  and  light  a  great  many  candles."  At  nightfall,
when  the  company  assembled,  the  Shaykh  and  the  Doctor  took
their  seats  together  on  a  couch,  and  the  Sufis  sat  in  front  of  it  in
three  rows,  a  hundred  men  in  each  row.  Khwaja  Abu  Tahir,  the
Shaykh's  eldest  son,  who  was  exceedingly  handsome,  presided

1 A  IO2,  IO.

3—2

36  Studies  in  Islamic  Mysticism  [CH.

over  the  table.  As  soon  as  the  time  came  for  dessert,  Hasan  placed
a  large  bowl  of  lawzina  before  the  Shaykh  and  the  Doctor.  After
they  had  helped  themselves,  the  Shaykh  said  to  Abu  Jahir,  "  Take

i>owl  and  go  to  yonder  dervish,  Bii  'Ali  Turshizi,  and  put  half
of  this  lawzina  in  his  mouth  and  eat  the  other  half  yourself."  Abu
Tahir  went  to  the  dervish,  and  kneeling  respectfully  before  him,
took  a  portion  of  the  sweetmeat,  and  after  swallowing  a  mouthful
put  the  other  half  in  the  dervish's  mouth.  The  dervish  raised  a  loud
cry  and  rent  his  garment  and  ran  forth  from  the  convent,  shouting
"  Labbayk ! "  The  Shaykh  said,  "  Abu  Tahir !  I  charge  you  to  wait
upon  that  dervish.  Take  his  staff  and  ewer  and  follow  him  and  be
assiduous  in  serving  him  until  he  reaches  the  Ka'ba."  When  the
dervish  saw  Abu  Jahir  coming  after  him,  he  stopped  and  asked
him  where  he  was  going.  Abu  Tahir  said,  "  My  father  has  sent  me
to  wait  upon  you,"  and  told  him  the  whole  story.  Bu  'Ali  returned
to  the  Shaykh  and  exclaimed,  "For  God's  sake,  bid  Abu  Tahir
leave  me ! "  The  Shaykh  did  so,  whereupon  the  dervish  bowed  and
departed.  Turning  to  Qushayri,  the  Shaykh  said,  "What  need  is
there  to  censure  and  unfrock  and  disgrace  a  dervish  whom  half  a
mouthful  of  lawzina  can  drive  from  the  city  and  cast  away  into
the  Hijaz?  For  four  years  he  has  been  devoted  to  my  Abu  Tahir,
and  except  on  your  account  I  should  never  have  divulged  his
secret."  Qushayri  rose  and  prayed  God  to  forgive  him  and  said,
"  I  have  done  wrong.  Every  day  I  must  learn  from  you  a  new  lesson

:fism."  All  the  Sufis  rejoiced  and  there  were  manifestations  of
ecstasy1.

Abu  Sa'fd's  invariable  success  in  conciliating  his  opponents
is  perhaps  the  greatest  miracle  that  his  biographers  record,
but  their  belief  in  it  will  hardly  be  shared  by  us.  His  mode  of
life  in  Nfshapiir,  as  depicted  by  his  own  friends  and  followers,
must  have  shocked  §uffs  of  the  old  school  who  had  been
taught  to  model  themselves  upon  the  saintly  heroes  of  Moslem ,
asceticism.  What  were  they  to  think  of  a  man  whose  visitors
found  him  lolling  on  cushions,  like  a  lord,  and  having  his  feet
massaged  by  one  of  his  dervishes2?  A  man  who  prayed  every
night  that  God  would  give  his  disciples  something  nice  to  eat3,
and  spent  all  the  money  he  received  on  costly  entertainments?

1  A  103,  14. «  A  109,  17;  179,  12. »  A  294,  ii.

I]  Abu  Sa'fd  ibn  Abi  'l-Khayr  37

Could  their  objections  be  removed  by  exhibitions  of  thought-
reading  or  by  appeals  to  the  divine  right  of  the  saint— T

Thou  art  thus  because  thy  lot  is  thus  and  thus,

I  am  so  because  my  lot  is  so  and  so1 —

or  by  exhortations  to  regard  the  inward  nature  and  dis-
position rather  than  the  outward  act2?  From  the  following
anecdote  it  appears  that  such  arguments  did  not  always
suffice.

When  Abu  Sa'id  was  at  Nishapur,  a  merchant  brought  him  a
present  of  a  large  bundle  of  aloes-wood  and  a  thousand  Nishapuri
dinars.  The  Shaykh  called  Hasan-i  Mu'addib  and  bade  him
prepare  a  feast ;  and  in  accordance  with  his  custom  he  handed  over
the  thousand  dinars  to  him  for  that  purpose.  Then  he  ordered  that
an  oven  should  be  placed  in  the  hall  and  that  the  whole  bundle  of
aloes-wood  should  be  put  in  it  and  burned,  saying,  "  I  do  this  that
my  neighbours  may  enjoy  its  perfume  with  me."  He  also  ordered
a  great  number  of  candles  to  be  lighted,  though  it  was  still  day.
Now,  there  was  at  that  time  in  Nishapur  a  very  powerful  inspector
of  police,  who  held  rationalistic  views3  and  detested  the  Sufis.  This
man  came  into  the  monastery  and  said  to  the  Shaykh,  "What  are
you  doing?  What  an  unheard-of  extravagance,  to  light  candles  in
the  daytime  and  burn  a  whole  bundle  of  aloes-wood  at  once !  It  is
against  the  law4."  The  Shaykh  replied,  "  I  did  not  know  that  it  is
against  the  law.  Go  and  blow  out  these  candles."  The  inspector
went  and  puffed  at  them,  but  the  flame  flared  over  his  face  and
hair  and  dress,  and  most  of  his  body  was  scorched.  "Did  not  you
know,"  said  the  Shaykh,  "that

Whoever  tries  to  blow  a  candle  out

That  God  hath  lighted,  his  moustache  gets  burnt?  "
The  inspector  fell  at  the  Shaykh's  feet  and  became  a  convert5.

While  the  relations  which  Abu  Sa'id  established  with  the
jurists  and  theologians  of  Nishapur  cannot  have  been  friendly,
it  is  likely  enough  that  he  convinced  his  adversaries  of  the
wisdom  or  necessity  of  leaving  him  alone.  In  order  to  under-

1  A  117,  16.  2  A  no,  3.  3  ^\j  ^^».lo.

4  Extravagance  (isrdf)  is  forbidden  in  the  Koran,  6,  142;  7,  29,  etc.

5  A  134,  9. In  another  version  of  this  story  (A  157,  n)  the  offender  is
smitten  with  paralysis.

38  Studies  in  Islamic  Mysticism  [CH.

stand  their  attitude,  we  must  remember  the  divinity  that
hedges  the  Oriental  saint  not  merely  in  the  eyes  of  mystics
but  amongst  all  classes  of  society.  He  wields  an  illimitable
and  mysterious  power  derived  from  Allah,  whose  chosen
instrument  he  is.  As  his  favour  confers  blessing,  so  his
displeasure  is  fraught  with  calamity.  Countless  tales  are  told
of  vengeance  inflicted  on  those  who  have  annoyed  or  insulted
him,  or  shown  any  want  of  respect  in  his  presence.  Even
if  his  enemies  are  willing  to  run  the  risk,  they  must  still
reckon  with  the  widely  spread  feeling  that  it  is  impious  to
criticise  the  actions  of  holy  men,  which  are  inspired  and
guided  by  Allah  Himself.

Naturally,  Abu  Sa'id  required  large  sums  of  money  for
maintaining  the  convent  with,  perhaps,  two  or  three  hundred
disciples,  on  such  a  liberal  scale  of  living  as  he  kept  up.  A
certain  amount  was  contributed  by  novices  who,  on  their
conversion,  put  into  the  common  stock  all  the  worldly  goods
they  possessed,  but  the  chief  part  of  the  revenues  came  in  the
shape  of  gifts  from  lay  brethren  or  wealthy  patrons  or  persons
who  desired  the  Shaykh  to  exert  his  spiritual  influence  on
their  behalf.  No  doubt,  much  food  and  money  was  offered  and
accepted;  much  also  was  collected  by  Hasan-i  Mu'addib,  who
seems  to  have  been  an  expert  in  this  business.  When  voluntary
contributions  failed,  the  Shaykh's  credit  with  the  tradesmen
of  Nfshapiir  enabled  him  to  supply  the  needs  of  his  flock.
Here  are  some  anecdotes  which  describe  how  he  triumphed
over  financial  difficulties.

The  'Amid  of  Khurasan  relates  as  follows:

The  cause  of  my  devotion  to  Shaykh  Abu  Sa'fd  and  his  disciples
was  this.  When  I  first  came  to  Nishapiir,  my  name  was  Hajib
Muhammad  and  I  had  no  servant  to  attend  upon  me.  Every  morn-
ing I  used  to  pass  the  gate  of  the  Shaykh's  convent  and  look  in,  and
whenever  I  saw  the  Shaykh,  that  day  brought  me  a  blessing,  so
that  I  soon  began  to  regard  the  sight  of  him  as  a  happy  omen.
One  night  I  thought  that  on  the  morrow  I  would  go  and  pay  my
respects  to  him  and  take  him  a  present.  I  took  a  thousand  silver
dirhems  of  the  money  which  had  been  recently  coined — thirty
dirhems  to  the  dinar — and  wrapped  them  in  a  piece  of  paper,

I]  Abu  Sa'id  ibn  Abi  9l-Khayr  39

intending  to  visit  the  Shaykh  next  day  and  lay  them  before  him.
I  was  alone  in  the  house  at  the  time  when  I  formed  this  plan,  nor
did  I  speak  of  it  to  any  one.  Afterwards  it  occurred  to  me  that  a
thousand  dirhems  are  a  great  sum,  and  five  hundred  will  be  ample ;

>so  I  divided  the  money  into  two  equal  parts,  which  I  placed  in  two
packets.  Next  morning,  after  prayers,  I  went  to  visit  the  Shaykh,
taking  one  packet  with  me  and  leaving  the  other  behind  my
pillow.  As  soon  as  we  had  exchanged  greetings,  I  gave  the  five
hundred  dirhems  to  Hasan-i  Mu'addib,  who  with  the  utmost
courtesy  approached  the  Shaykh  and  whispered  in  his  ear —
"Ha jib  Muhammad  has  brought  some  pieces  of  money  (shi-
kasta-i)."  The  Shaykh  said,  "God  bless  him!  but  he  has  not
brought  the  full  amount :  he  has  left  half  of  it  behind  his  pillow.
Hasan  owes  a  thousand  dirhems.  Let  him  give  Hasan  the  whole
sum  in  order  that  Hasan  may  satisfy  his  creditors  and  be  freed
from  anxiety."  On  hearing  these  words,  I  was  dumbfounded  and
immediately  sent  a  servant  to  bring  the  remainder  of  the  money
for  Hasan.  Then  I  said  to  the  Shaykh,  "Accept  me."  He  took  my
hand  and  said,  "It  is  finished.  Go  in  peace1."

During  Shaykh  Abu  Sa'id's  stay  in  Nishapur  Hasan-i  Mu'addib,
his  steward,  had  contracted  many  debts  in  order  to  provide  the
dervishes  with  food.  For  a  long  time  he  received  no  gift  of  money
and  his  creditors  were  dunning  him.  One  day  they  came  in  a  body
to  the  convent  gate.  The  Shaykh  told  Hasan  to  let  them  in.  On
being  admitted,  they  bowed  respectfully  to  the  Shaykh  and  sat
down.  Meanwhile  a  boy  passed  the  gate,  crying  "Sweet  cakes
(ndtif)l"  "Go  and  fetch  him,"  said  the  Shaykh.  When  he  was
brought  in,  the  Shaykh  bade  Hasan  seize  the  cakes  and  serve  them
out  to  the  Sufis.  The  boy  demanded  his  money,  but  the  Shaykh
only  said,  "It  will  come."  After  waiting  an  hour,  the  boy  said
again,  "  I  want  my  money"  and  got  the  same  reply.  At  the  end  of
another  hour,  having  been  put  off  for  the  third  time,  he  sobbed,
"My  master  will  beat  me,"  and  burst  into  tears.  Just  then  some
one  entered  the  convent  and  placed  a  purse  of  gold  before  the
Shaykh,  saying,  "  So-and-so  has  sent  it  and  begs  that  you  will  pray
for  him."  The  Shaykh  ordered  Hasan  to  pay  the  creditors  and  the
cake-boy.  It  was  exactly  the  sum  required,  neither  more  nor  less.
The  Shaykh  said,  "  It  came  in  consequence  of  the  tears  of  this  lad2."
1  A  113,  i.  2  A  123,  19.

40  Studies  in  Islamic  Mysticism  [CH.

There  was  in  Nfshapur  a  rich  broker,  Bu  'Amr  by  name,  who
was  such  an  enthusiastic  admirer  (muhibbi)  of  Shaykh  Abu  Sa'id
that  he  entreated  Hasan-i  Mu'addib  to  apply  to  him  for  anything
that  the  Shaykh  might  want,  and  not  to  be  afraid  of  asking  too
much.  One  day  (said  Hasan)  the  Shaykh  had  already  sent  me  to
him  seven  times  with  divers  requisitions  which  he  satisfied  in  full.
At  sunset  the  Shaykh  told  me  to  go  to  him  once  more  and  procure
some  rosewater,  aloes-wood,  and  camphor.  I  felt  ashamed  to
return  to  him ;  however,  I  went.  He  was  closing  his  shop.  When  he
saw  me,  he  cried,  "Hasan!  what  is  it?  You  come  late."  I  expressed
to  him  the  shame  which  I  felt  for  having  called  upon  him  so
frequently  in  one  day  and  I  made  him  acquainted  with  the  Shaykh's
instructions.  He  opened  the  shop-door  and  gave  me  all  that  I
needed;  then  he  said,  "Since  you  are  ashamed  to  apply  to  me  for
these  trifles,  to-morrow  I  will  give  you  a  thousand  dinars  on  the
security  of  the  caravanseray  and  the  bath-house,  in  order  that  you
may  use  that  sum  for  ordinary  expenses  and  come  to  me  for
matters  of  greater  importance."  I  rejoiced,  thinking  that  now  I
was  quit  of  this  ignoble  begging.  When  I  brought  the  rose-water,
aloes-wood,  and  camphor  to  the  Shaykh,  he  regarded  me  with
disapproval  and  said,  "  Hasan !  go  and  purge  thy  heart  of  all  desire
for  worldly  vanities,  that  I  may  let  thee  associate  with  the  Sufis."
I  went  to  the  convent  gate  and  stood  with  bare  head  and  feet  and
repented  and  asked  God  to  forgive  me  and  wept  bitterly  and  rubbed
my  face  on  the  ground ;  but  the  Shaykh  did  not  speak  to  me  that
night.  Next  day  when  he  preached  in  the  hall,  he  paid  no  attention
to  Bu  'Amr,  although  he  was  accustomed  to  look  at  him  every  day
in  the  course  of  his  sermon.  As  soon  as  he  had  finished,  Bu  'Amr
came  to  me  and  said,  "  Hasan !  what  ails  the  Shaykh?  He  has  not
looked  at  me  to-day."  I  said  that  I  did  not  know,  and  then  I  told
him  what  had  passed  between  the  Shaykh  and  me.  Bu  'Amr  went
up  to  the  Shaykh's  chair  and  kissed  it,  saying,  "O  prince  of  the
age,  my  life  depends  on  thy  look.  To-day  thou  hast  not  looked  at
me.  Tell  me  what  I  have  done,  that  I  may  ask  God's  forgiveness

..:  dl li  thee  tn  pardon  my  Offence."  The  Shaykli  said,  "  Will

you  fetch  me  down  from  the  highest  heaven  to  earth  and  demand
a  pledge  from  me  in  return  for  a  thousand  dinars?  If  you  wish  me
to  be  pleased  with  you,  give  me  the  money  now,  and  you  will  see
how  little  it  weighs  in  the  scales  of  my  lofty  spirit ! "  Bu  'Amr

i]  Abu  Sa'id  ibn  Abi  yl-Khayr  41

immediately  went  home  and  brought  back  two  purses,  each  con-
taining five  hundred  Nishapuri  dinars.  The  Shaykh  handed  them
to  me  and  said,  "  Buy  oxen  and  sheep.  Make  a  hotchpotch  (harisa)
of  the  beef  and  a  zira-bd  of  the  mutton,  seasoned  with  saffron  and
otto  of  roses.  Get  plenty  of  lawzina  and  rose-water  and  aloes- wood,
and  light  a  thousand  candles  in  the  daytime.  Lay  the  tables  at
Pushangan  (a  beautiful  village,  which  is  a  pleasure  resort  of  the
people  of  Nishapur),  and  proclaim  in  the  city  that  all  are  welcome
who  wish  to  eat  food  that  entails  neither  obligation  in  this  world
nor  calling  to  account  in  the  next."  More  than  two  thousand  men
assembled  at  Pushangan.  The  Shaykh  came  with  his  disciples  and
entertained  high  and  low  and  with  his  own  blessed  hand  sprinkled
rose-water  over  his  guests  while  they  partook  of  the  viands.

Abu  Sa'id's  methods  of  raising  money  are  further  illus-
trated by  the  story  in  which  it  is  recorded  that,  while
preaching  in  public,  he  held  up  a  sash  and  declared  that  he
must  have  three  hundred  dinars  in  exchange  for  it,  which  sum
was  at  once  offered  by  an  old  woman  in  the  congregation1.
On  another  occasion,  being  in  debt  to  the  amount  of  five
hundred  dinars,  he  sent  a  message  to  a  certain  Abu  '1-Fadl
Furati  that  he  was  about  to  visit  him.  Abu  '1-Fadl  entertained
him  sumptuously  for  three  days,  and  on  the  fourth  day
presented  him  with  five  hundred  dinars,  adding  a  hundred  for
travelling  expenses  and  a  hundred  more  as  a  gift.  The  Shaykh
said,  "  I  pray  that  God  may  take  from  thee  the  riches  of  this
world."  "Nay,"  cried  Abu  '1-Fadl,  "for  had  I  lacked  riches,
the  blessed  feet  of  the  Shaykh  would  never  have  come  here,
and  I  should  never  have  waited  upon  him  and  gained  from
him  spiritual  power  and  peace."  Abu  Sa'id  then  said,  "O
God !  do  not  let  him  be  a  prey  to  worldliness :  make  it  a  means
of  his  spiritual  advancement,  not  a  plague ! "  In  consequence
of  this  prayer  Abu  '1-Fadl  and  his  family  prospered  greatly
and  reached  high  positions  in  church  and  state2.  Apparently,
Abu  Sa'id  did  not  scruple  to  employ  threats  when  the
prospective  donor  disappointed  him.  And  his  threats  were
not  to  be  despised !  For  example,  there  was  the  Amir  Mas'iid
who,  after  once  paying  the  Shaykh's  debts,  obstinately
1  A  280,  3.  2  A  299,  16.

42  Studies  in  Islamic  Mysticism  [CH.

refused  to  comply  with  a  second  demand;  whereupon  Abu
Sa'fd  caused  the  following  verse  to  be  put  into  his  hands  by
Hasan-i  Mu'addib:

Perform  what  thou  hast  promised,  else  thy  might
And  valour  will  not  save  thy  life  from  me !

The  Amfr  flew  into  a  rage  and  drove  Hasan  from  his  presence.
On  being  told  of  this  Abu  Sa'id  uttered  no  word.  That  same
night  Mas'iid,  as  is  the  custom  of  Oriental  princes,  slipped  out
from  his  tent  in  disguise  to  make  a  round  of  the  camp  and
hear  what  the  soldiers  were  saying.  The  royal  tent  was
guarded  by  a  number  of  huge  Ghuri  dogs,  kept  in  chains  by
day  but  allowed  to  roam  at  night,  of  such  ferocity  that  they
would  tear  to  pieces  any  stranger  who  approached.  They  did
not  recognise  their  master,  and  before  any  one  could  answer
his  cries  for  help  he  was  a  mangled  corpse1.

Stories  of  this  type,  showing  the  saint  as  a  minister  of
divine  wrath  and  vengeance,  must  have  influenced  many
superstitious  minds.  The  average  Moslem's  fatalism  and  belief
in  clairvoyance  lead  him  to  justify  acts  which  to  us  seem
desperately  immoral.  Abu  Sa'fd  is  said  to  have  corresponded
with  his  famous  contemporary,  Ibn  Sfna  (Avicenna)2.  I
cannot  regard  as  historical  the  account  of  their  meeting  in  the
monastery  at  Nfshapur,  or  the  report  that  after  they  had
conversed  with  each  other  for  three  days  and  nights  the
philosopher  said  to  his  pupils,  "All  that  I  know  he  sees,"
while  the  mystic  declared,  "All  that  I  see  he  knows3."  Even
less  probable  is  the  statement  that  Avicenna's  mystical
writings  were  the  result  of  a  miracle  wrought  by  Abu  Sa'fd,
which  first  opened  his  eyes  to  the  reality  of  saintship  and
$ufism4.

Among  the  eminent  Persian  mystics  of  this  epoch  none
was  so  nearly  akin  to  Abu  Sa'id  in  temperament  and  character
as  Abu  '1-Hasan  of  Kharaqan5.  Before  leaving  Nfshapur  and

1  A  236,  21.

1  The  Arabic  text  of  a  letter  written  by  Avicenna  in  reply  to  one  from
Abu  Sa'id  is  given  in  H  65,  3.

•  A  251,  16.  «  A  252,  12.

•  See  his  biography  in  'Attar's  Tadhkiratu  'l-Awliyd,  n.  201-255. Some
of  his  sayings  are  translated  in  my  Mystics  of  Islam,  p.  133  foil.

I]  Abu  Sa'id  ibn  Abi  'l-Khayr  43

finally  settling  at  Mayhana,  Abu  Sa'id  paid  him  a  visit,  which
is  described  with  great  particularity1.  A  complete  version
would  be  tedious,  but  I  have  translated  the  most  interesting
passages  in  full.  When  Abu  Tahir,  the  eldest  son  of  Abu  Sa'id,
announced  his  intention  of  making  the  pilgrimage  to  Mecca,
his  father  with  a  numerous  following  of  Sufis  and  disciples
resolved  to  accompany  him.  As  soon  as  the  party  left
Nishapur  behind  them,  Abu  Sa'id  exclaimed,  "Were  it  not
for  my  coming,  the  holy  man  could  not  support  this  sorrow."
His  companions  wondered  whom  he  meant.  Now,  Ahmad
the  son  of  Abu  '1-Hasan  Kharaqani  had  just  been  arrested  and
put  to  death  on  his  wedding-eve.  Abu  '1-Hasan  did  not  know
until  next  morning,  when,  hearing  the  call  to  prayer,  he
came  forth  from  his  cell  and  trod  upon  the  head  of  his  son,
which  the  executioners  had  flung  away.  On  arriving  at
Kharaqan,  Abu  Sa'id  went  into  the  convent  and  entered  the
private  chapel  where  Abu  '1-Hasan  usually  sat.  Abu  '1-Hasan
rose  and  walked  halfway  down  the  chapel  to  meet  him,  and
they  embraced  each  other.  Abu  '1-Hasan  took  Abu  Sa'id's
hand  and  led  him  to  his  own  chair,  but  he  declined  to  occupy
it;  and  since  Abu  '1-Hasan  was  equally  averse  to  take  the
place  of  honour,  both  seated  themselves  in  the  middle  of  the
chapel.  While  they  sat  there  weeping,  Abu  '1-Hasan  begged
Abu  Sa'id  to  give  him  a  word  of  counsel,  but  Abu  Sa'id  said,
"It  is  for  thee  to  speak."  Then  he  bade  the  Koran-readers
who  were  with  him  read  the  Koran  aloud,  and  during  their
chant  the  Sufis  wept  and  wailed.  Abu  '1-Hasan  threw  his
gaberdine  (khirqa)  to  the  readers.  After  that,  the  bier  was
brought  out,  and  they  prayed  over  the  dead  youth  and  buried
im  with  manifestations  of  ecstasy.  When  the  Sufis  had
etired  to  their  cells,  a  dispute  arose  between  them  and  the
aders  for  the  possession  of  Abu  '1-Hasan's  khirqa,  which  the
ufis  claimed  in  order  that  they  might  tear  it  to  pieces.  Abu
1-Hasan  sent  a  message  by  his  servant  to  say  that  the  readers
should  keep  the  khirqa,  and  he  gave  the  Sufis  another  khirqa,
to  be  torn  to  pieces  and  distributed  among  them.  A  separate
chamber  was  prepared  for  Abu  Sa'id,  who  lodged  with  Abu

1  A  175-191.

44  Studies  in  Islamic  Mysticism  [CH.

'1-Hasan  three  days  and  nights.  In  spite  of  his  host's  entreaties
he  refused  to  speak,  saying,  "I  have  been  brought  hither  to
listen."  Then  Abu  '1-Hasan  said,  "I  implored  God  that  He
would  send  to  me  one  of  His  friends,  with  whom  I  might  speak
of  these  mysteries,  for  I  am  old  and  feeble  and  could  not  come
to  thee.  He  will  not  let  thee  go  to  Mecca.  Thou  art  too  holy
to  be  conducted  to  Mecca.  He  will  bring  the  Ka'ba  to  thee,
that  it  may  circumambulate  thee."  Every  morning  Abu
'1-Hasan  came  to  the  door  of  Abu  Sa'id's  room  and  asked—
addressing  the  mother  of  Khwaja  Muzaffar,  whom  Abu  Sa'id
had  brought  with  him  on  this  journey — "How  art  thou,  O
faqira*  Be  sage  and  vigilant,  for  thou  consortest  with  God.
Here  nothing  of  human  nature  remains,  nothing  of  the  flesh
(nafs)  remains.  Here  all  is  God,  all  is  God."  And  in  the  day-
time when  Abu  Sa'id  was  alone,  Abu  '1-Hasan  used  to  come
to  the  door  and  draw  back  the  curtain  and  beg  leave  to  come
hi  and  beseech  Abu  Sa'id  not  to  rise  from  his  couch;  and  he
would  kneel  beside  him  and  put  his  head  close  to  him,  and
they  would  converse  in  low  tones  and  weep  together;  and
Abu  '1-Hasan  would  slip  his  hand  underneath  Abu  Sa'id's
garment  and  lay  it  upon  his  breast  and  cry,  "  I  am  laying  my
hand  upon  the  Everlasting  Light...."  Abu  '1-Hasan  said,  "O
Shaykh,  every  night  I  see  the  Ka'ba  circumambulating  thy
head:  what  need  for  thee  to  go  to  the  Ka'ba?  Turn  back,  for
thou  wast  brought  hither  for  my  sake.  Now  thou  hast  per-
formed the  pilgrimage."  Abu  Sa'id  said,  "I  will  go  and  visit
Bistam  and  return  here."  "Thou  wishest  to  perform  the
'umra,"  said  Abu  '1-Hasan,  "after  having  performed  the
hajj."  Then  Abu  Sa'fd  set  out  for  Bistam,  where  he  visited
the  shrine  of  Bayazfd-i  Bistami.  From  Bistam  the  pilgrims
journeyed  westward  to  Damghan,  and  thence  to  Rayy.  Here
Abu  Sa'fd  made  a  halt  and  declared  that  he  would  go  no
farther  in  the  direction  of  Mecca.  Bidding  farewell  to  those
who  still  persisted  in  their  intention  of  performing  the  pil-
grimage, the  rest  of  the  party,  including  Abu  Sa'fd  and  his
son  Abu  J^hir,  turned  their  faces  towards  Kharaqan  and
Nfshapur.

The  last  years  of  Abu  Sa'fd's  life  were  spent  in  retirement

spe
COT

l]  Abu  Sa'id  ibn  Abi  'l-Khayr  45

at  Mayhana.  We  are  told  that  his  final  departure  from
Nishapiir  was  deeply  regretted  by  the  inhabitants,  and  that
the  chief  men  of  the  city  urged  him  in  vain  to  alter  his
decision1.  With  advancing  years  he  may  have  felt  that  the
duties  which  devolved  upon  him  as  a  director  of  souls  (not  to
speak  of  bodies)  were  too  heavy  a  burden :  in  his  old  age  he
uld  not  rise  without  being  helped  by  two  disciples  who  took
hold  of  his  arms  and  lifted  him  from  his  seat2.  He  left  no
money  in  the  convent,  saying  that  God  would  send  whatever
was  necessary  for  its  upkeep.  According  to  the  biographer,
this  prediction  was  fulfilled,  and  although  the  convent  never
possessed  a  sure  source  of  income  (ma'lum),  it  attracted  a
larger  number  of  dervishes  and  received  more  spiritual  and
material  blessings  than  any  other  religious  house  in  Nishapiir,
until  it  was  destroyed  by  the  invading  Ghuzz3.

Abu  Sa'id  lived  1000  months  (83  years  +  4  months).  He
died  at  Mayhana  on  the  4th  of  Sha'ban,  A.H.  440  =  I2th  of
January,  A.D.  1049,  and  was  buried  in  the  mosque  opposite
his  house4.  His  tomb  bore  the  following  lines  in  Arabic,  which
he  himself  had  chosen  for  an  epitaph :

I  beg,  nay,  charge  thee :  Write  on  my  gravestone,
"This  was  love's  bondsman,"  that  when  I  am  gone,
Some  wretch  well-versed  in  passion's  ways  may  sigh
And  give  me  greeting,  as  he  passes  by5.

Apart  from  several  allusions  to  his  corpulence,  the  only
description  of  Abu  Sa'id's  personal  appearance  that  his
biographers  have  preserved  is  the  following,  which  depicts
him  as  he  was  seen  by  an  old  man  whom  he  saved  from  dying
of  thirst  in  the  desert :

tall,  stout,  with  a  white  skin  and  wide  eyes  and  a  long  beard
falling  to  the  navel;  clad  in  a  patched  frock  (muraqqa');  in  his
hands  a  staff  and  a  ewer;  a  prayer-rug  thrown  over  his  shoulder,
also  a  razor  and  toothpick ;  a  Sufi  cap  on  his  head,  and  on  his  feet
shoes  of  cotton  soled  with  linen-rags  (jumjum) ;  light  was  shining
from  his  face 6.

1  A  193,  18.  2  A  no,  16.  3  A  195,  3.  *  A  67,  i.

5  H  78,  19. A  445,  12,  «  A  80,  14.

46  Studies  in  Islamic  Mysticism  [CH.

This  sketch  of  his  life  has  shown  us  the  saint  and  the  abbot
in  one.  Before  coming  into  closer  touch  with  the  former
character,  I  should  like  to  refer  to  a  few  passages  of  specially
monastic  interest.

The  first  gives  ten  rules  which  Abu  Sa'id  caused  to  be  put
in  writing,  in  order  that  they  might  be  observed  punctiliously
by  the  inmates  of  his  convent.  In  the  original,  after  every  rule
there  follow  some  words  of  the  Koran  on  which  it  is  based.

I. Let  them  keep  their  garments  clean  and  themselves  always

pure.

II.  Let  them  not  sit1  in  the  mosque  or  in  any  holy  place  for  the
sake  of  gossiping.

III.  In  the  first  instance2  let  them  perform  their  prayers  in

common.

IV.  Let  them  pray  much  at  night.

V. At  dawn  let  them  ask  forgiveness  of  God  and  call  unto  Him.
VI. In  the  morning  let  them  read  as  much  of  the  Koran  as  they

can,  and  let  them  not  talk  until  the  sun  has  risen.
VII. Between  evening  prayers  and  bedtime  prayers  let  them
occupy  themselves  with  repeating  some  litany  (wirdi  u
dhikri).

VIII.  Let  them  welcome  the  poor  and  needy  and  all  who  join
their  company,  and  let  them  bear  patiently  the  trouble  of
(waiting  upon)  them.

IX. Let  them  not  eat  anything  save  in  participation  with  one
another.

X.  Let  them  not  absent  themselves  without  receiving  per-
mission from  one  another.

Furthermore,  let  them  spend  their  hours  of  leisure  in  one  of
three  things :  either  in  the  study  of  theology  or  in  some  devotional
exercise  (wirdi)  or  in  bringing  comfort  to  some  one.  Whosoever
loves  this  community  and  helps  them  as  much  as  he  can  is  a  sharer
in  their  merit  and  future  recompense3.

1  Reading

*  *i*^  J^W»  * •«••  I  suppose,  at  the  commencement  of  their  monastic
life.

•  A  416,  5.

l]  Abu  Scftd  ibn  Abi  'l-Khayr  47

Pir  Abu  Salih  Dandani,  a  disciple  of  Shaykh  Abu  Sa'id,  used
continually  to  stand  beside  him  with  a  pair  of  nail-scissors  in  his
hand.  Whenever  the  Shaykh  looked  at  his  woollen  gaberdine  and
saw  the  nap  (purz)  on  it,  he  would  pull  the  nap  with  his  fingers,
and  then  Abu  Salih  would  at  once  remove  it  with  the  nail-scissors,
for  the  Shaykh  was  so  absorbed  in  contemplation  of  God  that  he
did  not  wish  to  be  disturbed  by  perceiving  the  state  of  his  clothes.
Abu  Salih  was  the  Shaykh's  barber  and  used  regularly  to  trim  his
moustache.  A  certain  dervish  desired  to  be  taught  the  proper  way
of  doing  this.  Abu  Salih  smiled  and  said,  "It  is  no  such  easy
matter.  A  man  needs  seventy  masters  of  the  craft  to  instruct  him
how  the  moustache  of  a  dervish  ought  to  be  trimmed."  This  Abu
Salih  related  that  the  Shaykh,  towards  the  end  of  his  life,  had  only
one  tooth  left.  "Every  night,  after  supper,  I  used  to  give  him  a
toothpick,  with  which  he  cleansed  his  mouth;  and  when  he  washed
his  hands,  he  would  pour  water  on  the  toothpick  and  lay  it  down.
One  evening  I  thought  to  myself,  '  He  has  no  teeth  and  does  not
require  a  toothpick:  why  should  he  take  it  from  me  every  night? '
The  Shaykh  raised  his  head  and  looked  at  me  and  said,  '  Because
I  wish  to  observe  the  Sunna  and  because  I  hope  to  win  divine
mercy.  The  Prophet  has  said,  May  God  have  mercy  upon  those  of  my
people  who  use  the  toothpick  in  their  ablutions  and  at  their  meals ! '
I  was  overcome  with  shame  and  began  to  weep1."

Pir  Hubbi  was  the  Shaykh's  tailor.  One  day  he  came  in
with  a  garment  belonging  to  the  Shaykh  which  he  had  mended.
At  that  moment  the  Shaykh  was  taking  his  noonday  siesta
and  reclining  on  a  couch,  while  Khwaja  'Abdu  1-Karim,  his
valet,  sat  beside  his  pillow  and  fanned  him.  Khwaja  'Abdu  '1-
Karim  exclaimed,  "What  are  you  doing  here?"  Pir  Hubbi
retorted,  "  Wherever  there  is  room  for  you,  there  is  room  for
me."  The  valet  laid  down  the  fan  and  struck  him  again  and
again.  After  seven  blows  the  Shaykh  said,  "  That  is  enough."
Pir  Hubbi  went  off  and  complained  to  Khwaja  Najjar,  who
said  to  the  Shaykh,  when  he  came  out  for  afternoon  prayers,
"The  young  men  lift  their  hands  against  the  elders:  what  says
the  Shaykh?"  The  Shaykh  replied,  "Khwaja  'Abdu  '1-Karim's
hand  is  my  hand,"  and  nothing  more  was  said  about  it2.

1  A  146,  4.  2  A  271,  5.

48  Studies  in  Islamic  Mysticism  [CH.

II.

In  describing  Abu  Sa'fd's  mystical  doctrines  and  their
relation  to  the  historical  development  of  §ufism,  European
scholars  have  hitherto  relied  almost  exclusively  on  the
quatrains  which  he  is  said  to  have  composed  and  of  which
more  than  six  hundred  have  been  published1.  As  I  have
shown  above  (p.  4,  note  3),  it  is  doubtful  whether  Abu  Sa'id
is  the  author  of  any  of  these  poems,  and  we  may  be  sure  that
in  the  main  they  are  not  his  work  and  were  never  even
quoted  by  him.  To  repeat  what  has  been  already  said,  they
form  a  miscellaneous  anthology  drawn  from  a  great  number  of
poets  who  flourished  at  different  periods,  and  consequently
they  reflect  the  typical  ideas  of  Persian  mysticism  as  a  whole.

Abu  Sa'fd  helped  to  bring  its  peculiar  diction  and  symbolism
into  vogue,  by  quoting  Sufi  poetry  in  his  sermons  and  allowing
it  to  be  chanted  in  the  samd' ,  but  we  may  hesitate  to  accept
the  view  that  he  invented  this  style  (which  occurs,  full-blown,
in  the  odes  of  his  contemporary,  Baba  Kuhi  of  Shfraz)  or  was
the  first  to  embody  it  in  quatrains.

The  mysticism  which  his  sayings  and  sermons  unfold  has
neither  the  precision  of  a  treatise  nor  the  coherence  of  a
system.  It  is  experimental,  not  doctrinal  or  philosophical.  It
does  not  concern  itself  with  abstract  speculations,  but  sets
forth  in  simple  and  un technical  language  such  principles  and
maxims  as  bear  directly  on  the  religious  life  and  are  the  fruit
of  dearly-bought  experience.  As  we  read,  we  seem  to  hear
the  voice  of  the  teacher  addressing  his  disciples  and  ex-
pounding for  their  benefit  the  truths  that  had  been  revealed
to  him.  Abu  Sa'fd  borrows  much  from  his  predecessors,
sometimes  mentioning  them  by  name,  but  often  appropriating

1  92  by  H.  Eth6  in  Sitzungsberichte  der  konigl.  bayer.  Akademie  der
Wissenschaften,  philosophisch-philologische  Classe  (1875),  pp.  145-168  and
(1878),  pp.  38-70;  400  by  Mawlavi  'Abdu  '1-Wali  in  the  Journal  of  the
Asiatic  Society  of  Bengal,  vol.  v,  No.  n  (December,  1909)  and  vol.  vn,
No.  10  (November,  1911);  and  1 1 2  by  H.  D.  Graves  Law  in  the  same  journal
(according  to  an  offprint  given  to  me  by  the  author  in  i<)i3,  which  refers  to
'Abdu  'l-Wali's  work  as  "comparatively  recent";  but  I  cannot  find  the
article  in  the  volumes  issued  in  1912  and  1913.  It  is  entitled  "Some  new
quatrains  of  Abu  Sa'id  ibn  Abi  '1-Khair").

I]  Abu  Scfid  ibn  Abi  'l-Khayr  49

their  wisdom  without  a  word  of  acknowledgement1.  Amongst
Moslems,  this  kind  of  plagiarism  is  considered  respectable,
even  when  the  culprit  is  not  a  saint.

The  sayings  of  Abu  Sa'id  include  several  definitions  of
Sufism,  which  it  will  be  convenient  to  translate  before  going
further.

1.  To  lay  aside  what  thou  hast  in  thy  head,  to  give  what  thou
hast  in  thy  hand,  and  not  to  recoil  from  whatsoever  befalls  thee2.

2.  Sufism  is  two  things :  to  look  in  one  direction  and  to  live  in
one  way  3.

3.  Sufism  is  a  name  attached  to  its  object;  when  it  reaches  its
ultimate  perfection,  it  is  God  (i.e.  the  end  of  Sufism  is  that,  for
the  Sufi,  nothing  should  exist  except  God)4.

4.  It  is  glory  in  wretchedness  and  riches  in  poverty  and
lordship  in  servitude  and  satiety  in  hunger  and  clothedness  in
nakedness  and  freedom  in  slavery  and  life  in  death  and  sweetness
in  bitterness5.

5.  The  Sufi  is  he  who  is  pleased  with  all  that  God  does,  in  order
that  God  may  be  pleased  with  all  that  he  does6.

6.  Sufism  is  patience  under  God's  commanding  and  forbidding,
and  acquiescence  and  resignation  in  the  events  determined  by
divine  providence7.

7.  Sufism  is  the  will  of  the  Creator  concerning  His  creatures
when  no  creature  exists8.

8.  To  be  a  Sufi  is  to  cease  from  taking  trouble  (takalluf) ;  and
there  is  no  greater  trouble  for  thee  than  thine  own  self  (tu'i-yi  tu),
for  when  thou  art  occupied  with  thyself,  thou  remainest  away  from
God9.

9.  He  said,  "Even  this  Sufism  is  polytheism  (shirk)."  "Why,

1  One  of  his  sayings,  which  is  given  both  in  Arabic  and  Persian  and  is
ascribed  to  "a  certain  sage,"  reveals  the  source  (hitherto,  I  believe,  un-
identified) of  Sir  William  Jones's  lines  To  an  Infant  newly  born:

"On  parent's  knees,  a  naked  new-born  child,
Weeping  thou  sat'st  while  all  around  thee  smiled;
So  live,  that  sinking  in  thy  long  last  sleep.
Calm  thou  mayst  smile,  while  all  around  thee  weep."

The  original  is  in  prose  and  runs  as  follows:  "Thou  wast  born  weeping,
whilst  thy  folk  smiled.  Endeavour  to  die  smiling,  whilst  thy  folk  weep"
(A  317,  14).

2  A  373,  7.  3  A  373,  16.  4  A  375,  n.  6  A  380,  2.

6  A  381,  5.  7  A  383,  i.  8  A  386,  4.  9  A  389,  16.

N.  s.  ii  4.

50  Studies  in  Islamic  Mysticism  [CH.

O  Shaykh? "  they  asked.  He  answered,  "Because  Sufism  consists
in  guarding  the  soul  from  what  is  other  than  God;  and  there  is
nothing  other  than  God1.

The  quietism  and  pantheistic  self-abandonment,  on  which
these  definitions  lay  so  much  stress,  forms  only  the  negative
side  of  Abu  Sa'id's  mystical  teaching.  His  doctrine  of  fund,
the  passing-away  from  self,  is  supplemented  by  an  equally
characteristic  positive  element,  of  which  I  shall  have  more  to
say  presently.  Both  aspects  are  indicated  in  the  following
maxim:  "A  man  ought  to  be  occupied  with  two  things: — he
ought  to  put  away  all  that  keeps  him  apart  from  God,  and
bring  comfort  to  dervishes2."

Innumerable  are  the  ways  to  God3,  yet  the  Way  is  but  a
single  step:  "take  one  step  out  of  thyself,  that  thou  mayst
arrive  at  God4."  To  pass  away  from  self  (fund)  is  to  realise
that  self  does  not  exist,  and  that  nothing  exists  except  God
(taw hid).  The  Tradition,  "He  who  knows  himself  knows  his
Lord,"  signifies  that  he  who  knows  himself  as  not-being
(adam)  knows  God  as  Real  Being  (wujud)5.  This  knowledge
cannot  be  obtained  through  the  intellect,  since  the  Eternal
and  Uncreated  is  inaccessible  to  that  which  is  created6;  it
cannot  be  learned,  but  is  given  by  divine  illumination.  The
organ  which  receives  it  is  the  "heart"  (qalb  or  dil),  a  spiritual
faculty,  not  the  heart  of  flesh  and  blood.  In  a  remarkable
passage  Abu  Sa'id  refers  to  a  divine  principle,  which  he  calls
sirr  Allah,  i.e.  the  conscience  or  consciousness  of  God,  and
describes  it  as  something  which  God  communicates  to  the
"heart."

Answering  the  question,  "What  is  sincerity  (ikhlds)?  "  he
said:

The  Prophet  has  said  that  ikhld§  is  a  divine  sirr  in  man's  heart
and  soul,  which  sirr  is  the  object  of  His  pure  contemplation  and
is  replenished  by  God's  pure  contemplation  thereof.  Whosoever
declares  God  to  be  One,  his  belief  in  the  divine  Unity  depends  on
that  sirr.

1  A  319,  8.  «  A  380.  6.  »  A  380,  9.  «  A  74,  13.

•  A  402,  3.  •  A  397,  8.

i]  Abu  Sa'id  ibn  Abi  'l-Khayr  51

Being  asked  to  define  it,  he  continued  as  follows:

That  sirr  is  a  substance  of  God's  grace  (latifa) — for  He  is  gracious
(latif)  unto  His  servants  (Koran,  42,  18) — and  it  is  produced  by
the  bounty  and  mercy  of  God,  not  by  the  acquisition  and  action  of
man.  At  first,  He  produces  a  need  and  longing  and  sorrow  in  man's
heart;  then  He  contemplates  that  need  and  sorrow,  and  in  His
bounty  and  mercy  deposits  in  that  heart  a  spiritual  substance
(latifa)  which  is  hidden  from  the  knowledge  of  angel  and  prophet.
That  substance  is  called  sirr  Allah,  and  that  is  ikhlds1....Tha.t  pure
sirr  is  the  Beloved  of  Unitarians.  It  is  immortal  and  does  not
become  naught,  since  it  subsists  in  God's  contemplation  of  it.  It
belongs  to  the  Creator:  the  creatures  have  no  part  therein,  and
in  the  body  it  is  a  loan.  Whoever  possesses  it  is  "living"  (hayy),
and  whoever  lacks  it  is  "animal"  (hayawdn).  There  is  a  great
difference  between  the  "living"  and  the  "animal"2.

Students  of  medieval  Christian  mysticism  will  find  many
analogies  to  this  sirr  Allah,  e.g.  the  "synteresis"  of  Gerson
and  Eckhart's  "  spark  "  or  "  ground  of  the  soul."

I  will  now  translate  some  of  Abu  Sa'id's  discourses  and
sayings  on  the  Way  to  God  through  self -negation.

He  was  asked,  "When  shall  a  man  be  freed  from  his
wants?  "

"When  God  shall  free  him,"  he  replied;  "this  is  not  effected  by  a
man's  exertion,  but  by  the  grace  and  help  of  God.  First  of  all,  He
brings  forth  in  him  the  desire  to  attain  this  goal.  Then  He  opens
to  him  the  gate  of  repentance  (tawba).  Then  He  throws  him  into
self-mortification  (mujdhada),  so  that  he  continues  to  strive  and,
for  a  while,  to  pride  himself  upon  his  efforts,  thinking  that  he  is
advancing  or  achieving  something;  but  afterwards  he  falls  into
despair  and  feels  no  joy.  Then  he  knows  that  his  work  is  not  pure,
but  tainted,  he  repents  of  the  acts  of  devotion  which  he  had  thought
to  be  his  own,  and  perceives  that  they  were  done  by  God's  grace
and  help,  and  that  he  was  guilty  of  polytheism  (shirk)  in  attributing
them  to  his  own  exertion.  When  this  becomes  manifest,  a  feeling
of  joy  enters  his  heart.  Then  God  opens  to  him  the  gate  of  certainty
(yaqin),  so  that  for  a  time  he  takes  anything  from  any  one  and
accepts  contumely  and  endures  abasement,  and  knows  for  certain

1  A  383,  15.  2  A  385,  3.

52  Studies  in  Islamic  Mysticism  [CH.

by  Whom  it  is  brought  to  pass,  and  doubt  concerning  this  is
removed  from  his  heart.  Then  God  opens  to  him  the  gate  of  love
(mahabba),  and  here  too  egoism  shows  itself  for  a  time  and  he  is
exposed  to  blame  (maldma),  which  means  that  in  his  love  of  God  he
meets  fearlessly  whatever  may  befall  him  and  recks  not  of  reproach ;
but  still  he  thinks  '  I  love '  and  finds  no  rest  until  he  perceives  that
it  is  God  who  loves  him  and  keeps  him  in  the  state  of  loving,  and
that  this  is  the  result  of  divine  love  and  grace,  not  of  his  own
endeavour.  Then  God  opens  to  him  the  gate  of  unity  (tawhid)  and
causes  him  to  know  that  all  action  depends  on  God  Almighty.
Hereupon  he  perceives  that  all  is  He,  and  all  is  by  Him,  and  all  is
His;  that  He  has  laid  this  self-conceit  upon  His  creatures  in  order
to  prove  them,  and  that  He  in  His  omnipotence  ordains  that  they
shall  hold  this  false  belief,  because  omnipotence  is  His  attribute,
so  that  when  they  regard  His  attributes  they  shall  know  that  He  is
the  Lord.  What  formerly  was  hearsay  now  becomes  known  to  him
intuitively  as  he  contemplates  the  works  of  God.  Then  he  entirely
recognises  that  he  has  not  the  right  to  say  ' I '  or  'mine.'  At  this
stage  he  beholds  his  helplessness;  desires  fall  away  from  him  and
he  becomes  free  and  calm.  He  wishes  that  which  God  wishes :  his
own  wishes  are  gone,  he  is  emancipated  from  his  wants,  and  has
gained  peace  and  joy  in  both  worlds.... First,  action  is  necessary,
then  knowledge,  in  order  that  thou  mayst  know  that  thou  knowest
naught  and  art  no  one.  This  is  not  easy  to  know.  It  is  a  thing  that
cannot  be  rightly  learned  by  instruction,  nor  sewn  on  with  needle
nor  tied  on  with  thread.  It  is  the  gift  of  God1."

The  heart's  vision  is  what  matters,  not  the  tongue's  speech.
Thou  wilt  never  escape  from  thy  self  (nafs)  until  thou  slay  it.  To
say  "  There  is  no  god  but  Allah  "  is  not  enough.  Most  of  those  who
make  the  verbal  profession  of  faith  are  polytheists  at  heart,  and
polytheism  is  the  one  unpardonable  sin.  Thy  whole  body  is  full  of
doubt  and  polytheism.  Thou  must  cast  them  out  in  order  to  be  at
peace.  Until  thou  deny  thy  self  thou  wilt  never  believe  in  God.
Thy  self,  which  is  keeping  thee  far  from  God  and  saying,  "  So-and-
so  has  treated  thee  ill,"  "such  and  such  a  one  has  done  well  by
thee,"  points  the  way  to  creatureliness ;  and  all  this  is  polytheism.
Nothing  depends  on  the  creatures,  all  depends  on  the  Creator.
This  thou  must  know  and  say,  and  having  said  it  thou  must  stand

1  A  376,  n.

I]  Abu  Scfid  ibn  Abi  'l-Khayr  53

firm.  To  stand  firm  (istiqdma)  means  that  when  thou  hast  said
"One,"  thou  must  never  again  say  "Two."  Creator  and  creature
are  "Two."... Do  not  double  like  a  fox,  that  ye  may  suddenly
start  up  in  some  other  place :  that  is  not  right  faith.  Say  "  Allah ! "
and  stand  firm  there.  Standing  firm  is  this,  that  when  thou  hast
said  "God"  thou  shouldst  no  more  speak  or  think  of  created
things,  so  that  it  is  just  as  though  they  were  not.... Love  that  One
who  does  not  cease  to  be  when  thou  ceasest,  in  order  that  thou
mayst  be  such  a  being  that  thou  never  wilt  cease  to  be1 !

So  long  as  any  one  regards  his  purity  and  devotion,  he  says
"Thou  and  I,"  but  when  he  considers  exclusively  the  bounty  and
mercy  of  God,  he  says  "Thou!  Thou!"  and  then  his  worship2
becomes  a  reality3.

He  was  asked,  "What  is  evil  and  what  is  the  worst  evil?  "
He  replied,  "Evil  is  ' thou ' ;  and  the  worst  evil  is  ' thou/  when
thou  knowest  it  not4."

Abu  Sa'id's  belief  that  he  had  escaped  from  the  prison  of
individuality  was  constantly  asserting  itself.  Once  he  attended
a  party  of  mourners  (ta'ziya),  where  the  visitors,  as  they
arrived,  were  announced  by  a  servant  (mu'arrif)  who  with  a
loud  voice  enumerated  their  titles  of  honour  (alqdb) .  When  Abu
Sa'id  appeared,  the  mu'arrif  inquired  how  he  should  announce
him.  " Go,"  said  he,  "and  tell  them  to  make  way  for  Nobody,
the  son  of  Nobody5."  In  speaking  of  himself,  he  never  used  the
pronouns  "I"  or  "we,"  but  invariably  referred  to  himself  as
"they"  (ishdri).  The  author  of  the  A  srdru  'l-ta  whid  apologises
for  having  restored  the  customary  form  of  speech,  pointing
out  that  if  he  had  retained  "they"  in  such  cases,  the  meaning
of  the  text  would  have  been  confused  and  unintelligible  to

Iost6.
While  the  attainment  of  selflessness  is  independent  of
1  A  371,  5  (abridged  in  translation).
2  Bandagi  (Arabic  'ubudiyya)  is  properly  man's  relation  as  a  slave  to  his
Lord. Cf .  R.  Hartmann,  A  l-Kuschairis  Darstellung  des  Stifttums,  p.  5  foil.
3  A  410,  16.  4  A  403,  3.  5  A  348,  3.

6  A  12,  7.  Probably  for  the  same  reason,  Abu  Sa'id  discarded  the  im-
perative, using  the  impersonal  form  instead  (A  68,  12).  He  always  said,
" It  is  necessary  to  do  so-and-so"  (chunin  bdyad  hard),  not  "Do  so-and-so"
{chunin  bikuri).

54  Studies  in  Islamic  Mysticism  [CH.

human  initiative,  the  mystic  participates,  to  some  extent,  in
the  process  by  which  it  is  attained.  A  power  not  his  own
draws  him  on  towards  the  goal,  but  this  divine  attraction
(kashish)  demands,  on  his  part,  an  inward  striving  (kushish),
without  which  there  can  be  no  vision  (binish)1.  Like  many
Suffs,  Abu  Sa'fd  admits  freewill  in  practice  but  denies  it  in
theory.  As  a  spiritual  director,  he  could  not  teach  what,  as  a
pantheist,  he  was  bound  to  believe — that  the  only  real  agent
is  God.  Speaking  from  the  standpoint  of  the  religious  law,  he
used  often  to  say:  " O  God !  whatever  comes  from  me  to  Thee
I  beseech  Thee  to  forgive,  and  whatever  comes  from  Thee  to
me,  Thine  is  the  praise2 ! "  On  the  other  hand,  he  says  that
had  there  been  no  sinners,  God's  mercy  would  have  been
wasted3;  and  that  Adam  would  not  have  been  visited  with
the  tribulation  of  sin  unless  forgiveness  were  the  dearest  of  all
things  to  God4.  In  the  following  passage  he  suggests  that
although  sin  is  an  act  of  disobedience  to  the  divine  com-
mandment (a mr) ,  it  is  none  the  less  determined  by  the  divine
will  (irdda).

On  the  Day  of  Resurrection  Iblis  (Satan)  will  be  brought  to
judgment  with  all  the  devils,  and  he  will  be  charged  with  having
led  multitudes  of  people  astray.  He  will  confess  that  he  called  on
them  to  follow  him,  but  will  plead  that  they  need  not  have  done  so.
Then  God  will  say,  "  Let  that  pass !  Now  worship  Adam,  in  order
that  thou  mayst  be  saved."  The  devils  will  implore  him  to  obey
and  thereby  deliver  himself  and  them  from  torment,  but  Iblis
will  answer,  weeping,  "  Had  it  depended  on  my  will,  I  would  have
worshipped  Adam  at  the  time  when  I  was  first  bidden.  God
commands  me  to  worship  him,  but  does  not  will  it.  Had  He  willed
it,  I  should  have  worshipped  him  then5."

It  is  significant  that  Abu  Sa'fd  lets  Iblfs  have  the  last  word,
whereas  Hallaj,  who  was  faced  with  the  same  dilemma,
insisted  that  the  saint  must  fulfil  the  divine  command  (amr)
at  whatever  cost  of  suffering  to  himself.

The  "inward  striving"  after  selflessness  is  identical  with

1  A  387.  9.  »  A  408,  14.  »  A  398,  10.  4  A  401,  17.

*  A  332,  14.  For  a  full  discussion  of  the  doctrine  of  amr  and  irdda  see
Massignon's  edition  of  the  Kitdb  al-fawdsin,  p.  145  foil.

I]  Abu  Sa'id  ibn  Abi  '1-Khayr  55

the  state  which  Abu  Sa'id  calls  "want"  (niydz).  There  is  no
way  nearer  to  God  than  this1.  It  is  described  as  a  living  and
luminous  fire  placed  by  God  in  the  breasts  of  His  servants  in
order  that  their  "self"  (nafs)  maybe  burned;  and  when  it  has
been  burned,  the  fire  of  "want"  becomes  the  fire  of  "longing"
(shawq)  which  never  dies,  neither  in  this  world  nor  in  the  next,
and  is  only  increased  by  vision2.

Complete  negation  of  individuality  involves  complete
affirmation  of  the  real  and  universal  Self — a  fact  which  is
expressed  by  Sufis  in  the  formula,  "Abiding  after  passing-
away"  (al-baqd  ba'd  al-fand).  The  perfect  mystic  abides  in
God,  and  yet  (as  Ruysbroeck  says)  "he  goes  out  towards
created  things  in  a  spirit  of  love  towards  all  things,  in  the
virtues  and  in  works  of  righteousness3."  He  is  not  an  ecstatic
devotee  lost  in  contemplation  of  the  Oneness,  nor  a  saintly
recluse  shunning  all  commerce  with  mankind,  but  a  philan-
thropist who  in  all  his  words  and  actions  exhibits  and  diffuses
amongst  those  around  him  the  divine  life  with  which  he  has
been  made  one.  "The  true  saint,"  said  Abu  Sa'id,  "goes  in
and  out  amongst  the  people  and  eats  and  sleeps  with  them
and  buys  and  sells  in  the  market  and  marries  and  takes  part
in  social  intercourse,  and  never  forgets  God  for  a  single
moment4."  His  ideal  of  charity  and  brotherhood  was  a  noble
one,  however  he  may  have  abused  it.  He  declared  that  there
is  no  better  and  easier  means  of  attaining  to  God  than  by
bringing  joy  to  the  heart  of  a  Moslem5,  and  quoted  with
approval  the  saying  of  Abu  '!-' Abbas  Bashshar,  "When  a
disciple  performs  an  act  of  kindness  to  a  dervish,  it  is  better
for  him  than  a  hundred  genuflexions;  and  if  he  gives  him  a
mouthful  of  food,  it  is  better  for  him  than  a  whole  night  spent
in  prayer6."  His  purse  was  always  open,  and  he  never
quarrelled  with  any  one7,  because  he  regarded  all  creatures
with  the  eye  of  the  Creator,  not  with  the  eye  of  the  creatures8.
When  his  followers  wished  to  chastise  a  bigot  who  had  cursed

1  A  328,  10.  2  A  388,  10.

3  Cf.  my  Mystics  of  Islam,  p.  162  foil.

4  A  259,  5. 6  A  380,  ii.  6  A  329,  12.
7  A  306,  17;  220,  3.  8  A  382,  9.

56  Studies  in  Islamic  Mysticism  [CH.

him,  he  restrained  them,  saying,  "God  forbid!  He  is  not
cursing  me,  but  he  thinks  that  my  belief  is  false  and  that  his
own  belief  is  true :  therefore  he  is  cursing  that  false  belief  for
God's  sake1."  He  seldom  preached  on  Koranic  texts  describing
the  pains  of  Hell,  and  in  his  last  years,  when  reciting  the  Koran,
he  passed  overall  the  "verses  of  torment"  (dydt-i  'adhdb).  "O
God ! "  he  cried,  "inasmuch  as  men  and  stones  have  the  same
value  in  Thy  sight,  feed  the  flames  of  Hell  with  stones  and  do
not  burn  these  miserable  wretches2 ! "  Although  Abu  Sa'id's
charity  embraced  all  created  beings,  he  makes  a  clear  dis-
tinction between  the  Sufis  and  the  rest  of  his  fellow-men.  The
Stiffs  are  God's  elect  and  are  united  by  a  spiritual  affinity
which  is  more  binding  than  any  ties  of  blood.

Four  thousand  years  before  God  created  these  bodies,  He
created  the  souls  and  kept  them  beside  Himself  and  shed  a  light
upon  them.  He  knew  what  quantity  of  light  each  soul  received
and  He  was  showing  favour  to  each  in  proportion  to  its  illumina-
tion. The  souls  remained  all  that  time  in  the  light  until  they
became  fully  nourished.  Those  who  in  this  world  live  in  joy  and
agreement  with  one  another  must  have  been  akin  to  one  another
in  yonder  place.  Here  they  love  one  another  and  are  called  the
friends  of  God,  and  they  are  brethren  who  love  one  another  for
God's  sake.  These  souls  know  each  other  by  the  smell,  like  horses.
Though  one  be  in  the  East  and  the  other  in  the  West,  yet  they  feel
joy  and  comfort  in  each  other's  talk,  and  one  who  lives  in  a  later
generation  than  the  other  is  instructed  and  consoled  by  the  words
of  his  friend8.

Abu  Sa'fd  said:

Whoever  goes  with  me  in  this  Way  is  my  kinsman,  even  though
he  be  many  degrees  removed  from  me,  and  whoever  does  not  back
me  in  this  matter  is  nobody  to  me,  even  though  he  be  one  of  my
nearest  relatives4.

To  many  Christians  the  description  of  Abu  Sa'fd  as  a
Moslem  saint  will  seem  doubly  paradoxical.  The  Moham-
medan notion  of  saintship,  which  is  founded  on  ecstasy5,

1  A  120,  2.  'A  261,  i ;  359,  15.  *  A  399,  14.

4  A  391,  12.  •  See  The  Mystics  of  Islam,  p.  120  foil.

i]  Abu  Scfid  ibn  Abi  'l-Khayr  57

justifies  the  noun;  but  we  may  still  wonder  that  the  adjective
should  be  applied  to  a  man  who  on  one  occasion  cried
out  in  a  transport  of  enthusiasm,  "There  is  nothing  inside
this  coat  except  Allah1 ! "  I  need  not  discuss  here  the  causes
which  gradually  brought  about  such  a  revolution  that,  as
Professor  D.  B.  Macdonald  says,  "the  devout  life  within
the  Muslim  church  led  to  a  more  complete  pantheism  than
ever  did  the  Christian  trinity2."  At  any  rate,  the  question
whether  Abu  Sa'id  was  a  Moslem  cannot  be  decided  against
him  on  this  count,  unless  we  are  prepared  to  excommuni-
cate most  of  the  saints,  some  of  the  profoundest  theologians,
and  wellnigh  all  the  earnestly  religious  thinkers  of  Islam.
This  was  recognised  by  his  orthodox  opponents,  who  ignored
his  theosophical  doctrines  and  attacked  him  as  an  inno-
vator in  matters  connected  with  the  religious  law.  Within
reasonable  limits,  he  might  believe  and  say  what  he  liked,
they  would  take  notice  only  of  his  overt  acts.  The  following
pages,  which  set  forth  his  attitude  towards  positive  religion,
will  prove  to  every  impartial  reader  that  in  their  treatment
of  heretics  the  medieval  Christian  divines  had  much  to  learn
from  their  Moslem  contemporaries.  Upon  toleration  also  ex
Oriente  lux.

At  the  time  of  Abu  Sa'id's  residence  in  Nishapiir  Shaykh  Bii
'Abdallah  Baku  was  in  the  convent  of  Shaykh  Abu  'Abd  al-
Rahman  al-Sulami,  of  which  he  became  the  director  after  the  death
of  Abu  'Abd  al-Rahman.  (Baku  is  a  village  in  the  district  of
Shirwan.)  This  Bii  'Abdallah  Baku  used  frequently  to  talk  with
Shaykh  Abu  Sa'id  in  a  controversial  spirit  and  ask  him  questions
about  the  Sufi  Path.  One  day  he  came  to  him  and  said, "  O  Shaykh !
we  see  you  doing  some  things  that  our  Elders  never  did."  "What
are  these  things?"  Abu  Sa'id  inquired.  "One  of  them,"  said  he,
"is  this,  that  you  let  the  young  men  sit  beside  the  old  and  put  the
juniors  on  a  level  with  their  seniors  in  all  affairs  and  make  no
difference  between  them ;  secondly,  you  permit  the  young  men  to
dance  and  sing;  and  thirdly,  when  a  dervish  throws  off  his
gaberdine  (in  ecstasy),  you  sometimes  direct  that  it  should  be

1  H  6,  5.  A  262,  5.

2  The  religious  attitude  and  life  in  Islam,  p.  39.

58  Studies  in  Islamic  Mysticism  [CH.

given  back  to  him,  saying  that  the  dervish  has  the  best  right  to  his
own  gaberdine.  This  has  never  been  the  practice  of  our  Elders. "  "Is
there  anything  else?"  said  Abu  Sa'id.  "No,"  he  replied.  Abu
Sa'id  said,  "As  regards  the  juniors  and  seniors,  none  of  them  is  a
junior  in  my  opinion.  When  a  man  has  once  entered  on  the  Path  of
$ufism,  although  he  may  be  young,  his  seniors  ought  to  consider
that  possibly  he  will  receive  in  a  single  day  what  they  have  not
received  in  seventy  years.  None  who  holds  this  belief  will  look
upon  any  person  as  a  junior.  Then,  as  to  the  young  men's  dancing
in  the  samd',  the  souls  of  young  men  are  not  yet  purged  of  lust :
indeed  it  may  be  the  prevailing  element ;  and  lust  takes  possession
of  all  the  limbs.  Now,  if  a  young  dervish  claps  his  hands,  the  lust
of  his  hands  will  be  dissipated,  and  if  he  tosses  his  feet,  the  lust  of
his  feet  will  be  lessened.  When  by  this  means  the  lust  fails  in  their
limbs,  they  can  preserve  themselves  from  great  sins,  but  when
all  lusts  are  united  (which  God  forfend !),  they  will  sin  mortally.
It  is  better  that  the  fire  of  their  lust  should  be  dissipated  in  the
samd'  than  in  something  else.  As  regards  the  gaberdine  which  a
dervish  throws  off,  its  disposal  rests  with  the  whole  company  of
dervishes  and  engages  their  attention.  If  they  have  no  other
garment  at  hand,  they  clothe  him  again  in  his  own  gaberdine,  and
thereby  relieve  their  minds  from  the  burden  of  thinking  about  it.
That  dervish  has  not  taken  back  his  own  gaberdine,  but  the
company  of  dervishes  have  given  him  their  gaberdine  and  have
thus  freed  their  minds  from  thought  of  him.  Therefore  he  is
protected  by  the  spiritual  concentration  (himma)  of  the  whole
company.  This  gaberdine  is  not  the  same  one  which  he  threw  away. ' '
Bu  'Abdallah  Baku  said,  "Had  I  never  seen  the  Shaykh,  I  should
never  have  seen  a  real  Sufi1."

This  interesting  passage  represents  Abu  Sa'fd  as  having
departed  in  certain  respects  from  the  ancient  §ufistic  tradition.
His  innovations,  by  destroying  the  influence  and  authority  of
the  more  experienced  dervishes,  would  naturally  tend  to  relax
discipline.  Early  §uff  writers,  e.g.  Sarraj,  Qushayri,  and
Hujwfrf,  do  not  agree  with  him  in  thinking  that  the  practice
of  samd'  is  beneficial  to  the  young ;  on  the  contrary,  they  urge
the  necessity  of  taking  care  lest  novices  should  be  demoralised

>  A  269,  2.

I]  Abu  Scfid  ibn  Abi  U-Khayr  59

by  it.  According  to  the  same  writers,  the  doctrines  of  Sufism
are  contained  in,  and  derived  from,  the  Koran  and  the
Traditions,  of  which  the  true  meaning  has  been  mystically
revealed  to  the  Sufis  alone.  This  theory  concedes  all  that
Moslems  claim  as  to  the  unique  authority  of  the  Koran  and
reduces  the  difference  between  Moslem  and  Sufi  to  a  question
of  interpretation.  Abu  Sa'id,  however,  found  the  source  of  his
doctrine  in  a  larger  revelation  than  the  Word  which  was  given
to  the  Prophet.

The  author  of  the  Asrdr  says:

My  grandfather,  Shaykhu  '1-Islam  Abu  Sa'id,  relates  that  one
day,  whilst  Abu  Sa'id  was  preaching  in  Nishapur,  a  learned  theo-
logian who  was  present  thought  to  himself  that  such  doctrine  is
not  to  be  found  in  the  seven  sevenths  (i.e.  the  whole)  of  the  Koran.
Abu  Sa'id  immediately  turned  towards  him  and  said,  "Doctor,  thy
thought  is  not  hidden  from  me.  The  doctrine  that  I  preach  is
contained  in  the  eighth  seventh  of  the  Koran."  "What  is  that? "
the  theologian  inquired.  Abu  Sa'id  answered :  "  The  seven  sevenths
are,  0  Apostle,  deliver  the  message  that  hath  been  sent  down  to
thee  (Kor.  5,  71),  and  the  eighth  seventh  is,  He  revealed  unto  His
servant  that  which  He  revealed  (Kor.  53,  10).  Ye  imagine  that
the  Word  of  God  is  of  fixed  quantity  and  extent.  Nay,  the
infinite  Word  of  God  that  was  sent  down  to  Mohammed  is  the
whole  seven  sevenths  of  the  Koran ;  but  that  which  He  causes  to
come  into  the  hearts  of  His  servants  does  not  admit  of  being
numbered  and  limited,  nor  does  it  ever  cease.  Every  moment
there  comes  a  messenger  from  Him  to  the  hearts  of  His  servants,
as  the  Prophet  declared,  saying,  'Beware  of  the  clairvoyance
(firdsa)  of  the  true  believer,  for  verily  he  sees  by  the  light  of  God.' "
Then  Abu  Sa'id  quoted  the  verse :

Thou  art  my  soul's  joy,  known  by  vision,  not  by  hearsay.
Of  what  use  is  hearsay  to  one  who  hath  vision?

In  a  Tradition  (he  went  on)  it  is  stated  that  the  Guarded  Tablet
(lawh-i  mahfuz)1  is  so  broad  that  a  fleet  Arab  horse  would  not  be
able  to  cross  it  in  four  years,  and  the  writing  thereon  is  finer  than
a  hair.  Of  all  the  writing  which  covers  it  only  a  single  line  has  been

1  Mohammedans  believe  that  everything  that  shall  happen  till  the  Last
Day  is  inscribed  on  a  Tablet  under  the  Throne  of  God.

6o  Studies  in  Islamic  Mysticism  [CH.

communicated  to  God's  creatures.  That  little  keeps  them  in
perplexity  until  the  Resurrection.  As  for  the  rest,  no  one  knows
anything  about  it1.

Here  Abu  Sa'fd  sets  aside  the  partial,  finite,  and  temporal
revelation  on  which  Islam  is  built,  and  appeals  to  the  universal,
infinite,  and  everlasting  revelation  which  the  Suffs  find  in
their  hearts.  As  a  rule,  even  the  boldest  Mohammedan
mystics  shrink  from  uttering  such  a  challenge.  So  long  as  the
inner  light  is  regarded  only  as  an  interpreter  of  the  written
revelation,  the  supremacy  of  the  latter  is  nominally  main-
tained, though  in  fact  almost  any  doctrine  can  be  foisted  upon
it :  this  is  a  very  different  thing  from  claiming  that  the  inner
light  transcends  the  Prophetic  Law  and  possesses  full
authority  to  make  laws  for  itself.  Abu  Sa'id  does  not  say
that  the  partial  and  universal  revelations  are  in  conflict  with
each  other:  he  does  not  repudiate  the  Koran,  but  he  denies
that  it  is  the  final  and  absolute  standard  of  divine  truth.  He
often  quotes  Koranic  verses  in  support  of  his  theosophical
views.  Only  when  the  Book  fails  him  need  he  confound  his
critics  by  alleging  a  secret  communication  which  he  has
received  from  the  Author.

The  foregoing  anecdote  prepares  us  for  mysticism  of  an
advanced  and  antinomian  type.  Not  that  Abu  Sa'fd  acted  in
logical  accordance  with  his  beliefs.  With  one  exception,  which
will  be  noted  presently,  he  omitted  no  religious  observance
that  a  good  Moslem  is  required  to  perform.  But  while  he  thus
shielded  himself  under  the  law,  he  showed  in  word  and  deed
how  little  he  valued  any  external  ceremony  or  traditional
dogma.

There  was  at  Qa'in  a  venerable  Imam,  whose  name  was
Khwaja  Muhammad  Qa'inf.  When  Abu  Sa'fd  arrived  at  Qa'in,
Khwaja  Muhammad  spent  most  of  his  time  in  waiting  upon  him,
and  he  used  to  attend  all  the  parties  to  which  Abu  Sa'id  was
invited.  On  one  of  these  occasions,  during  the  samd'  which
followed  the  feast,  Abu  Sa'fd  and  all  the  company  had  fallen  into
transports  of  ecstasy.  The  muezzin  gave  the  call  to  noonday

1  H  49,  22.  A  132,  3.

I]  Abu  Sa'id  ibn  Abi  yl-Khayr  61

prayers,  but  Abu  Sa'id  remained  in  the  same  rapture  and  the
dervishes  continued  to  dance  and  shout.  "Prayers!  Prayers!"
cried  the  Imam  Muhammad  Qa'ini.  ' '  We  are  at  prayers, ' '  said  Abu
Sa'id;  whereupon  the  Imam  left  them  in  order  to  take  part  in  the
prayer-service.  When  Abu  Sa'id  came  out  of  his  trance,  he  said,
"Between  its  rising  and  setting  the  sun  does  not  shine  upon  a
more  venerable  and  learned  man  than  this" — meaning  Muham-
mad Qa'ini — "but  his  knowledge  of  Sufism  is  not  so  much  as  the
tip  of  a  hair1."

Although  it  would  be  wrong  to  use  this  story  as  evidence
of  Abu  Sa'id's  habitual  practice,  we  may  at  least  affirm  that
in  his  eyes  the  essence  of  prayer  was  not  the  formal  act,  but
the  "passing  away  from  self"  which  is  completely  attained  in
ecstasy.  "Endeavour,"  he  said,  "to  have  a  mystical  experi-
ence (wdrid),  not  a  devotional  exercise  (wird)2."  One  day  he
said  to  a  dervish,  who  in  order  to  show  the  utmost  respect
stood  before  him  in  the  attitude  of  prayer,  "This  is  a  very
respectful  posture,  but  thy  not-being  would  be  still  better3."

He  never  made  the  pilgrimage  to  Mecca,  which  every
Moslem  is  bound  to  make  at  least  once.  Many  Sufis  who
would  have  gladly  dispensed  with  this  semi-pagan  rite
allegorised  it  and  attached  a  mystical  significance  to  each  of
the  various  ceremonies4;  but  they  saved  their  orthodoxy  at
the  expense  of  their  principles.  Abu  Sa'id  had  no  such
reputation  to  keep  up.  His  refusal  to  perform  the  Hajj  is  not
so  surprising  as  the  contemptuous  language  in  which  he  refers
to  one  of  the  five  main  pillars  of  Islam.

Abu  Sa'id  was  asked,  "Who  has  been  thy  Pir?  for  every  Pir
has  had  a  Pir  to  instruct  him ;  and  how  is  it  that  thy  neck  is  too
big  for  thy  shirt-collar,  while  other  Pirs  have  emaciated  them-
selves by  austerities?  And  why  hast  thou  not  performed  the
Pilgrimage,  as  they  have  done?  "  He  replied,  "Who  has  been  my
Pir?  This  (doctrine  that  I  teach)  is  part  of  what  my  Lord  hath

1  A  293,  12.

2  A  403,  15.  3  A  375,  13.

4  Cf.  Kashf  al-MaJijiib  (translation),  p.  327  fol.;  Kitdb  al-Luma' ,  172,
3  foil.  The  allegorical  interpretation  of  the  Pilgrimage  seems  to  have  been
borrowed  by  the  Suffs  from  the  Isma'ilis.  See  Professor  Browne's  Literary
History  of  Persia,  vol.  n,  p.  241  foil.

62  Studies  in  Islamic  Mysticism  [CH.

taught  me  (Kor.  12,  37).  How  is  it  that  my  neck  is  too  big  for  my
shirt-collar?  I  marvel  how  there  is  room  for  my  neck  in  the  seven
heavens  and  earths  after  all  that  God  hath  bestowed  upon  me.
Why  have  I  not  performed  the  Pilgrimage?  It  is  no  great  matter
that  thou  shouldst  tread  under  thy  feet  a  thousand  miles  of  ground
in  order  to  visit  a  stone  house.  The  true  man  of  God  sits  where  he
is,  and  the  Bayt  al-Ma'mur1  comes  several  times  in  a  day  and  night
to  visit  him  and  perform  the  circumambulation  above  his  head.
Look  and  see!"  All  who  were  present  looked  and  saw  it2.

The  mystic's  pilgrimage  takes  place  within  himself3.  "If
God  sets  the  way  to  Mecca  before  any  one,  that  person  has
been  cast  out  of  the  Way  to  the  Truth4."  Not  content  with
encouraging  his  disciples  to  neglect  the  Hajj,  Abu  Sa'id  used
to  send  those  who  thought  of  performing  it  to  visit  the  tomb
of  Abu  '1-Fadl  Hasan  at  Sarakhs,  bidding  them  circum-
ambulate it  seven  times  and  consider  that  their  purpose  was
accomplished5.  One  sees  what  a  menace  to  Mohammedan
institutions  the  cult  of  the  saints  had  already  become.

The  saint  lost  in  contemplation  of  God  knows  no  religion,
and  it  is  often  his  fate  to  be  classed  with  the  freethinkers
(zanddiqa),  who,  from  the  Moslem  point  of  view,  are  wholly
irreligious,  though  some  of  them  acknowledge  the  moral  law.
Abu  Sa'fd  said,  "Whoever  saw  me  in  my  first  state  became  a
?iddiq,  and  whoever  saw  me  in  my  last  state  became  a  zindiq6,"
meaning  that  those  who  accused  him  of  being  a  freethinker
thereby  made  themselves  guilty  of  the  very  thing  which  they
imputed  to  him.  I  will  translate  the  biographer's  commentary
on  this  saying.

His  first  state  was  self-mortification  and  asceticism,  and  since
most  men  look  at  the  surface  and  regard  the  outward  form,  they
saw  the  austerity  of  his  life  and  how  painfully  he  advanced  on  the
Way  to  God,  and  their  sincere  belief  (sidq)  in  this  Way  was  in-
creased and  they  attained  to  the  degree  of  the  Sincere  (siddiqdn).
His  last  state  was  contemplation,  a  state  in  which  the  fruit  of  self-

1  The  celestial  archetype  of  the  Ka'ba.  See  E.  J.  W.  Gibb,  History  of
Ottoman  Poetry,  vol.  I,  p.  37.

1  A  347,  7.  »  A  360,  n  «  A  374,  15.

*  H  15,  12.  •  A  41,  19.

I]  Abu  Sa'td  ibn  Abi  'l-Khayr  63

mortification  is  gathered  and  the  complete  unveiling  (kashf]  comes
to  pass;  accordingly,  eminent  mystics  have  said  that  states  of
contemplation  are  the  heritage  of  acts  of  self-mortification  (al-
mushdhaddt  mawdrithu  'l-mujdhaddt).  Those  who  saw  him  in  this
state,  which  is  necessarily  one  of  enjoyment  and  happiness,  and
were  ignorant  of  his  former  state  denied  that  which  was  true
(haqq);  and  whoever  denies  the  Truth  (Haqq}  is  a  freethinker
(zindiq).  There  are  many  analogies  to  this  in  the  sensible  world.
For  example,  when  a  man  seeks  to  win  the  favour  of  a  king  and  to
become  his  companion  and  intimate  friend,  before  attaining  to
that  rank  he  must  suffer  all  sorts  of  tribulation  and  patiently
endure  injuries  and  insults  from  high  and  low,  and  submit  with
cheerfulness  to  maltreatment  and  abuse,  giving  fair  words  in
return  for  foul;  and  when  he  has  been  honoured  with  the  king's
approval  and  has  been  admitted  to  his  presence,  he  must  serve
him  assiduously  and  hazard  his  life  in  order  that  the  king  may  place
confidence  in  him.  But  after  he  has  gained  the  king's  confidence
and  intimacy,  all  this  hard  and  perilous  service  belongs  to  the  past.
Now  all  is  grace  and  bounty  and  favour;  everywhere  he  meets  with
new  pleasures  and  delights ;  and  he  has  no  duty  but  to  wait  upon
the  king  always,  from  whose  palace  he  cannot  be  absent  a  single
moment  by  day  or  night,  in  order  that  he  may  be  at  hand  when-
ever the  king  desires  to  tell  him  a  secret  or  to  honour  him  with  a
place  by  his  side1.

Asceticism  and  positive  religion  are  thus  relegated  to  the
lower  planes  of  the  mystical  life.  The  Sufi  needs  them  and
must  hold  fast  to  them  while  he  is  serving  his  spiritual
apprenticeship  and  also  during  the  middle  stage  which  is
marked  by  longer  or  shorter  intervals  of  illumination ;  but  in
his  "last  state,"  when  the  unveiling  is  completed,  he  has  no
further  use  for  ascetic  practices  and  religious  forms,  for  he
lives  in  permanent  communion  with  God  Himself.  This  leads
directly  to  antinomianism,  though  in  theory  the  saint  is
above  the  law  rather  than  against  it.  One  who  sees  the  reality
within  cannot  judge  by  appearances.  Being  told  that  a
disciple  of  his  was  lying  blind-drunk  on  a  certain  road,  Abu
Sa'id  said,  "Thank  God  that  he  has  fallen  on  the  way,  not

1  A  42,  i.

64  Studies  in  Islamic  Mysticism  [CH.

off  the  Way1."  Some  one  asked  him,  "Are  the  men  of  God  in
the  mosque?  "  "They  are  in  the  tavern  too,"  he  replied2.

His  pantheistic  vision  blotted  out  the  Mohammedan
afterworld  with  its  whole  system  of  rewards  and  punishments.
"Whoever  knows  God  without  mediation  worships  Him
without  recompense8."  There  is  no  Hell  but  selfhood,  no
Paradise  but  selflessness : ' '  Hell  is  where  thou  art  and  Paradise
where  thou  art  not4."  He  quoted  the  Tradition,  "My  people
shall  be  split  into  more  than  seventy  sects,  of  which  a  single
one  shall  be  saved,  while  the  others  shall  be  in  the  Fire,"  and
added,  "that  is  to  say,  in  the  fire  of  their  own  selves5."

As  I  have  already  remarked,  Abu  Sa'id  speaks  with  two
voices:  now  as  a  theosophist,  now  as  a  Moslem.  Hence  the
same  terms  bear  their  ordinary  religious  meaning  in  one
passage  and  are  explained  mystically  in  another,  while  the
purest  pantheism  runs  side  by  side  with  popular  theology.  To
our  minds  it  seems  absurd  to  suppose  that  he  believed  in  both  ;
yet  probably  he  did,  at  least  so  far  as  to  have  no  difficulty  in
accepting  the  Mohammedan  scheme  when  it  suited  him.  For
example,  he  preaches  the  doctrine  of  the  intercession  of  saints,
in  which  (though  the  Koran  does  not  support  it)  Paradise,
Hell,  the  Day  of  Judgment,  etc.,  are  what  the  Koran  says
they  are.  A  few  of  his  sayings  on  this  subject  may  be  quoted
here,  especially  as  it  is  closely  connected  with  his  miracles  and
legend  which  will  be  discussed  in  the  following  pages.

The  man  who  is  being  carried  off  to  Hell  will  see  a  light  from
afar.  He  will  ask  what  it  is  and  will  be  told  that  it  is  the  light  of
such  and  such  a  Pir.  He  will  say,  "  In  our  world  I  used  to  love
him."  The  wind  will  bear  his  words  to  the  ears  of  that  Pir,  who  will
plead  for  him  in  the  divine  presence,  and  God  will  release  the
sinner  on  account  of  the  intercession  of  that  holy  man8.

Whoever  has  seen  me  and  has  done  good  work  for  my  family
and  disciples  will  be  under  the  shadow  of  my  intercession  here-
after7.

I  have  prayed  God  to  forgive  my  neighbours  on  the  left,  on  the

1  H76,  7.  «  A  373,  4.  •  A  406,  i.

4  A  266,  16;  375,  16.  »  A  392,  16.

•  A  380,  16.  »  A  418,  4.

I]  AM  Sa'id  ibn  Abi  'l-Khayr  65

right,  in  front,  and  behind,  and  He  has  forgiven  them  for  my  sake."
Then  he  said,  "  My  neighbours  are  Balkh  and  Merv  and  Nishapur
and  Herat.  I  am  not  speaking  of  those  who  live  here  (Mayhana)1."

"  I  need  not  say  a  word  on  behalf  of  those  around  me.  If  any
one  has  mounted  an  ass  and  passed  by  the  end  of  this  street,  or  has
passed  my  house  or  will  pass  it,  or  if  the  light  of  my  candle  falls
on  him,  the  least  thing  that  God  will  do  with  him  is  that  He  will
have  mercy  upon  him2."

III.

Sufism  is  at  once  the  religious  philosophy  and  the  popular
religion  of  Islam.  The  great  Mohammedan  mystics  are  also
saints.  Their  lives  belong  to  the  Legend  and  contain,  besides
their  lofty  and  abstruse  speculations,  an  account  of  the
miracles  which  they  wrought.  They  are  the  object  of  endless
worship  and  adoration,  their  tombs  are  holy  shrines  whither
men  and  women  come  as  pilgrims  to  beseech  their  all-
powerful  aid,  their  relics  bring  a  blessing  that  only  the  rich
can  buy.  Whilst  still  living,  they  are  canonised  by  the  people ;
not  posthumously  by  the  Church.  Their  title  to  saintship
depends  on  a  peculiarly  intimate  relation  to  God,  which  is
attested  by  fits  of  ecstasy  and,  above  all,  by  thaumaturgic
gifts  (kardmdt  =  ^apior^ara,  grazie) .  Belief  in  such  gifts  is
almost  universal,  but  there  is  disagreement  as  to  the  import-
ance which  should  be  attached  to  them.  The  higher  doctrine,
that  they  are  of  small  value  in  comparison  with  the  attain-
ment of  spiritual  perfection,  was  ignored  by  the  mass  of
Moslems,  who  would  have  considered  a  saint  without  miracles
to  be.no  saint  at  all.  Miracles  there  must  be;  if  the  holy  man
failed  to  supply  them,  they  were  invented  for  him.  It  is  vain
to  inquire  how  far  the  miracles  of  Abu  Sa'id  may  have  been
the  work  of  popular  imagination,  but  the  following  extracts
show  that  the  question  is  not  an  irrelevant  one,  even  if  we
take  for  granted  the  reality  of  these  occult  and  mysterious
powers.

It  is  related  by  Ustad  'Abdu  '1-Rahman,  who  was  Abu

1  A  418,  6.  2  A  418,  9.

N.  S.  II  5

66  Studies  in  Islamic  Mysticism  [CH.

Sa'id's  principal  Koran-reader  (muqri),  that  when  Abu  Sa'id
was  living  in  Nishapur  a  man  came  to  him  and  saluted  him
and  said :

"  I  am  a  stranger  here.  On  my  arrival  I  found  the  whole  city
full  of  thy  fame.  They  tell  me  thou  art  a  man  who  has  the  gift  of
miracles  and  does  not  hide  it.  Now  show  me  one."  Abu  Sa'id
replied :  "  When  I  was  at  Amul  with  Abu  '!-' Abbas  Qassab,  some
one  came  to  him  on  the  same  errand  and  demanded  of  him  the
same  thing  which  you  have  just  demanded  of  me.  He  answered,
'  What  do  you  see  that  is  not  miraculous?  A  butcher's  son  (pisar-i
qassdbl),  whose  father  taught  him  his  own  trade,  has  a  vision,  is
enraptured,  is  brought  to  Baghdad  and  falls  in  with  Shaykh  Shibli ;
from  Baghdad  to  Mecca,  from  Mecca  to  Medina,  from  Medina  to
Jerusalem,  where  Khadir  appears  to  him,  and  God  puts  it  in
Khadir's  heart  to  accept  him  as  a  disciple ;  then  he  is  brought  back
here  and  multitudes  turn  towards  him,  coming  forth  from  taverns
and  renouncing  wickedness  and  taking  vows  of  penitence  and
sacrificing  wealth.  Filled  with  burning  love  they  come  from  the
ends  of  the  world  to  seek  God  from  me.  What  miracle  is  greater
than  this? '  The  man  replied  that  he  wished  to  see  a  miracle  at  the
present  moment.  '  Is  it  not  a  miracle,'  said  Abu  '!-' Abbas,  '  that  a
goat-killer's  son  is  sitting  in  the  seat  of  the  mighty  and  that  he
does  not  sink  into  the  earth  and  that  this  wall  does  not  fall  upon
him  and  that  this  house  does  not  tumble  over  his  head  ?  Without
goods  and  gear  he  possesses  saintship,  and  without  work  or  means
of  support  he  receives  his  daily  bread  and  feeds  many  people.  Is
not  all  this  a  gift  of  miracles?'  Good  sir  (Abu  Sa'fd  continued),
your  experience  with  me  is  the  same  as  that  man's  with  Abu
'l-'Abbas  Qassab."  "  O  Shaykh ! "  said  he,  "  I  ask  thee  for  miracles
and  thou  tellest  of  Shaykh  Abu  'l-'Abbas."  Abu  Sa'fd  said,
"  Whosoever  belongs  entirely  to  the  Giver  (Karim),  all  his  acts  are
gifts  (kardmdt)."

Then  he  smiled  and  said  in  verse :

Every  wind  that  comes  to  me  from  the  region  of  Bukhara
Breathes  the  perfume  of  roses  and  musk  and  the  scent  of  jessamine.
Every  man  and  woman  on  whom  that  wind  is  blowing
Thinks  it  is  surely  blowing  from  Khoten.
Nay,  nay ! From  Khoten  bloweth  no  such  delicious  gale :

I]  AM  Scfid  ibn  Abi  'l-Khayr  67

That  wind  is  coming  from  the  presence  of  the  Beloved.
Each  night  I  gaze  towards  Yemen,  that  thou  mayst  rise;
For  thou  art  Suhayl  (Canopus),  and  Suhayl  rises  from  Yemen.
Adored  One ! I  endeavour  to  hide  thy  name  from  all,
In  order  that  thy  name  may  not  come  into  folk's  mouths;
But  whether  I  will  or  no,  whenever  I  speak  to  any  one,
Thy  name  is  the  first  word  that  comes  to  my  lips.

When  God  makes  a  man  pure  and  separates  him  from  his
selfhood,  all  that  he  does  or  abstains  from  doing,  all  that  he  says
and  all  that  he  feels  becomes  a  wondrous  gift  (kardmdt).  God  bless
Mohammed  and  the  whole  of  his  Family1.

In  another  passage  the  extraordinary  feats  performed  by
saints  are  reduced  to  their  proper  insignificance.

.  They  said  to  him,  "So-and-so  walks  on  the  water."  He
replied,  "It  is  easy  enough:  frogs  and  waterfowl  do  it."  They
said,  "So-and-so  flies  in  the  air."  "So  do  birds  and  insects,"
he  replied.  They  said,  "So-and-so  goes  from  one  town  to
another  in  a  moment  of  time."  "Satan,"  he  rejoined,  "goes
in  one  moment  from  the  East  to  the  West.  Things  like  these
have  no  great  value  " ;  and  he  proceeded  to  give  the  definition
of  the  true  saint  which  has  been  quoted  already2 — a  man  who
lives  in  friendly  intercourse  with  his  fellow-creatures,  yet  is

tver  forgetful  of  God3.
Abu  Sa'id  looked  with  disfavour  on  the  composition  of
marvellous  tales  concerning  himself.  One  day  he  summoned
his  famulus,  Khwaja  'Abdu  '1-Karim,  and  inquired  what  he
had  been  doing.  'Abdu  1-Karim  answered  that  he  had  been
writing  some  anecdotes  of  his  master  for  a  certain  dervish  who
wanted  them.  "O  'Abdu  '1-Karim!"  said  the  Shaykh,  "do
not  be  a  writer  of  anecdotes:  be  such  a  man  that  anecdotes
will  be  told  of  thee."  The  biographer  observes  that  Abu  Sa'id's
fear  lest  a  legend  of  his  miracles  should  be  published  and  widely
circulated  accords  with  the  practice  of  the  most  eminent  Sufis,
who  have  always  concealed  their  mystical  experiences4.  Abu
Sa'id  placed  the  hidden  and  unrecognised  saint  above  the
saint  manifest  and  known  to  the  people :  the  former  is  he  whom
God  loves,  the  latter  he  who  loves  God5.

1  A  369,  5- 2  See  p.  55. 3  A  258,  17. *  A  243,  18. 6  A  381,  i.

5-2

68  Studies  in  Islamic  Mysticism  [CH.

Such  protests  may  have  retarded,  although  they  did  not
check,  the  constantly  increasing  glorification  of  popular  saints
by  themselves  and  their  devotees.  At  any  rate,  the  ancient
Lives  of  Abu  Sa'fd  are  modest  and  subdued  if  we  compare
them  with  some  famous  legends  of  the  same  kind.

As  I  have  mentioned,  his  recorded  miracles  are  mostly
instances  oifirdsa,  a  term  equivalent  to  clairvoyance.  Being
an  effect  of  the  light  which  God  sets  in  the  purified  heart,
firdsa  is  reckoned  among  the ' '  gifts ' '  (kardmdt)  of  the  saint  and
is  accepted  as  evidence  of  holiness.  There  were  two  friends,  a
tailor  and  a  weaver,  who  obstinately  asserted  that  Abu  Sa'fd
was  an  impostor.  One  day  they  said,  "This  man  pretends  to
have  the  gift  of  miracles.  Let  us  go  to  him,  and  if  he  knows
what  trade  each  of  us  follows,  we  shall  then  know  that  his
claim  is  true."  They  disguised  themselves  and  went  to  the
Shaykh.  As  soon  as  his  eye  fell  on  them,  he  said:

On  thefalak  are  two  craftsmen1,
One  a  tailor,  one  a  weaver.

Then  he  said,  pointing  to  the  tailor:

This  one  fashions  robes  for  princes.

And  pointing  to  the  weaver:

This  one  weaves  black  woollens  only.

Both  were  covered  with  confusion  and  fell  at  the  Shaykh's
feet  and  repented  of  their  disbelief2.

Moslems  attribute  to  firdsa,  and  therefore  to  a  divine
source,  all  the  phenomena  of  telepathy,  thought-reading,  and
second  sight.  In  the  course  of  this  essay  I  have  had  occasion
to  translate  several  testimonies  that  Abu  Sa'fd  was  richly
endowed  with  these  "gifts"  and  that  he  made  his  reputation
as  a  saint  by  exhibiting  them  in  public.  That  he  really  pos-
sessed them  or,  at  least,  persuaded  a  great  number  of  people
to  think  so,  is  beyond  dispute — otherwise,  traditions  attesting

1  The  falak  is  a  pole  on  which  the  feet  are  tied  when  bastinado  is
administered.  The  words  "on  the  falak"  refer,  no  doubt,  to  the  anxious
suspense  in  which  the  two  sceptics  awaited  the  result  of  their  experiment.
Cf.  our  phrase  "on  the  rack."

1  A  240,  9.

I]  AU  Scfid  ibn  Abi  9l-Khayr  69

them  would  not  have  occupied  so  much  of  his  legend;  but
when  we  come  to  examine  particular  cases,  we  find  that  the
evidence  is  weak  from  a  scientific  point  of  view  as  well  as  on
common  grounds  of  probability.  Such  considerations,  I  need
hardly  say,  not  only  have  no  influence  upon  the  Moslem's
belief  in  occult  phenomena  but  do  not  even  enter  his  mind.
Many  stories  illustrating  Abu  Sa'id's  powers  oifirdsa  occur  in
the  preceding  pages,  and  it  would  be  useless  to  give  further
specimens.  The  following  extracts  commemorate  some
miracles  of  a  different  class.

In  Nishapur  there  lived  a  woman  of  noble  family,  whose  name
was  f  shi  Nili.  She  was  a  great  ascetic,  and  on  account  of  her  piety
the  people  of  Nishapur  used  to  seek  blessings  from  her.  It  was
forty  years  since  she  had  gone  to  the  warm  baths  or  set  foot
outside  of  her  house.  When  Abu  Sa'id  came  to  Nishapur  and  the
report  of  his  miracles  spread  through  the  city,  she  sent  a  nurse,
who  always  waited  upon  her,  to  hear  him  preach.  "  Remember
what  he  says,"  said  she,  "and  tell  me  when  you  come  back."  The
nurse,  on  her  return,  could  recollect  nothing  of  Abu  Sa'id's  dis-
course, but  repeated  to  her  mistress  some  bacchanalian  verses  she
had  heard  him  recite1.  Ishi  cried,  "  Go  and  wash  your  mouth !  Do
ascetics  and  divines  speak  such  words  as  these? "  Now,  Ishi  was
in  the  habit  of  making  eye-salves  which  she  gave  to  the  people.
That  night  she  saw  a  frightful  thing  in  her  sleep  and  started  up.
Both  her  eyes  were  aching.  She  treated  them  with  eye-salves,  but
was  no  better;  she  betook  herself  to  all  the  physicians,  but  found
no  cure:  she  moaned  in  pain  twenty  days  and  nights.  Then  one
night  she  slept  and  dreamed  that  if  she  wished  her  eyes  to  be
better,  she  must  satisfy  the  Shaykh  of  Mayhana  and  win  his
exalted  favour.  Next  day  she  put  in  a  purse  a  thousand  dirhems,
which  she  had  received  as  alms,  and  bade  the  nurse  take  it  to  Abu
Sa'id  and  present  it  to  him  as  soon  as  he  should  have  finished  his
sermon.  When  the  nurse  laid  it  before  him,  he  was  using  a  tooth-
pick— for  it  was  his  rule  that  at  the  end  of  the  sermon  a  disciple
brought  some  bread  and  a  toothpick,  which  he  would  use  after
eating  the  bread.  He  said  to  her,  as  she  was  about  to  depart,
"Come,  nurse,  take  this  toothpick  and  give  it  to  thy  lady.  Tell  her

1  I  have  not  attempted  to  translate  this  rubd'i.  Its  general  drift  is  plain,
but  there  are  textual  difficulties.

jo  Studies  in  Islamic  Mysticism  [CH.

that  she  must  stir  some  water  with  it  and  then  wash  her  eyes  with
the  water,  in  order  that  her  outward  eye  may  be  cured.  And  tell
her  to  put  out  of  her  heart  all  suspicious  and  unfriendly  feelings
towards  the  $iiffs,  in  order  that  her  inward  eye  too  may  be  cured."
Ishi  carefully  followed  his  directions.  She  dipped  the  toothpick
in  water  and  washed  her  eyes  and  was  cured  immediately.  Next
day  she  brought  to  the  Shaykh  all  her  jewelry  and  ornaments  and
dresses,  and  said,  "  O  Shaykh !  I  have  repented  and  have  put  every
hostile  feeling  out  of  my  heart."  "May  it  bring  thee  blessing!"
said  he,  and  bade  them  conduct  her  to  the  mother  of  Bu  Tahir1,
that  she  might  robe  her  in  the  gaberdine  (khirqa).  Ishi  went  in
obedience  to  his  command  and  donned  the  gaberdine  and  busied
herself  with  serving  the  women  of  this  fraternity  (the  Sufis).  She
gave  up  her  house  and  goods,  and  rose  to  great  eminence  in  this
Path,  and  became  a  leader  of  the  Sufis2.

During  the  time  when  Abu  Sa'fd  was  at  Nfshapur,  disciples
came  to  him  of  all  sorts,  well  and  ill  bred.  One  of  his  converts  was
a  rough  peasant  with  iron-soled  mountain-shoes,  which  made  a
disagreeable  noise  whenever  he  entered  the  monastery;  he  was
always  knocking  them  against  the  wall  and  annoying  the  Sufis  by
his  rudeness  and  violence.  One  day  the  Shaykh  called  him  and
said,  "You  must  go  to  a  certain  valley  (which  he  named — it  lies
between  the  hills  of  Nfshapur  and  TUS,  and  a  stream  descending
from  it  falls  into  the  Nishapur  river).  After  going  some  distance
you  will  see  a  big  rock.  You  must  perform  an  ablution  on  the  bank
of  the  stream  and  a  prayer  of  two  genuflexions  on  the  rock,  and
wait  for  a  friend  of  mine,  who  will  come  to  you.  Give  him  my
greeting,  and  there  is  something  I  wish  you  to  tell  him,  for  he  is
a  very  dear  friend  of  mine:  he  has  been  with  me  seven  years."
The  dervish  set  off  with  the  utmost  eagerness,  and  all  the  way  he
was  thinking  that  he  was  going  to  see  one  of  the  saints  or  one  of  the
Forty  Men  who  are  the  pivot  of  the  world  and  upon  whom
depends  the  order  and  harmony  of  human  affairs.  He  was  sure
that  the  holy  man's  blessed  look  would  fall  on  him  and  make  his
fortune  both  in  this  world  and  in  the  next.  When  he  came  to  the
place  indicated  by  the  Shaykh,  he  did  what  the  Shaykh  had
ordered;  then  he  waited  a  while.  Suddenly  there  was  a  dreadful
clap  and  the  mountain  quaked.  He  looked  and  saw  a  black  dragon,
1  The  eldest  son  of  Abti  Sa'id.  »  A  91,  18.

4

AM  Sa'td  ibn  Abi  'l-Khayr  71

the  largest  he  had  ever  seen :  its  body  filled  the  whole  space  between
two  mountains.  At  the  sight  of  it  his  spirit  fled ;  he  was  unable  to
move  and  fell  senseless  to  the  earth.  The  dragon  advanced  slowly
towards  the  rock,  on  which  it  laid  its  head  reverently.  After  a
little  while,  the  dervish  recovered  himself  somewhat,  and  observing
that  the  dragon  had  come  to  a  halt  and  was  motionless,  he  said,
though  in  his  terror  he  scarcely  knew  what  he  said,  "The  Shaykh
greets  thee."  The  dragon  with  many  signs  of  reverence  began  to
rub  its  face  in  the  dust,  whilst  tears  rolled  from  its  eyes.  This,  and
the  fact  that  it  attempted  nothing  against  him,  persuaded  the
dervish  that  he  had  been  sent  to  meet  the  dragon;  he  therefore
delivered  the  Shaykh's  message,  which  it  received  with  great
humility,  rubbing  its  face  in  the  dust  and  weeping  so  much  that
the  rock  where  its  head  lay  became  wet.  Having  heard  all,  it  went
away.  As  soon  as  it  was  out  of  sight,  the  dervish  came  to  himself
and  once  more  fell  in  a  swoon.  A  long  time  passed  before  he
revived.  At  last  he  rose  and  slowly  descended  to  the  foot  of  the
hill.  Then  he  sat  down,  picked  up  a  stone,  and  beat  the  iron  off  his
clogs.  On  returning  to  the  monastery,  he  entered  so  quietly  that
none  was  aware  of  his  coming,  and  spoke  the  salaam  in  such  a  low
voice  that  he  was  barely  heard.  When  the  elders  saw  his  behaviour,
they  desired  to  know  who  was  the  Pir  to  whom  he  had  been  sent ;
they  wondered  who  in  half  a  day  had  wrought  in  his  pupil  a  change
that  can  generally  be  produced  only  by  means  of  long  and  severe
discipline.  When  the  dervish  told  the  story,  every  one  was
amazed.  The  elder  Sufis  questioned  the  Shaykh,  who  replied, "  Yes,
for  seven  years  he  has  been  my  friend,  and  we  have  found  spiritual
joy  in  each  other's  society."  After  that  day  none  ever  saw  the
dervish  behave  rudely  or  heard  him  speak  loudly.  He  was  entirely
reformed  by  a  single  attention  which  the  Shaykh  bestowed  on
him1.

When  Shaykh  Abu  Sa'id  was  at  Nishapiir,  holding  splendid
feasts  and  musical  entertainments  and  continually  regaling  the
dervishes  with  luxurious  viands,  such  as  fat  fowls  and  lawzina
and  sweetmeats,  an  arrogant  ascetic  came  to  him  and  said,  "O
Shaykh !  I  have  come  in  order  to  challenge  you  to  a  forty  days'
fast  (chihila)."  The  poor  man  was  ignorant  of  the  Shaykh's
novitiate  and  of  his  forty  years'  austerities:  he  fancied  that  the

1  A  128,  ii.

72  Studies  in  Islamic  Mysticism  [CH.

Shaykh  had  always  lived  in  this  same  manner.  He  thought  to
himself,  "  I  will  chasten  him  with  hunger  and  put  him  to  shame  in
the  eyes  of  the  people,  and  then  I  shall  be  the  object  of  their
regard."  On  hearing  his  challenge,  the  Shaykh  said,  "May  it  be
blessed ! "  and  spread  his  prayer-rug.  His  adversary  did  the  like,
and  they  both  sat  down  side  by  side.  While  the  ascetic,  in  accord-
ance with  the  practice  of  those  who  keep  a  fast  of  forty  days,  was
eating  a  certain  amount  of  food,  the  Shaykh  ate  nothing;  and
though  he  never  once  broke  his  fast,  every  morning  he  was  stronger
and  fatter  and  his  complexion  grew  more  and  more  ruddy.  All  the
time,  by  his  orders  and  under  his  eyes,  the  dervishes  feasted
luxuriously  and  indulged  in  the  samd',  and  he  himself  danced  with
them.  His  state  was  not  changed  for  the  worse  in  any  respect.  The
ascetic,  on  the  other  hand,  was  daily  becoming  feebler  and  thinner
and  paler,  and  the  sight  of  the  delicious  viands  which  were  served
to  the  Sufis  in  his  presence  worked  more  and  more  upon  him.  At
length  he  grew  so  weak  that  he  could  scarcely  rise  to  perform  the
obligatory  prayers.  He  repented  of  his  presumption  and  confessed
his  ignorance.  When  the  forty  days  were  finished,  the  Shaykh  said,
"  I  have  complied  with  your  request:  now  you  must  do  as  I  say."
The  ascetic  acknowledged  this  and  said,  "It  is  for  the  Shaykh  to
command."  The  Shaykh  said,  "  We  have  sat  forty  days  and  eaten
nothing  and  gone  to  the  privy :  now  let  us  sit  forty  days  and  eat
and  never  go  to  the  privy."  His  adversary  had  no  choice  but  to
accept  the  challenge,  but  he  thought  to  himself  that  it  was  im-
possible for  any  human  being  to  do  such  a  thing1.

In  the  end,  of  course,  the  Shaykh  proves  to  be  an  overman,
and  the  ascetic  becomes  one  of  his  disciples.

It  is  related  that  an  eminent  Shaykh  who  lived  in  Abu
Sa'fd's  time  went  on  a  warlike  expedition  to  Rum  (Asia  Minor) ,
accompanied  by  a  number  of  $uffs.  Whilst  he  was  marching
in  that  country,  he  saw  Iblfs.  "O  accursed  one!"  he  cried,
"what  art  thou  doing  here? — for  thou  canst  not  cherish  any
design  against  us."  Iblfs  replied  that  he  had  come  thither
involuntarily.  "I  was  passing  by  Mayhana,"  said  he,  "and
entered  the  town.  Shaykh  Abu  Sa'fd  came  out  of  the  mosque.
I  met  him  on  the  way  to  his  house  and  he  gave  a  sneeze  which
cast  me  here1."

1  A  160,  18.  «  A  361,  5.

I]  Abti  Sa'id  ibn  Abi  'l-Khayr  73

A  tomb  and  sepulchre  (turbati  u  mashhadi)  was  the  only
memorial  of  Abu  Sa'id  in  his  native  town  that  the  Ghuzz
hordes  did  not  utterly  destroy1.  Concerning  his  relics,  that  is
to  say,  garments  and  other  articles  which  were  venerated  on
account  of  some  circumstance  that  gave  them  a  peculiar
sanctity  or  simply  because  they  once  had  belonged  to  him,  we
find  valuable  details  in  three  passages  of  the  Asrdr.

One  day,  whilst  Shaykh  Abu  Sa'id  was  preaching  at  Nishapiir,
he  grew  warm  in  his  discourse  and  being  overcome  with  ecstasy
exclaimed,  "There  is  naught  within  this  vest  (jubba)  except
Allah ! "  Simultaneously  he  raised  his  forefinger  (angusht-i
musabbiha),  which  lay  on  his  breast  underneath  the  jubba,  and  his
blessed  finger  passed  through  the  jubba  and  became  visible  to  all.
Among  the  Shaykhs  and  Imams  present  on  that  occasion  were  Abu
Muhammad  Juwayni,  Abu  Jl-Qasim  Qushayri,  Isma'il  Sabuni,  and
others  whom  it  would  be  tedious  to  enumerate.  None  of  them,  on
hearing  these  words,  protested  or  silently  objected.  All  were
beside  themselves,  and  following  the  Shaykh's  example  they  flung
away  their  gaberdines  (khirqahd).  When  the  Shaykh  descended
from  the  pulpit,  his  jubba  and  their  gaberdines  were  torn  to  pieces
(and  distributed) 2.  The  Shaykhs  were  unanimously  of  opinion  that
the  piece  of  silk  (kazhpdra)  which  bore  the  mark  of  his  blessed
finger  should  be  torn  off  from  the  breast  of  the  jubba  and  set  apart,
in  order  that  in  the  future  all  who  came  or  went  might  pay  a  visit
to  it.  Accordingly,  it  was  set  apart  just  as  it  was,  with  the  cotton
and  lining,  and  remained  in  the  possession  of  Shaykh  Abu  '1-Fath
and  his  family.  Those  who  came  from  all  parts  of  the  world  as
pilgrims  to  Mayhana,  after  having  visited  his  holy  shrine  used  to
visit  that  piece  of  silk  and  the  other  memorials  of  the  Shaykh  and
used  to  see  the  mark  of  his  finger,  until  the  Ghuzz  invasion,  when
that  blessing  and  other  precious  blessings  of  his  were  lost3.

Bu  Nasr  Shirwani,  a  rich  merchant  of  Nishapur,  was  converted
by  Abu  Sa'id.  He  gave  the  whole  of  his  wealth  to  the  Sufis  and

1  A  6,  4.

2  "The  tearing  up  and  distributing  is  to  distribute  the  blessing  that  is
supposed  to  cleave  to  them  from  having  been  worn  by  some  one  in  an
especially  blessed  state.  So  the  garments  of  saints  acquire  miraculous  power ;
compare  Elijah's  mantle"  (Prof.  D.  B.  Macdonald  in  JRAS,  1902,  p.  10;  see
also  Richard  Hartmann,  Al-Kuschairis  Darstellung  des  SAfitums,  p.  141  foil,
and  cf.  pp.  43  and  58  supra).  3  A  262,  5.

74  Studies  in  Islamic  Mysticism  [CH.

showed  the  utmost  devotion  to  the  Shaykh.  When  the  latter  left
Nishapur  to  return  to  Mayhana,  he  bestowed  on  Bii  Nasr  a  green
woollen  mantle  (labdcha)  of  his  own,  saying,  "Go  to  thy  country
and  set  up  my  banner  there."  Accordingly  Bu  Nasr  went  back  to
Shirwan,  became  the  director  and  chief  of  the  Sufis  in  that  region,
and  built  a  convent,  which  exists  to-day  and  is  known  by  his  name.
The  Shaykh's  mantle  is  still  preserved  in  the  convent,  where  Bu
Nasr  deposited  it.  Every  Friday  at  prayer-time  the  famulus  hangs
it  from  a  high  place  in  the  building,  and  when  the  people  come  out
of  the  Friday  mosque  they  go  to  the  convent  and  do  not  return
home  until  they  have  paid  a  visit  to  the  Shaykh's  mantle.  No
citizen  neglects  this  observance.  If  at  any  time  famine,  pestilence,
or  other  calamity  befall  the  country,  they  place  the  mantle  on
their  heads  and  carry  it  afield,  and  the  whole  population  go  forth
and  reverently  invoke  its  intercession.  Then  God,  the  glorious  and
exalted,  in  His  perfect  bounty  and  in  honour  of  the  Shaykh
removes  the  calamity  from  them  and  brings  their  desires  to  pass.
The  inhabitants  of  that  country  say  that  the  mantle  is  a  proved
antidote  (tirydk-i  mujarrab)  and  they  make  immense  offerings  to
the  followers  of  the  Shaykh.  At  the  present  time,  through  the
blessings  of  the  Shaykh's  spirit  (himma)  and  the  people's  excellent
belief  in  the  Sufis,  this  province  can  show  more  than  four  hundred
well-known  monasteries,  where  dervishes  obtain  refreshment1.

When  the  fame  of  Abu  Sa'id  reached  Mecca,  the  Shaykhs  of  the
Holy  City,  wishing  to  know  what  kind  of  man  he  was,  sent  Bii
'Amr  Bashkhwani,  who  was  a  great  ascetic  and  had  resided  in
Mecca  for  thirty  years,  to  Mayhana  in  order  that  he  might  bring
back  a  trustworthy  report  of  Abu  Sa'id's  character  and  mystical
endowments.  Bu  'Amr  journeyed  to  Mayhana  and  had  a  long
conversation  with  Abu  Sa'id  in  private.  After  three  days,  when  he
was  about  to  return  to  Mecca,  Abu  Sa'fd  said  to  him,  "  You  must
go  to  Bashkhwan:  you  are  my  deputy  in  that  district.  Ere  long
the  bruit  of  your  renown  will  be  heard  in  the  fourth  heaven."  Bii
'Amr  obeyed  and  set  out  for  Bashkhwan.  As  he  was  taking  leave,
Abu  Sa'id  gave  him  three  toothpicks  which  he  had  cut  with  his
own  blessed  hand,  and  said,  "  Do  not  sell  one  of  these  for  ten  dinars
nor  for  twenty,  and  if  thirty  dinars  are  offered  " — (here  he  stopped
short  and  Bu  'Amr  went  on  his  way).  On  arriving  at  Bashkhwan,

1  A  173,  15.

I]  AM  Sa'id  ibn  Abi  'l-Khayr  75

he  lodged  in  the  room  which  is  now  (part  of)  his  convent,  and  the
people  honoured  him  as  a  saint.  Every  Thursday  he  began  a
complete  recitation  of  the  Koran,  in  which  he  was  joined  by  his
disciples  and  the  men  of  Bashkhwan  and  all  the  notables  of  the
neighbouring  hamlets;  and  when  the  recitation  was  finished,  he
would  call  for  a  jug  of  water  and  dip  in  it  one  of  the  toothpicks
which  he  had  received  from  Shaykh  Abu  Sa'id.  The  water  was  then
distributed  amongst  the  sick,  and  it  healed  them  by  means  of  the
blessed  influence  of  both  Shaykhs.  The  headman  of  Bashkhwan,
who  was  always  suffering  from  colic,  begged  Bu  'Amr  to  send  him
some  of  the  holy  water.  No  sooner  had  he  drunk  it  than  the  pain
ceased.  Next  morning  he  came  to  Bu  'Amr  and  said,  "  I  hear  that
you  have  three  of  these  toothpicks.  Will  you  sell  me  one,  for  I  am
very  often  in  pain?  "  Bu  'Amr  asked  him  how  much  he  would  give.
He  offered  ten  dinars.  "  It  is  worth  more,"  said  Bu  'Amr.  "  Twenty
dinars."  "It  is  worth  more."  "Thirty  dinars."  " No,  it  is  worth
more."  The  headman  said  nothing  and  would  not  bid  any  higher.
Bii  'Amr  said,  "My  master,  Shaykh  Abu  Sa'id,  stopped  at  the
same  amount."  He  gave  him  one  of  the  toothpicks  in  exchange  for
thirty  dinars,  and  with  that  money  he  founded  the  convent  which
now  exists.  The  headman  kept  the  toothpick  as  long  as  he  lived.
On  his  deathbed  he  desired  that  it  should  be  broken  and  that  the
pieces  should  be  placed  in  his  mouth  and  buried  with  him.  As
regards  the  two  remaining  toothpicks,  in  accordance  with  Bu
'Amr's  last  injunctions  they  were  placed  in  his  shroud  and  in-
terred in  his  blessed  tomb1.

I  have  set  before  my  readers  a  picture  of  Abu  Sa'id  as  he
appears  in  the  oldest  and  most  authentic  documents  available.
These  do  not  always  show  him  as  he  was,  but  it  would  be
absurd  to  reproach  his  biographers  with  their  credulity  and
entire  lack  of  critical  judgment:  they  write  as  worshippers,
and  their  work  is  based  upon  traditions  and  legends  which
breathe  the  very  spirit  of  unquestioning  faith.  Only  an  alloy
can  be  extracted  from  such  materials,  however  carefully  they
are  analysed.  The  passages  in  which  Abu  Sa'id  describes  his
early  life,  conversion,  and  novitiate  are  perhaps  less  open  to
suspicion  than  the  numerous  anecdotes  concerning  his

1 A  2OI, 12.

j6  Studies  in  Islamic  Mysticism  [CH.  I

miracles.  Here  pious  invention  plays  a  large  part  and  is  not
limited  by  any  sense  of  natural  law.  Even  the  sceptics
converted  by  Abu  Sa'id  feel  sure  that  miracles  occur,  and  only
doubt  his  ability  to  perform  them.  The  mystical  sayings  attri-
buted to  him  have  a  power  and  freedom  beyond  speculative
theosophy  and  suggest  that  he  owed  his  fame,  in  the  first
instance,  to  an  enthusiastic  personality  and  to  the  possession
of  "  psychic  "  gifts  which  he  knew  how  to  exhibit  impressively.
He  was  a  great  teacher  and  preacher  of  Sufism.  If  the  matter  of
his  doctrine  is  seldom  original,  his  genius  gathered  up  and  fused
the  old  elements  into  something  new.  In  the  historical  develop-
ment he  stands  out  as  a  leading  exponent  of  the  pantheistic,
poetical,  anti-scholastic,  and  antinomian  ideas  which  had  been
already  broached  by  his  predecessor,  Bayazid  of  Bistam,  and
Abu  '1-Hasan  Kharaqani.  It  may  be  said  of  Abu  Sa'id  that
he,  perhaps  more  than  any  one  else,  gave  these  ideas  the
distinctive  form  in  which  they  are  presented  to  us  by  the
later  religious  philosophy  of  Persia.  Their  peculiarly  Persian
character  is  just  what  we  should  expect,  seeing  that  Bayazfd,
Abu  '1-Hasan,  and  Abu  Sa'id  himself  were  born  and  passed
their  lives  in  Khurasan,  the  cradle  of  Persian  nationalism.
Abu  Sa'id  also  left  his  mark  on  another  side  of  Sufism,  its
organisation  as  a  monastic  system1.  Although  he  founded  no
Order,  the  convent  over  which  he  presided  supplied  a  model
in  outline  of  the  fraternities  that  were  established  during  the
I2th  century;  and  in  the  ten  rules  which  he,  as  abbot,  drew
up  and  caused  to  be  put  into  writing2  we  find,  so  far  as  I  know,
the  first  Mohammedan  example  of  a  regula  ad  monachos.

1  Cf.  Qazwini,  Athdru  'l-bildd  (ed.  Wtistenfeld),  p.  241,  3  fr.  foot.
•  See  p.  46  supra.

CHAPTER  II

THE  PERFECT  MAN1

Man,  is  not  he  Creation's  last  appeal,

The  light  of  Wisdom's  eye  ? Behold  the  wheel

Of  universal  life  as  'twere  a  ring,

But  Man  the  superscription  and  the  seal.

OMAR  KHAYYAM.

OVTOOS, <f>rjo-w,  c<rri  TTCIVV  fiaOcia  /ecu Sv<TKa.Ta\r)7rTO<;  rj  TOV  reXetov
avOptoTTOV  yvt3(rt5. 'Apxrj  yap,  <j>-r)criv,  T€Aetajcrea>s  yvwo-is  di/^ptoTrov ^€ov
8«  yv<3<ris  aTnypTKr/xtvry  reXct'owri?. HlPPOLYTUS.
31)  dt'Siov  Xoyos.

WHAT  do  Sufis  mean  when  they  speak  of  the  Perfect  Man
(al-insdnu  'l-kdmil),  a  phrase  which  seems  first  to  have  been
used  by  the  celebrated  Ibnu  l-'Arabi,  although  the  notion
underlying  it  is  almost  as  old  as  Sufism  itself2?  The  question

1  The  title  is  borrowed  from  Jili  js_  work,  the  Insdnu  'l-kdmil,  of  which  a
brief  but  illuminating  expositidrTwill  be  found  in  Dr  Muhammad  Iqbal's
Development  of  metaphysics  in  Persia  (London,  1908),  p.  150  foil.  I  may  also
refer  to  two  articles  written  by  myself:  "A  Moslem  philosophy  of  religion"
(Museon,  Cambridge,  1915,  p.  83  foil.)  and  "The  Sufi  doctrine  of  the  Perfect
Man"  (Quest,  1917,  p.  545  foil.);  passages  from  both  have  been  incorporated
in  this  essay,  with  or  without  alteration.  The  following  abbreviations  are
used:  K  =  the  edition  of  the  Insdnu  'l-kdmil  published  at  Cairo  in  A.H.  1300;
Comm. K  =  the  commentary  by  Ahmad  ibn  Muhammad  al-Madani  on
chapters  50-54  of the  Insdnu 'l-kdmil (Loth's  Catalogue of  the  Arabic
manuscripts  in  the  Library  of  the  India  Office,  No.  667);  M=the  commentary
by  Jili  on  the  559th  chapter  of  Ibnu  '!-'  Arabi's  Futuhdtu  'l-Makkiyya  (Loth's
Catalogue,  No.  6931).

2  In  the  first  chapter  of  the  Fususu  'l-hikam  (Cairo,  A.H.  1321)  Ibnu  '1-
'Arabi  (ob.  A.D.  1240)  says  that  when  God  willed  that  His  attributes  should
be  displayed,  He  created  a  microcosmic  being  (kawnjdmi1),  the  Perfect  Man,
through  whom  "God's  consciousness  (sirr)  is  manifested  to  Himself." Abu
Yazid  al-Bistami  (ob.  A.D.  875)  defines  "the  perfect  and  complete  man"
(al-kdmilu  'l-tdmm),  who  after  having  been  invested  with  Divine  attributes
becomes  unconscious  of  them  (Qushayri,  Risdla,  Cairo,  A.H.  1318,  p.  140,  1.  12
foil.),  i.e.,  enters  fully  into  the  state  oifand;  but  here  the  term  does  not  bear
the  peculiar  significance  attached  to  it  by  Ibnu  'l-'Arabi  and  Jili.

78  Studies  in  Islamic  Mysticism  [CH.

might  be  answered  in  different  ways,  but  if  we  seek  a  general
definition,  perhaps  we  may  describe  the  Perfect  Man  as  a  man
who  has  fully  realised  his  essential  oneness  with  the  Divine
Being  in  whose  likeness  he  is  made.  This  experience,  enjoyed
by  prophets  and  saints  and  shadowed  forth  in  symbols  to
others,  is  the  foundation  of  the  Sufi  theosophy.  Therefore,  the
class  of  Perfect  Men  comprises  not  only  the  prophets  from
Adam  to  Mohammed,  but  also  the  superlatively  elect
(khu$usu  'l-khusus)  amongst  the  Sufis,  i.e.,  the  persons  named
collectively  awliyd,  plural  of  wall,  a  word  originally  meaning
"near,"  which  is  used  for  "friend,"  "protege,"  or  "devotee."
Since  the  wall  or  saint  is  the  popular  type  of  Perfect  Man,  it
should  be  understood  that  the  essence  of  Mohammedan
saintship,  as  of  prophecy,  is  nothing  less  than  Divine  illumina-
tion, immediate  vision  and  knowledge  of  things  unseen  and
unknown,  when  the  veil  of  sense  is  suddenly  lifted  and  the
conscious  self  passes  away  in  the  overwhelming  glory  of  "the
One  true  Light."  An  ecstatic  feeling  of  oneness  with  God
constitutes  the  wall.  It  is  the  end  of  the  Path  (tariqa)  in  so
far  as  the  discipline  of  the  Path  is  meant  to  predispose  and
prepare  the  disciple  to  receive  this  incalculable  gift  of  Divine
grace,  which  is  not  gained  or  lost  by  anything  that  a  man  may
do,  but  comes  to  him  in  proportion  to  the  measure  and  degree
of  spiritual  capacity  with  which  he  was  created.

Two  special  functions  of  the  wall  further  illustrate  the  rela-
tion of  the  popular  saint-cult  to  mystical  philosophy — (i)  his
function  as  a  mediator,  (2)  his  function  as  a  cosmic  power.
The  Perfect  Man,  as  will  be  explained  in  the  course  of  our
argument,  unites  the  One  and  the  Many,  so  that  the  universe
depends  on  him  for  its  continued  existence.  In  Mohammedan
religious  life  the  wali  occupies  the  same  middle  position:  he
bridges  the  chasm  which  the  Koran  and  scholasticism  have
set  between  man  and  an  absolutely  transcendent  God.  He
brings  relief  to  the  distressed,  health  to  the  sick,  children  to
the  childless,  food  to  the  famished,  spiritual  guidance  to  those
who  entrust  their  souls  to  his  care,  blessing  to  all  who  visit
his  tomb  and  invoke  Allah  in  his  name.  The  walls,  from  the
highest  to  the  lowest,  are  arranged  in  a  graduated  hierarchy,

II]  The  Perfect  Man  79

with  the  Qutb  at  their  head,  forming  "a  saintly  board  of
administration  by  which  the  invisible  government  of  the
world  is  carried  on1."  Speaking  of  the  Awtdd — four  saints
whose  rank  is  little  inferior  to  that  of  the  Qutb  himself —
Hujwiri  says:

It  is  their  office  to  go  round  the  whole  world  every  night,  and
if  there  be  any  place  on  which  their  eyes  have  not  fallen,  next  day
some  flaw  will  appear  in  that  place ;  and  they  must  then  inform  the
Qutb,  in  order  that  he  may  direct  his  attention  to  the  weak  spot,
and  that  by  his  blessing  the  imperfection  may  be  remedied  2.

Such  experiences  and  beliefs  were  partly  the  cause  and'
partly  the  consequence  of  speculation  concerning  the  nature
of  God  and  man,  speculation  which  drifted  far  away  from
Koranic  monotheism  into  pantheistic  and  monistic  philo-
sophies. The  Sufi  reciting  the  Koran  in  ecstatic  prayer  and
seeming  to  hear,  in  the  words  which  he  intoned,  not  his  own
voice  but  the  voice  of  God  speaking  through  him,  could  no
longer  acquiesce  in  the  orthodox  conception  of  Allah  as  a
Being  utterly  different  from  all  other  beings.  This  dogma  was
supplanted  by  faith  in  a  Divine  Reality  (al-Haqq) ,  a  God  who
is  the  creative  principle  and  ultimate  ground  of  all  that
exists.  While  Sufis,  like  Moslems  in  general,  affirm  the
transcendence  of  God  and  reject  the  notion  of  infusion  or
incarnation  (hulul),  it  is  an  interesting  fact  that  one  of  the
first  attempts  in  Islam  to  indicate  more  precisely  the  meaning
of  mystical  union  was  founded  on  the  Christian  doctrine  of
two  natures  in  God.  Hallaj,  who  dared  to  say  Ana  'l-Haqq,
"I  am  the  Haqq3,"  thereby  announced  that  the  saint  in  his
deification  "becomes  the  living  and  personal  witness  of
God."  The  Jewish  tradition  that  God  created  Adam  in  His
own  image  reappeared  as  a  hadith  (saying  of  the  Prophet)
and  was  put  to  strange  uses  by  Mohammedan  theosophists.

1  Prof.  D.  B.  Macdonald,  The  religious  attitude  and  life  in  Islam,  p.  163.

2  Hujwiri,  Kashf  al-Mahjub,  p.  228  of  my  translation.

3  Masslgnon  renders,  "  1  am  the  Creative  Truth"  (Kitdb  al-Tawdsin,
p.  175). Al-Haqq  is  the  Creator  as  opposed  to  the  creatures  (al-khalq)  and
this  seems  to  be  the  meaning  in  which  Hallaj  understood  the  term,  but  it  is
also  applied  to  God  conceived  pantheistically  as  the  one  permanent  reality.
Cf.  the  article  "Hakk"  by  Prof.  D.  B.  Macdonald  in  Encycl.  of  Islam.

8o  Studies  in  Islamic  Mysticism  [CH.

Even  the  orthodox  Ghazali  hints  that  here  is  the  key  of
a  great  mystery  which  nothing  will  induce  him  to  divulge1.
According  to  Hallaj,  the  essence  of  God's  essence  is  Love.
Before  the  creation  God  loved  Himself  in  absolute  unity
and  through  love  revealed  Himself  to  Himself  alone.  Then,
desiring  to  behold  that  love-in-aloneness,  that  love  without
otherness  and  duality,  as  an  external  object,  He  brought  forth
from  non-existence  an  image  of  Himself,  endowed  with  all
His  attributes  and  names.  This  Divine  image  is  Adam,  in
and  by  whom  God  is  made  manifest — divinity  objectified  in
humanity2.  Hallaj,  however,  distinguishes  the  human  nature
(ndsut)  from  the  Divine  (Idhut).  Though  mystically  united,
they  are  not  essentially  identical  and  interchangeable.
Personality  survives  even  in  union:  water  does  not  become
wine,  though  wine  be  mixed  with  it.  Using  a  more  congenial
metaphor,  Hallaj  says  in  verses  which  are  often  quoted :

I  am  He  whom  I  love,  and  He  whom  I  love  is  I.

We  are  two  spirits  dwelling  in  one  body3,

If  thou  seest  me,  thou  seest  Him ;

And  if  thou  seest  Him,  thou  seest  us  both.

The  markedly  Christian  flavour  of  the  Hallaj ian  doctrine
condemned  it  in  Moslem  eyes,  and  while  later  Suffs  develop
its  main  ideas  and  venerate  Hallaj  himself  as  a  martyr  who
was  barbarously  done  to  death  because  he  had  proclaimed  the
Truth,  they  interpret  his  Ana  'l-Haqq  in  the  light  of  an
idealistic  monism  which  reduces  all  antitheses — including
Idhut  and  ndsut — to  necessarily  correlated  aspects  of  the
universal  Essence.  His  doctrine  in  its  original  form  has  only

1  Ibyd  (Bulaq,  A.H.  1289),  vol.  iv,  p.  294.

1  Massignon,  Kitdb  al-fawdsin,  p.  129.

*  Contrast  this  with  the  monistic  expression  of  the  same  thought  by  Jill
(K  I.  51,  i):  "We  are  the  spirit  of  One,  though  we  dwell  by  turns  in  two
bodies."  So,  too,  Jalalu'ddin  Rumf  (Dwdni  Shamsi  Tabriz,  p.  153):
"  Happy  the  moment  when  we  are  seated  in  the  palace,  thou  and  I,

With  two  forms  and  with  two  figures,  but  with  one  soul,  thou  and  I."

Cf.  K  li.  121,  ii  foil. :  "Essential  love  is  love  in  Oneness,  so  that  each  of
the  lovers  appears  in  the  form  of  the  other  and  represents  the  other.  Inas-
much as  the  love  of  the  body  and  the  soul  is  essential,  the  soul  is  pained  by
the  body's  pain  in  this  world,  while  the  body  is  pained  by  the  soul's  pain  in
the  other  world:  then  each  of  them  appears  in  the  other's  form."

II]  The  Perfect  Man  81

recently  been  recovered  and  given  to  the  world  by  M.  Louis
Massignon,  to  whose  learned  and  brilliant  monograph  every
student  of  Sufism  is  deeply  indebted.

'Abdu  1-Karim  ibn  Ibrahim  al-Jili,  author  of  al-Insdnu
'l-kdmilfi  ma'rifati  'l-awdkhir  wa  'l-awd'il  ("The  Man  perfect
in  knowledge  of  the  last  and  first  things"),  was  born  in
A.D.  1365-6  and  probably  died  some  time  between  A.D.  1406
and  1417.  His  surname,  which  is  derived  from  Jilan  or  Gilan,
the  province  south  of  the  Caspian,  commemorates  his  descent
from  the  founder  of  the  Qadirite  order  of  dervishes,  'Abdu
'1-Qadir  al-Jili  (Gilani) ,  who  died  almost  exactly  200  years
before  the  date  of  Jill's  birth1.  In  the  Insdnu  'l-kdmil  he  more
than  once  refers  to  'Abdu  '1-Qadir  as  "our  Shaykh/'  so  that
he  must  have  been  a  member  of  the  fraternity.  The  Moslem
biographers  leave  him  unnoticed,  but  he  himself  tells  us  that
he  lived  at  Zabid  in  Yemen  with  his  Shaykh,  Sharafu'ddin
Isma'il  ibn  Ibrahim  al-Jabarti,  and  had  previously  travelled
in  India2.  Of  his  mystical  writings  twenty  are  known  to  be
extant,  and  it  is  not  unlikely  that  as  many  have  been  lost.

Jili  begins  his  work  with  a  statement  of  his  object  in
composing  it3.  That  object  is  God  (al-Haqq):  therefore  he
must  treat  in  the  first  place,  of  the  Divine  names,  then  of  the
Divine  attributes,  and  lastly  of  the  Divine  essence.  "I  will
call  attention,"  he  says,  "to  mysteries  which  no  author  has
ever  put  into  a  book4,  matters  concerning  the  gnosis  of  God
and  of  the  universe,  and  will  tread  a  path  between  reserve  and
divulgation."  He  writes  throughout  as  one  reporting  what
has  been  communicated  to  him  in  mystical  converse  (mukd-

1  I  do  not  know  on  what  authority  Dr  Goldziher  in  his  article  on  Jili  in
the  Encycl.  of  Islam  (vol.  i,  p.  46)  connects  the  nisba  with  Jil,  a  village  in  the

district  of  Baghdad.  J ill  calls  himself  ^1  ^IjjUl  L~J  ^^JOt  (Loth,
Cat.  of  Arabic  MSS.  in  the  India  Office  Library,  p.  182,  col.  1, 1.  7  from  foot).
He  traced  his  descent  to  a  sibt  of  'Abdu  '1-Qadir,  i.e.,  to  a  son  of  the  Shaykh's
daughter.

2  He  mentions  (K  n.  43,  20  foil.)  that  in  A.H 79O  =  A.D.  1388  he  was  in
India  at  a  place  named  Kushi,  where  he  conversed  with  a  man  under
sentence  of  death  for  the  murder  of  three  notables.  The  earliest  date
referring  to  his  stay  at  Zabid  is  A.H.  796  =  A.D.  1393-4  (K  n.  61,  20),  and  the
latest  A.H.  805  =  AD.  1402-3  (Loth,  op.  cit.  p.  183).

3  K  i.  6,  4  foil.  *  Cf.  K  i.  63,  penult,  and  foil.

N.  s.  ii  6

82  Studies  in  Islamic  Mysticism  [CH.

lama),  so  that  "  the  hearer  knows  it  intuitively  to  be  the  word
of  God1."  These  private  revelations  are  supported,  he  asserts,
by  the  Koran  and  the  Sunna,  and  he  warns  his  readers  not  to
charge  him  with  errors  which  may  arise  from  their  own  want
of  understanding ;  but  while  he  professes  belief  in  the  Moham-
medan articles  of  faith2,  he  interprets  them  by  an  allegorising
method  that  yields  any  and  every  meaning  desired.  As  a
writer,  he  is  not  without  talent,  though  his  work  belongs  to
mysticism  rather  than  to  literature.  Besides  many  poems
which  he  seems  to  have  admired  inordinately3,  he  intro-
duces maqdmas  in  rhymed  prose  and  specimens  of  the
Platonic  myth.  Thus  he  tells  how  the  stranger,  whose  name
is  the  Spirit,  returned  from  long  exile  and  imprisonment  to
the  world  known  as  Yuh,  and  entered  a  spacious  city  where
Khadir  rules  over  "the  Men  of  the  Unseen"  (rijdlu  'l-ghayb)
—exalted  saints  and  angels,  of  whom  six  classes  are  de-
scribed4. .

The  characteristic  of  the  Insdnu  'l-kdmil  is  the  idea  of  the
Perfect  Man,  "who  as  a  microcosmos  of  a  higher  order  reflects
not  only  the  powers  of  nature  but  also  the  divine  powers  '  as
in  a  mirror'  (comp.  the  yevitcbs  ai>6pu>Tro<;  of  Philo)5."  On
this  basis  Jilf  builds  his  mystical  philosophy.  It  will  be
better  grasped  as  a  whole,  if  before  coming  to  details  I
endeavour  to  sketch  it  in  outline.

Jilf  belongs  to  the  school  of  Sufis  who  hold  that  Being  is
one6,  that  all  apparent  differences  are  modes,  aspects,  and
manifestations  of  reality,  that  the  phenomenal  is  the  outward
expression  of  the  real.  He  begins  by  denning  essence  as  that

1  Jlli  often  uses  logical  arguments,  but  "the  paradoxes  proved  by  his
logic  are  really  the  paradoxes  of  mysticism,  and  are  the  goal  which  he  feels
his  logic  must  reach  if  it  is  to  be  in  accordance  with  insight"  (Bertrand
Russell,  "Mysticism  and  Logic"  in  the  Hibbert  Journal,  vol.  xn,  No.  4,

P  793)-

•  K  i.  4.  10  foil.  »  K  i.  39,  20  foil.

4  K  ii.  34,  23  foil.  Cf.  K  i.  8,  6  foil.  In  the  Futuhdlu  'l-Makkiyya,  ch.
559,  Ibnu  'l-'Arabl  likens  the  Divine  Spirit  in  man  to  Yuh,  "  which  is  a  name
of  thf  sun  and  refers  to  God  (al-Haqq),  for  He  is  the  light  of  the  heavens  and
the  earth,  and  Man  is  a  perfect  and  complete  copy  of  Him"  (M  34  a).

•  Goldziher  in  Encycl.  of  Islam.  The  heavenly  man  is  the  summum  genus,
the  earthly  man  the  summa  species  (M  40  a).

•  This  doctrine  is  called  "the  unity  of  Being"  (wafrdatu  'l-wujud).

II]  The  Perfect  Man  83

to  which  names  and  attributes  are  referred ;  it  may  be  either
existent  or  non-existent,  i.e.,  existing  only  in  name,  like  the
fabulous  bird  called  'Anqd.  Essence  that  really  exists  is  of
two  kinds:  Pure  Being,  or  God,  and  Being  joined  to  not-
being,  i.e.,  the  world  of  created  things.  The  essence  of  God  is
unknowable  per  se;  we  must  seek  knowledge  of  it  through  its
names  and  attributes.  It  is  a  substance  with  two  accidents,
eternity  and  everlastingness ;  with  two  qualities,  creativeness
and  creatureliness ;  with  two  descriptions,  uncreatedness  and
origination  in  time ;  with  two  names,  Lord  and  slave  (God  and
man) ;  with  two  aspects,  the  outward  or  visible,  which  is  the
present  world,  and  the  inward  or  invisible,  which  is  the  world
to  come;  both  necessity  and  contingency  are  predicated  of  it,
and  it  may  be  regarded  either  as  non-existent  for  itself  but
existent  for  other,  or  as  non-existent  for  other  but  existent  for
itself1.

Pure  Being,  as  such,  has  neither  name  nor  attribute;  only
when  it  gradually  descends  from  its  absoluteness  and  enters
the  realm  of  manifestation,  do  names  and  attributes  appear
imprinted  on  it.  The  sum  of  these  attributes  is  the  universe,
which  is  "  phenomenal "  only  in  the  sense  that  it  shows  reality
under  the  form  of  externality.  Although,  from  this  stand-
point, the  distinction  of  essence  and  attribute  must  be  admitted,
the  two  are  ultimately  one,  like  water  and  ice.  The  so-called
phenomenal  world — the  world  of  attributes — is  no  illusion:
it  really  exists  as  the  self-revelation  or  other  self  of  the  *,
Absolute.  In  denying  any  real  difference  between  essence  and
attribute,  Jili  makes  Being  identical  with  Thought.  The
world  expresses  God's  idea  of  Himself,  or  as  Ibnu  'l-'Arabi
puts  it,  "we  ourselves  are  the  attributes  by  which  we  describe
God;  our  existence  is  merely  an  objectification
existence.  God  is  necessary  to  us  in  order  that  we  may  exist,
while  we  are  necessary  to  Him  in  order  that  He  may  be
manifested  to  Himself2."

Jili  calls  the  simple  essence,  apart  from  all  qualities  and
relations,  "the  dark  mist"  (al-Amd).  It  develops  conscious-

1  K  i.  20,  23  foil.

2  Fustis  (Cairo,  A.H.  1312),  19,  78,  181,  etc.

6—2

lescribe
of His ,\

84  Studies  in  Islamic  Mysticism  [CH.

ness  by  passing  through  three  stages  of  manifestation,  which
modify  its  simplicity.  The  first  stage  is  Oneness  (Ahadiyya),
the  second  is  He-ness  (Huwiyya),  and  the  third  is  I-ness
(Aniyya).  By  this  process  of  descent  Absolute  Being  lias
become  the  subject  and  object  of  all  thought  and  has  revealed
itself  as  Divinity  with  distinctive  attributes  embracing  the
whole  series  of  existence.  The  created  world  is  the  outward
aspect  of  that  which  in  its  inward  aspect  is  God.  Thus  in  the
Absolute  we  find  a  principle  of  diversity,  which  it  evolves  by
moving  downwards,  so  to  speak,  from  a  plane  beyond  quality
and  relation,  beyond  even  the  barest  unity,  until  by  degrees
it  clothes  itself  with  manifold  names  and  attributes  and  takes
visible  shape  in  the  infinite  variety  of  Nature.  But  "  the  One
remains,  the  Many  change  and  pass."  The  Absolute  cannot
rest  in  diversity.  Opposites  must  be  reconciled  and  at  last
united,  the  Many  must  again  be  One.  Recurring  to  Jill's
metaphor,  we  may  say  that  as  water  becomes  ice  and  then
water  once  more,  so  the  Essence  crystallised  in  the  world  of
attributes  seeks  to  return  to  its  pure  and  simple  self.  And  in
order  to  do  so,  it  must  move  upwards,  reversing  the  direction
of  its  previous  descent  from  absoluteness.  We  have  seen  how
reality,  without  ceasing  to  be  reality,  presents  itself  in  the
form  of  appearance:  by  what  means,  then,  does  appearance
cease  to  be  appearance  and  disappear  in  the  abysmal  darkn<  ss
of  reality?

Man,  in  virtue  of  his  essence,  is  the  cosmic  Thought  as-
suming flesh  and  connecting  Absolute  Being  with  the  world
of  Nature.

While  every  appearance  shows  some  attribute  of  reality,
Man  is  the  microcosm  in  which  all  attributes  are  united,  and
in  him  alone  does  the  Absolute  become  conscious  of  itself  in
all  its  diverse  aspects.  To  put  it  in  another  way,  the  Absolute,
having  completely  realised  itself  in  human  nature,  returns
into  itself  through  the  medium  of  human  nature;  or,  more
intimati-iy,  God  and  man  become  one  in  the  Perfect  Man —
the  enraptured  prophet  or  saint — whose  religious  function  as
a  mediator  between  man  and  God  corresponds  with  his
metaphysical  function  as  the  unifying  principle  by  means  of

II]  The  Perfect  Man  85

which  the  opposed  terms  of  reality  and  appearance  are
harmonised.  Hence  the  upward  movement  of  the  Absolute
from  the  sphere  of  manifestation  back  to  the  unmanifested
Essence  takes  place  in  and  through  the  unitive  experience  of
the  soul;  and  so  we  have  exchanged  philosophy  for  mysticism.

Jili  distinguishes  three  phases  of  mystical  illumination  or
revelation  (tajalli),  which  run  parallel,  as  it  were,  to  the  three
stages — Oneness,  He-ness,  and  I-ness — traversed  by  the
Absolute  in  its  descent  to  consciousness.

In  the  first  phase,  called  the  Illumination  of  the  Names,
the  Perfect  Man  receives  the  mystery  that  is  conveyed  by  each
of  the  names  of  God,  and  he  becomes  one  with  the  name  in
such  sort  that  he  answers  the  prayer  of  any  person  who  in-
vokes God  by  the  name  in  question.

Similarly,  in  the  second  phase  he  receives  the  Illumination
of  the  Attributes  and  becomes  one  with  them,  i.e.,  with  the
Divine  Essence  as  qualified  by  its  various  attributes:  life,
knowledge,  power,  will,  and  so  forth.  For  example,  God
reveals  Himself  to  some  mystics  through  the  attribute  of  life.
Such  a  man,  says  Jili,  is  the  life  of  the  whole  universe;  he  feels
that  his  life  permeates  all  things  sensible  and  ideal,  that  all
words,  deeds,  bodies,  and  spirits  derive  their  existence  from
him.  If  he  be  endued  with  the  attribute  of  knowledge,  he
knows  the  entire  content  of  past,  present,  and  future  existence,
how  everything  came  to  be  or  is  coming  or  will  come  to  be,
and  why  the  non-existent  does  not  exist:  all  this  he  knows
both  synthetically  and  analytically.  The  Divine  attributes  are
classified  by  the  author  under  four  heads :  (i)  attributes  of  the
Essence,  (2)  attributes  of  Beauty,  (3)  attributes  of  Majesty,
(4)  attributes  of  Perfection.  He  says  that  all  created  things
are  mirrors  in  which  Absolute  Beauty  is  reflected.  What  is
ugly  has  its  due  place  in  the  order  of  existence  no  less  than
what  is  beautiful,  and  equally  belongs  to  the  Divine  per-
fection :  evil,  therefore,  is  only  relative.  As  was  stated  above,
the  Perfect  Man  reflects  all  the  Divine  attributes,  including
even  the  Essential  ones,  such  as  unity  and  eternity,  which  he
shares  with  no  other  being  in  this  world  or  the  next.

The  third  and  last  phase  is  the  Illumination  of  the  Essence.

86  Studies  in  Islamic  Mysticism  [CH.

Here  the  Perfect  Man  becomes  absolutely  perfect.  Every
attribute  has  vanished,  the  Absolute  has  returned  into  itself.
In  the  theory  thus  outlined  we  can  recognise  a  monistic  form
of  the  myth  which  represents  the  Primal  Man,  the  first-born
of  God,  as  sinking  into  matter,  working  there  as  a  creative
principle,  longing  for  deliverance,  and,  at  last  finding  the  way
back  to  his  source1.  Jili  calls  the  Perfect  Man  the  preserver
of  the  universe,  the  Qutb  or  Pole  on  which  all  the  spheres  of
existence  revolve.  He  is  the  final  cause  of  creation,  i.e.,  the
means  by  which  God  sees  Himself,  for  the  Divine  names  and
attributes  cannot  be  seen,  as  a  whole,  except  in  the  Perfect
Man.  He  is  a  copy  made  in  the  image  of  God ;  therefore  in  him
is  that  which  corresponds  to  the  Essence  with  its  two  cor-
related aspects  of  He-ness  and  I-ness,  i.e.,  inwardness  and
outwardness,  or  divinity  and  humanity.  His  real  nature  is
threefold,  as  Jili  expressly  declares  in  the  following  verses,
which  no  one  can  read  without  wondering  how  a  Moslem  could
have  written  them:

If  you  say  that  it  (the  Essence)  is  One,  you  are  right ;  or  if  you  say

that  it  is  Two,  it  is  in  fact  Two.
Or  if  you  say,  "  No,  it  is  Three,"  you  are  right,  for  that  is  the  real

nature  of  Man2.

Here  we  have  a  Trinity  consisting  of  the  Essence  together
with  its  two  complementary  aspects,  namely,  Creator  and
creature — God  and  man.  Now,  all  men  are  perfect  potentially,
but  few  are  actually  so.  These  few  are  the  prophets  and  saints.
And  since  their  perfection  varies  in  degree  according  to  their
capacity  for  receiving  illumination,  one  of  them  must  stand
out  above  all  the  rest.  Jfli  remains  a  Moslem  in  spite  of  his
philosophy,  and  for  him  this  absolutely  Perfect  Man  is  the
Prophet  Mohammed.  In  the  poem  from  which  I  have  quoted
he  identifies  the  Three-in-One  with  Mohammed  and  addresses
him  as  follows:

O  centre  of  the  compass !  O  inmost  ground  of  the  truth !  O  pivot
of  necessity  and  contingency !

1  S«c  Bousset,  Hauptprobleme  der  Gnosis,  p.  160  foil.
*  K  i.  10,  21  fol.

II]  The  Perfect  Man  87

O  eye  of  the  entire  circle  of  existence ! O  point  of  the  Koran  and

the  Furqdn ! 1
O  perfect  one,  and  perfecter  of  the  most  perfect,  who  have  been

beautified  by  the  majesty  of  God  the  Merciful !
Thou  art  the  Pole  (Qutb)  of  the  most  wondrous  things.  The  sphere

of  perfection  in  its  solitude  turns  on  thee.
Thou  art  transcendent ;  nay,  thou  art  immanent ;  nay,  thine  is  all

that  is  known  and  unknown,  everlasting  and  perishable.
Thine  in  reality  is  Being  and  not-being ;  nadir  and  zenith  are  thy

two  garments.
Thou  art  both  the  light  and  its  opposite;  nay,  but  thou  art  only

darkness  to  a  gnostic  that  is  dazed2.

Jili  also  holds  that  in  every  age  the  Perfect  Men  are  an  out-
ward manifestation  of  the  essence  of  Mohammed3,  which  has
the  power  of  assuming  whatever  form  it  will ;  and  he  records
the  time  and  place  of  his  own  meeting  with  the  Prophet,  who
appeared  to  him  in  the  guise  of  his  spiritual  director,  Sharafu-
'ddin  Isma'il  al-Jabarti.  In  the  6oth  chapter  of  the  Insdnu
'l-kdmil  he  depicts  Mohammed  as  the  absolutely  perfect  man,
the  first-created  of  God  and  the  archetype  of  all  other  created
beings.  This,  of  course;  is  an  Islamic  Logos  doctrine4.  It
brings  Mohammed  in  some  respects  very  near  to  the  Christ  of
the  Fourth  Gospel  and  the  Pauline  Epistles.  But  if  the
resemblance  is  great,  so  is  the  difference.  The  Fatherhood  of
God,  the  Incarnation,  and  the  Atonement  suggest  an  in-
finitely rich  and  sympathetic  personality,  whereas  the
Mohammedan  Logos  tends  to  identify  itself  with  the  active
principle  of  revelation  in  the  Divine  essence.  Mohammed  is

1  See  Studies  in  Islamic  Poetry,  p.  174,  note  3.  2  K  I.  n,  i  foil.

3  So  in  the  pseudo-Clementine  writings  Adam  or  Christ,  the  true  prophet
and  perfect  incarnation  of  the  Divine  spirit,  is  represented  as  manifesting
himself  personally  in  a  whole  series  of  subsequent  bearers  of  Revelation.
Bousset,  op.  cit.  p.  172,  quotes  the  following  passages:  "nam  et  ipse  verus
propheta  ab  initio  mundi  per  saeculum  currens  festinat  ad  requiem,"  and
"Christus,  qui  ab  initio  et  semper  erat,  per  singulas  quasque  generationes
piis  latenter  licet  semper  tamen  ad  erat." On  the  transmission  of  the  Light
of  Mohammed  see  Goldziher's  article  cited  in  the  next  note.

4  An  excellent  survey  of  the  doctrine  concerning  the  pre-existence  of
Mohammed,  of  the  consequences  drawn  from  it,  and  of  the  sources  from
which  it  was  derived,  will  be  found  in  Goldziher's  Neuplatonische  und
gnostische  Elemente  imHadit  (ZeitschriftfurAssyriologie,  vol.  22,  p.  317  foil.).

88  Studies  in  Islamic  Mysticism  [CH.

loved  and  adored  as  the  perfect  image  or  copy  of  God:  "he
that  has  seen  me  has  seen  Allah,"  says  the  Tradition1.
Except  that  he  is  not  quite  co-equal  and  co-eternal  with  his
Maker,  there  can  be  no  limit  to  glorification  of  the  Perfect
Man2.  I  need  hardly  say  that  Mohammed  gave  the  lie  direct
to  those  who  would  have  thrust  this  sort  of  greatness  upon
him:  his  apotheosis  is  the  triumph  of  religious  feeling  over
historical  fact.

These  ideas  in  part  go  back  to  Hallaj  but  were  first  worked
out  and  systematised  by  the  most  prolific  of  Moslem  theoso-
phists  and  one  of  the  most  original,  Muhyi'ddin  Ibnu  'l-'Arabi,
of  whose  influence  on  the  course  of  later  Sufi  speculation  the
traces  are  so  broad  and  deep  that  he  well  deserves  the
honorary  title  of  doctor  maximus  (al-shaykhu  'l-akbar),  by
which  he  is  frequently  designated.  Although  Jili  does  not
follow  him  everywhere,  he  has  learned  much  from  his
predecessor's  manner  of  philosophising;  he  looks  at  things
from  a  similar  standpoint,  and  his  thought  moves  in  the  same
(  circle  of  mystical  phantasies  struggling  to  clothe  themselves
'  with  forms  of  logic.  Ibnu  'l-'Arabi  would  be  better  known  to
us,  if  he  had  written  more  briefly,  lucidly,  and  methodically.
In  all  these  respects  Jili  has  the  advantage :  we  can  say  of  the
Insdnu  'l-kdmil  what  cannot  be  said  of  the  Futuhdtu  7-
Makkiyya  or  the  Fu§usu  'l-hikam — that  the  author  is  not  so
difficult  as  the  subject.  The  philosophy  of  Ibnu  'l-'Arabi
requires  a  volume  for  itself,  but  I  will  attempt  to  give  my
readers  some  account  of  the  Fusus,  where  he  treats  particu-
larly of  the  Divine  attributes  displayed  by  the  prophetic  class
of  Perfect  Men8.

The  Insdnu  'l-kdmil,  though  strongly  marked  with  a
character  and  expression  of  its  own,  is  one  of  those  books
which  gather  up  the  threads  of  a  whole  system  of  thought  and
serve  as  a  clue  to  it.  After  having  explored  the  visionary  world
of  reality  through  which  the  author  conducts  us  step  by  step,

1  Borrowed^from  St  John,  ch.  xiv.  v.  g.

•  Jili  declares  that  wherever  in  his  writings  the  expression  "the  Perfect
Man  ibsolutcly,  it  refers  to  Mohammed  (K  n.  59,  6).

'  Sec  Appendix  11.

I]  The  Perfect  Man  89

we  at  least  know  where  we  are  when  hierophants  of  the
le  guild  beckon  us  to  their  company  and  bid  us  soar  with
them

Into  the  height  of  Love's  rare  universe.

I  trust  that  the  following  analysis  and  exposition  is  full
enough  to  bring  out  the  principal  features  of  the  work  and
open  an  avenue  for  further  study.  The  subject-matter  of  Jili's
sixty-three  chapters  has  been  arranged  under  a  few  heads  in
the  way  that  seemed  most  suitable.

I.  ESSENCE,  ATTRIBUTE,  AND  NAME

The  Absolute  Essence  (Dhdt),  or  the  Essence  of  God,  is
that  to  which  names  and  attributes  belong  in  their  real
nature,  not  as  they  appear  in  existence1.  It  denotes  the  self
(nafs)  of  God  whereby  He  exists,  for  He  is  self-subsist ent.  It
is  endowed  with  all  the  names  and  ideas  which  His  perfection
demands.  Amongst  these  are  infinity  and  incomprehensibility.
No  words  can  express  or  hint  what  the  Essence  is,  since  it  has
no  opposite  or  like.  In  its  absoluteness  it  annuls  all  the  con-
tradictions which,  as  the  universal  ground  of  individualisation,
it  includes2.

I  am  convinced  that  It  (the  Essence)  is  non-existence,  since  by

existence  It  was  manifested3.
Thought  hath  beheld  It  from  afar  as  a  power  exerting  itself  in

existence.

It  is  not  other  than  a  wall,  wherein  is  set  for  thee  a  store  of  treasures.
I  am  that  wall,  and  It  is  the  hidden  treasure — hidden  in  order  that

I  may  find  it  by  digging.
Take  It  then,  to  be  a  body  in  respect  of  an  outward  form  (which  It

assumes),  while  to  that  body  It  is  a  spirit,  that  thou  mayst

regard  it  (the  body).

1  K  i.  18.

2  Cf.  the  passage  (i.  20,  23  foil.)  translated  on  p.  83.

3  The  concept  of  existence  involves  non-existence  as  its  logical  comple-
ment.  God,  in  virtue  of  His  name,  "the  Outward"  (al-Zdhir),  is  identical
with  all  existing  objects,  while  in  virtue  of  His  name,  "the  Inward"  (al-
Bdtin)  He  is  non-existent  externally. Cf.  the  saying  of  Hegel,  "Being  and
not-Being  are  identical,"  i.e.,  no  distinctions  are  absolute.

90  Studies  in  Islamic  Mysticism  [CH,

God  made  Its  comeliness  (husn)  complete1,  and  by  the  beauty
(jamdl)  of  God  It  became  celebrated  (known  to  all).

It  never  subsisted  (as  an  object)  but  in  thee  alone2:  perceive  the
Word  (Amr)3,  that  thou  mayst  see  its  diverse  forms4.

I  am  the  existent  and  the  non-existent  and  the  naughted  and  the

everlasting.

I  am  the  awared  and  the  imagined  and  the  snake  and  the  charmer.
I  am  the  loosed  and  the  bound  and  the  wine  and  the  cupbearer.
I  am  the  treasure,  I  am  poverty,  I  am  my  creatures  and  my

Creator.

******
Neither  affirm  my  existence  nor  deny  it,  O  immortal  one  !
Do  not  suppose  thyself  different  from  me  or  deem  thyself  the  eye

of  my  eye-corners.

******
And  say,  "That  am  I,  yet  in  respect  of  my  qualities  and  natural

dispositions  That  I  am  not5."

Jflf  defines  the  attribute  ($ifat)  of  a  thing  as  that  which
conveys  knowledge  of  its  state  to  the  understanding6.  The
attributes  of  the  Essence  are  the  forms  of  thought  by  which
it  is  manifested  and  made  known.  In  the  world  of  appearance
we  distinguish  the  forms  from  the  reality  underlying  them,
but  the  distinction  is  not  ultimate:  the  attributes  in  their  real
nature  are  identical  with  the  Essence  which  manifests  itself
as  "other,"  i.e.,  under  the  aspect  of  externality,  to  our
perceptions7.  What  is  called  in  theology  the  creation  of  the
world  is  just  this  manifestation,  accompanied  by  division  and
plurality,  of  the  Essence  as  the  attributes,  or  of  Being  as  the
object  of  thought;  and  in  reality  the  Essence  is  the  attributes
(al-Dhdt  'aynu  'l-sifdt).  The  universe  is  an  idea  —  "such  stuff
as  dreams  are  made  on,"  although  the  idea  cannot  properly
be  differentiated  from  the  "thing-in-itself,"  except  for  con-
venience of  understanding.  Here  let  me  translate  part  of  the

1  Jamdl  denotes  the  attribute  of  Divine  Beauty,  husn  its  outward
manifestation.  Cf.  Jfli's  verse  (in  his  'Ayniyya)  :

1  In  Man,  the  microcosm.  8  I.e.  the  Logos.  4  K  I.  8,  18  foil.

•  K  i.  9,  ii  foil.  •  K  I.  27,  26.  *  Cf.  K  I.  8  1,  2  foil.

n]  The  Perfect  Man  91

57th  chapter,  "Concerning  thought  (khaydl),  how  it  is  the
material  (hayuld,  v\rj)  of  the  Cosmos1."

Thought  is  the  life  of  the  spirit  of  the  universe :  it  is  the  foundation

of  that  life,  and  its  (Thought's)  foundation  is  Man.
To  him  that  knows  Thought  through  the  power  of  the  Almighty,

existence  is  nothing  but  a  thought.
Sensation,  before  its  appearance,  is  an  object  of  thought  to  thee,

and  if  it  goes  it  resembles  a  dream.
And,  similarly,  the  time  during  which  it  is  felt  inheres  in  our

consciousness  upon  a  foundation  (of  thought).
Be  not  deceived  by  sensation,  for  it  is  an  object  of  thought  (mukh-

ayyal),  and  so  is  the  reality  (which  every  form  expresses)  and

the  whole  universe,
And  likewise,  to  him  that  knows  the  truth,  the  worlds  of  malakut

and  jabarut,  and  the  divine  nature  (Idhut)  and  the  human

nature  (ndsut).
Do  not  despise  the  rank  of  Thought,  for  it  is  the  very  gist  of  the

notion2  of  the  Being  who  disposes  all.

Know  that  Thought  is  the  origin  of  existence  and  is  the  essence
wherein  God  is  manifested  perfectly.  Consider  your  own  belief  in
God  and  in  His  having  the  attributes  and  names  which  belong  to
Him.  Where  is  the  locus  (mahall]  of  this  belief,  in  which  God  is
made  manifest  to  you?  It  is  Thought.  Therefore  we  said  that
Thought  is  the  essence  wherein  He  becomes  manifest  in  perfection.
If  you  recognise  this,  it  will  be  plain  to  you  that  Thought  is  the
origin  of  the  whole  universe,  because  God  is  the  origin  of  all
things,  and  their  most  perfect  manifestation  occurs  nowhere  but
in  a  locus  which  is  the  origin  (of  His  manifestation) ;  and  that  locus
is  Thought.  Mark  how  the  Prophet  considered  the  sensible  world
to  be  a  dream — and  dream  is  a  thought — and  said,  "  Mankind  are
asleep,  and  when  they  die,  they  awake,"  i.e.,  the  reality  in  which
they  were  during  their  earthly  life  is  manifested  to  them,  and  they

1  K  ii.  32,  last  line.  Khaydl  is  imaginal  thought  (phantasy).  It  includes
all  that  is  perceived  by  the  mind  in  an  ideal  or  material  form.  Mystics  hold
that  God  reveals  Himself  in  five  planes  (hafiardt):  (i)  the  plane  of  the
Essence,  (2)  the  plane  of  the  Attributes,  (3)  the  plane  of  the  Actions,  (4)  the
plane  of  Similitudes  and  Phantasy  (khaydl),  (5)  the  plane  of  sense  and  ocular
vision.  Each  of  these  is  a  copy  of  the  one  above  it,  so  that  whatever  appears
in  the  sensible  world  is  the  symbol  of  an  unseen  reality.  Cf.  Fusds,  no.
2  Haqiqa,  i.e.,  the  attributes  by  which  Pure  Being  is  individualised.

92  Studies  in  Islamic  Mysticism  [CH.

perceive  that  they  were  asleep.  Not  that  death  brings  a  complete
awakening.  Forgetfulness  (ghaflat)  of  God  prevails  over  those  in
the  intermediate  state  (barzakh)  and  those  in  the  place  of  Judgment
and  those  in  Hell  and  Paradise,  until  God  reveals  Himself  to  them
on  the  Hill  to  which  the  inhabitants  of  Paradise  go  forth  and
behold  Him.  This  forgetfulness  is  the  sleep  (mentioned  by  the
Prophet).  The  universe,  then,  has  its  origin  in  a  thought,  and  for
this  reason  Thought  determines  the  individuals  therein:  all,
whatever  their  sphere  of  existence,  are  determined  by  Thought.
For  example,  the  people  of  this  world  are  determined  by  thought
of  their  life  as  it  is  now  or  as  it  shall  be  hereafter;  in  either  case,
they  are  forgetful  of  presence  with  God  (al-hudur  ma'  Allah) :  they
are  asleep.  He  that  is  present  with  God  is  awake  according  to  the
measure  of  his  presence.... The  sleep  of  the  inhabitants  of  the  next
world  is  lighter,  but  although  they  are  with  God  in  respect  that  He
is  with  all  beings  and  says  (in  the  Koran),  "  He  is  with  you  where-
soever ye  be,"  yet  are  they  with  Him  in  sleep,  not  in  waking.  One
that,  by  divine  predestination,  enjoys  in  this  world  what  shall  at
last  be  shown  on  the  Hill  to  the  people  of  Paradise,  so  that  God
reveals  Himself  to  him  and  he  knows  God — that  man  is  (truly)
awake.  If  you  perceive  that  those  in  every  world  are  judged  to  be
asleep,  then  judge  that  all  those  worlds  are  a  thought,  inasmuch  as
Sleep  is  the  world  of  Thought.

The  comparison  with  dream-experience  does  not  imply
that  the  universe  is  unreal,  but  that  it  is  reality  as  presented
to  itself  through  and  in  the  cosmic  consciousness  of  the  Perfect
Man,  which  holds  all  the  attributes  of  reality  together.  This,
we  have  already  noted,  is  the  central  doctrine  of  the  work
before  us.  Other  men  lack  such  consciousness:  they  regard
the  sum  of  attributes  constituting  the  "material"  world  as
something  different  from  the  Essence  and  from  themselves.

In  the  unitive  state  there  is  immediate  perception  of  the
Essence,  but  no  mystic  perceives  the  attributes  as  they  really
are:  you  can  feel  intuitively  that  you  are  He,  that  the  Divine
essence  is  consubstantial  (ayri)  with  your  own,  and  thereby
attain  to  knowledge  of  the  Essence;  you  cannot,  however,
perceive  and  know  the  attributes  of  the  Essence  any  more
than  you  can  perceive  and  know  the  qualities  latent  in  your-

II]  The  Perfect  Man  93

self,  which  are  only  visible  in  their  effects.  Consequently  it
may  be  said  that  the  Essence  is  imperceptible,  in  the  sense  of
its  being  identical  with  the  attributes1.

The  name  (ism)  objectifies  the  named  (musamma)  in  the
understanding,  pictures  it  in  the  mind,  presents  it  to  the
judgment,  moves  it  in  reflection  and  keeps  it  in  memory2.  It
serves  to  make  unknown  things  known;  therefore,  its  relation
to  the  named  is  that  of  the  outward  to  the  inward,  and  in  this
respect  it  is  identical  with  the  named.  Some  things  exist  in
name  and  not  otherwise;  thus,  the  existence  of  the  'Anqd  is
entirely  nominal:  the  "named  "  in  this  case  is  not-being.  God,
on  the  contrary,  is  real  Being;  and  just  as  our  knowledge  of
the  'Anqd  is  derived  from  its  name,  so  we  reach  knowledge
of  God  through  the  name  Allah,  in  which  all  the  Divine  names
and  attributes  are  comprised3.

God  made  this  name  a  mirror  for  man,  so  that  when  he  looks  in
it,  he  knows  the  true  meaning  of  "God  was  and  there  was  naught
beside  Him,"  and  in  that  moment  it  is  revealed  to  him  that  his
hearing  is  God's  hearing,  his  sight  God's  sight,  his  speech  God's
speech,  his  life  God's  life,  his  knowledge  God's  knowledge,  his  will
God's  will,  and  his  power  God's  power,  and  that  God  possesses  all
these  attributes  fundamentally;  and  then  he  knows  that  all  the
aforesaid  qualities  are  borrowed  and  metaphorically  applied  to
himself,  whereas  they  really  belong  to  God4.

The  Divine  names  are  either  names  of  the  Essence,  e.g.,
al-Ahad  (the  One),  or  names  of  the  attributes,  e.g.,  al-Rahmdn
(the  Merciful),  al-Alim  (the  Knowing).  Each  of  them—
except  al-Ahad,  which  transcends  relationship — brings  forth
the  effect  (athar)  inherent  in  that  particular  aspect  of  the
Essence  of  which  it  is,  so  to  speak,  the  embodiment.  Good
and  evil,  faith  and  infidelity,  all  mundane  life,  thought,
feeling,  and  action  proceed  inevitably  from  the  Divine  names5.

1  K  i.  28,  21  foil.  2  K  i.  21,  4  fr.  foot.

3  Cf.  the  theory  and  practice  of  dhikr.  The  doctrine  that  the  "named  "  is
revealed  by  means  of  the  name,  which  is  its  obverse  or  outward  self,  has
played  a  great  part  in  Sufism.

4  K  I.  22,  20  foil.

6  Cf.  Ibnu  'l-'Arabi's  definition  of  ism  (Ta'rifdt  of  Jurjani,  ed.  by  Fliigel,
p.  293)  as  "the  Divine  name  that  rules  a  passing  state  of  mystical  feeling

94  Studies  in  Islamic  Mysticism  [CH.

II.  THE  DESCENT  OF  THE  ABSOLUTE1.

Pure  Being,  devoid  of  qualities  and  relations,  is  called  by
Jilf  "the  dark  mist"  or  "blindness"  (al-Amd),  a  term  which
the  Prophet  is  said  to  have  used  in  answering  the  question,
"Where  was  God  before  the  creation?2"  Dr  Iqbal  remarks
that  al-Amd,  translated  into  modern  phraseology,  would  be
"the  Unconsciousness,"  and  that  our  author  here  anticipates
the  theories  of  Schopenhauer  and  Von  Hartmann3.  The
parallel  seems  to  me  little  more  than  verbal.  Jill's  ontology
is  based  on  logic,  and  in  developing  it  he  follows  a  method
which  curiously  resembles  the  Hegelian  dialectic.  According
to  Hegel,

the  Absolute  Idea  itself  is  the  resolution  of  the  antithesis  of  Nature
and  Mind.  The  Idea  is  articulated  as  abstract,  self-identical  unity,
negation  of  this  by  a  plural "  other  "  of  particularity  and  differences,
and  as  concrete  identity-in-difference  and  unity-in-plurality,
wherein  it  affirms  itself  with  a  richer  content.... The  "result"  in
question,  however,  must  not  be  expressed  amiss.  It  does  not  occur
at  the  end  of  a  time-process.  "Moments"  severed  for  us  are  together
for  the  Absolute  Idea,  the  conscious  Reason,  the  Notion  which
knows  all  as  itself.  The  tail  of  the  serpent  is  in  the  serpent's  mouth.
This  self-sundering  of  the  Idea  is  the  Hegelian  form  of  the  mystic
Jacob  Bohme's  view  that  "without  self-diremption "  the  being  of
the  Eternal  would  be  not-being.  Conscious  knowledge,  it  is  urged,
implies  antithesis  within  the  Spiritual  Ground4.

(hdl),"  and  the  definitions  of  terms  like  'abdullah,  'abdu  'l-Rahim,  'abdu
'l-Malik,  etc.,  in  the  Istildhdlu  'l-$i4fiyya  of  'Abdu  '1-Razzaq  al-Kashani,  ed.
by  Sprenger,  p.  91  foil.

1  "Descent"  (nuztil,  tanazzul)  is  equivalent  to  " individualisation "
(la'ayyun)  and  denotes  the  process  by  which  Pure  Being  gradually  becomes
qualified.

1  K  i.  43,  2  foil.  Cf.  Lane  under  ;l^c  and  Nyberg,  Kleinere  Schriften
des  Ibn  al-'Arabi,  Introd.,  p.  154.  Jill  says  that  the  word  signifies  the
Essence  without  its  complementary  attributes  of  Haqq  (Creator)  and  khalq
(creatures),  i.e.,  the  Essence  viewed  apart  from  its  "self-diremption."

*  Development  of  Metaphysics  in  Persia,  p.  165  fol.  I  have  assumed  that
Dr  Iqbal  is  referring  to  these  philosophers.  His  exact  words  are  "  anticipates
metaphysical  doctrines  of  modern  Germany."

4  E.  D.  Fawcett,  The  World  as  imagination,  p.  102.

nj  The  Perfect  Man  95

Similar  principles  determine  Jill's  line  of  thought,  although
he  never  states  them  formally.

The  'Amd,  as  he  describes  it,  is  not  a  blind  unconscious
power,  but  it  is  the  absolute  inwardness  (buturi)  and  occulta-
tion  (istitdr)  in  which  the  opposite  concept  of  outwardness
(zuhur) — i.e.,  all  relations  of  the  Essence  to  itself  as  "  other  "—
is  somehow  absorbed  and  negated,  like  starlight  in  sunlight1.
Jili  compares  the  'Amd,  as  the  eternal  and  unchangeable
ground  of  Being,  to  the  fire  which,  in  a  sense,  is  always  latent
in  the  flint  whence  it  flashes  forth2.  Thus  the  l  Amd  may  be
regarded  as  the  inmost  self,  the  "immanent  negativity"  of
the  Essence ;  as  such,  it  is  logically  correlated  with  A  hadiyya3,
in  which  the  Essence  knows  itself  as  transcendental  unity;
and  both  these  aspects  are  reconciled  in  the  Absolute,  "whose
outwardness  is  identical  with  its  inwardness4."

A  hadiyya,  the  abstract  notion  of  oneness,  although  nothing
else  is  manifested  in  it,  marks  the  first  approach  of  the
Essence  to  manifestation5.  Its  nature  is  analogous  to  a  wall
viewed  from  a  distance  as  a  single  whole  without  reference  to
the  clay,  wood,  bricks,  and  mortar  of  which  it  is  composed :
the  wall  is  "one"  in  respect  of  its  being  a  name  for  the
*'  murity  "  (jiddriyya) 6.  In  the  same  way  A  hadiyya  comprises
all  particulars  as  negated  by  the  idea  of  unity.  This  absolute
unity  in  turn  resolves  itself  into  a  pair  of  opposites  in  order  to
become  re-united  in  a  third  term  which  carries  the  process  of
individualisation  a  stage  further.  Thus  we  arrive  at  Wdhidiyya

1  K  i.  43,  8  foil.;  i.  44,  5  foil. Cf.  i.  61,  4  foil.— "The  Essence  (Dhdt)
denotes  Absolute  Being  stripped  of  all  modes,  relations,  and  aspects.  Not
that  they  are  outside  of  Absolute  Being;  on  the  contrary,  they  belong  to  it,
but  they  are  in  it  neither  as  themselves  nor  as  aspects  of  it;  no,  they  are
identical  with  the  being  of  the  Absolute.  The  Absolute  is  the  simple  essence
in  which  no  name  or  quality  or  relation  is  manifested.  When  any  of  these
appears  in  it,  that  idea  is  referred  to  that  which  appears  in  the  Essence,  not
to  the  pure  Essence,  inasmuch  as  the  Essence,  by  the  law  of  its  nature,  com-
prehends universals,  particulars,  and  relations,  not  as  they  are  judged  to  exist,
but  as  they  are  judged  to  be  naughted  under  the  might  of  the  transcendental  one-
ness of  the  Essence."

2  K  i.  42,  23  foil.

3  Jili  says  distinctly  that  the  terms  'Amd  and  A  hadiyya  are  opposed  to
each  other  as  inward  and  outward  aspects  of  the  Essence  (K  i.  43,  7  foil.).

«  K  i.  45,  7.  5  K  i.  61,  16  foil.  •  K  i.  36,  9  foil.

96  Studies  in  Islamic  Mysticism  [CH.

or  relative  unity,  i.e.,  unity  in  plurality.  The  intervening
thesis  and  antithesis  are  named  Huwiyya  (He-ness)1  and
Aniyya  (I-ness)2.  Huwiyya  signifies  the  inward  unity  (al-
ahadiyyat  al-bdtina)  in  which  the  attributes  of  the  Essence
disappear;  Aniyya,  the  obverse  side  or  outward  expression  of
Huwiyya,  is  that  unity  revealing  itself  in  existence.  Clearly,
then,  external  manifestation  is  the  result  of  a  "  self-diremp-
tion"  which  lies  in  the  very  nature  of  the  Essence  as  Pure
Thought3.  The  discord  of  Huwiyya  (the  Many  submerged  in
the  One)  and  Aniyya  (the  One  manifested  in  the  Many)  is
overcome  in  the  harmony  of  Wdhidiyya  (the  Many  identical
in  essence  with  each  other  and  with  the  One) 4.  In  Wdhidiyya
"essence  is  manifested  as  attribute  and  attribute  as  essence,"
so  that  all  distinction  between  the  attributes  is  lost:  one  is
the  'ayn  (identity)  of  the  other,  Mercy  and  Vengeance  are  the
same.  We  shall  see  that  from  this  point  of  view  the  plane  of
Divinity  (Ildhiyya)  is  a  descent  horn  Wdhidiyya,  in  so  far  as  in
the  former  the  attributes,  which  were  identical  in  the  latter,
become  distinct  and  opposed.  Before  passing  to  theology,  let

1  See  K  i.  61,  20  foil,  and  82,  n  foil.  Huwa,  the  pronoun  of  the  third
person  singular,  is  called  in  Arabic  grammar  "the  absent  one"  (al-ghd'ib);
therefore  Huwiyya  indicates  the  absence  (ghaybubiyya)  of  the  attributes  of
the  Essence  (from  manifestation  and  perception).  It  is  the  inmost  con-
sciousness of  God  (sirr  Allah).  Jill  demonstrates  this  (i.  82,  19  foil.)  by
analysing  the  name  Allah,  which  in  Arabic  is  written  ALLH :  take  away  the
A,  and  there  remains  LLH  =  /z7/rfA  =  "to  God";  then  take  away  the  first  L,
and  you  are  left  with  UH.  =  lahu  =  "  to  Him  " ;  remove  the  second  L,  and  you
have  H=Huwa  =  "He"  (cf.  my  ed.  of  the  Kitdb  al-Luma',  p.  89,  1.  3  foil.).
God  is  often  described  by  Sufis  as  the  huwiyya  or  inmost  self  of  man  and  the
universe,  while  man  and  the  universe  are  the  huwiyya  (haqiqa,  objectified
idea)  of  God.  God  is  the  absolute  Huwiyya  (Individuality),  and  everything
has  its  own  peculiar  huwiyya,  which  makes  it  what  it  is  (Fu$u?,  146,  8  foil.).
Cf.  Fu?u$,  46  and  194.

•  K  i.  61.  22;  83,  16. Aniyya,  derived  from  Ana,  "I,"  and  indicating
presence,  is  involved  in  the  notion  of  Huwiyya  as  the  rind  is  implied  by  the
kernel.

*  Cf.  E.  Caird,  Hegel,  p.  149:  "As  the  lightning  sleeps  in  the  dewdrop,  so
in  the  simple  and  transparent  unity  of  self-consciousness  there  is  held  in
equilibrium  that  vital  antagonism  of  opposites,  which,  as  the  opposition  of
thought  and  things,  of  mind  and  matter,  of  spirit  and  nature,  seems  to  rend
the  world  asunder."

4  Cf.  K  i.  37,  8-9:  "  Wdhidiyya  is  that  (aspect)  in  which  the  Essence
appears  as  unifying  the  difference  of  my  attributes.  Here  the  All  is  both  One
and  Many.  Marvel  at  the  plurality  of  what  essentially  is  One."

ll]  The  Perfect  Man  97

me  put  the  author's  scheme  of  ontological  devolution  in  the
form  of  a  ta*ble.

A.  Absolute  Being  or  Pure  Thought  (al-Dhdt,  al-Wujud  al-mutlaq) .

(a)  Inward  aspect:  "the  dark  mist"  (al-'Amd).  Being,  sunk  in

itself,  bare  potentiality.

(b)  Outward aspect: abstract Oneness (Ahadiyya). Being,

conscious  of  itself  as  unity.

B.  Abstract  Oneness  (Ahadiyya).

(a)  Inward  aspect:  He-ness  (Huwiyya). Being,  conscious  of

itself  as  negating  the  Many  (attributes).

(b)  Outward  aspect:  I-ness  (Aniyya).  Being,  conscious  of  itself

as  the  "truth"  of  the  Many.

C.  Unity  in  plurality  (Wdhidiyya) .  Being,  identifying  itself  as  One

with  itself  as  Many.

III.  THE  ESSENCE  AS  GOD.

In  the  Insdnu  'l-kdmil  we  find  the  same  contrast  as  in  the
Vedanta  system  between  Being  with  attributes,  i.e.,  God,  and
Being  which  would  not  be  absolute  unless  it  were  stripped  of
all  qualities.  The  essence  of  God  is  Pure  Being,  but  Divinity
(Ildhiyya) — the  domain  of  Allah,  regarded  as  He  who
necessarily  exists — is  the  highest  manifestation  of  the  Essence,
embracing  all  that  is  manifested:  "it  is  a  name  for  the  sum
of  the  individualisations  of  Being,  i.e.,  Being  in  the  relation
of  Creator  (al-Haqq)  to  created  things  (al-khalq),  and  for  their
maintenance  in  their  respective  order  in  that  sum1."  Here
the  full  ideal  content  of  every  individualisation,  existent  or
non-existent2,  is  manifested  according  to  its  proper  place  in
the  series,  and  all  opposites  exhibit  their  relativity  in  the
greatest  possible  perfection;  thus,  the  Creator  (al-Haqq)
appears  in  the  form  of  the  creature  (al-khalq)*,  and  conversely
the  creature  in  the  form  of  the  Creator*.  Since  Divinity
represents  the  sum  of  the  attributes,  it  is  invisible  to  the  eye,

1  K  i.  31,  4  fr.  foot.

2  The  universal correlation  of  Ildhiyya  links  Being  with  Not-being
(cf.  p.  89,  note  3),  a  truth  which  cannot  be  apprehended  except  by  mystical
intuition  (K  I.  33,  2  foil.)-

8  According  to  the  Hadith,  "I  saw  my  Lord  in  the  form  of  a  beardless
youth."  *  E.g.  "God  created  Adam  in  His  own  image."

N.  s.  ii  7

98  Studies  in  Islamic  Mysticism  [CH.

though  visible  everywhere  in  its  effects,  i.e.,  in  the  sensible
world;  the  Essence,  on  the  other  hand,  is  visible,  though  its
where  is  unknown.  Similarly,  when  you  see  a  man,  you  know
or  believe  that  he  has  certain  qualities,  but  you  do  not  see
them;  his  essence  (dhdt),  however,  you  see  as  a  whole,  even  if
many  of  his  qualities  are  unknown  to  you.  Only  the  effects
of  his  qualities  are  visible,  the  qualities  themselves  you
cannot  see,  because  the  attribute  must  always  remain  hidden
in  the  Essence;  otherwise,  it  could  be  separated  from  the
Essence,  and  that  is  impossible1.  In  a  scale  of  existence  where
each  lower  individualisation  marks  a  loss  of  simplicity,  the
difference-in-identity  (Ildhiyya)  in  which  the  sunken  riches
of  the  Absolute  are  completely  realised,  might  be  expected
to  succeed  the  identity-in-difference  which  belongs  to  the
stage  of  Wdhidiyya.  Jili,  as  a  mystical  theologian,  does  not
take  this  view.  He  enthrones  Allah  in  the  seat  of  the  Absolute
and  gives  the  following  line  of  descent2:

1.  Divinity  (Ildhiyya).

2.  Abstract  Oneness  (A  hadiyya) .

3.  Unity  in  plurality  (Wdhidiyya).

4.  Mercifulness  (Rahmdniyya) .

5.  Lordship  (Rububiyya) .

Mercifulness  and  Lordship  are  specialised  aspects  of
Divinity.  Rahmdniyya*  manifests  the  creative  attributes
(al-sifdtu  'l-haqqiyya)  exclusively4,  whereas  Ildhiyya  compre-
hends both  the  creative  and  the  creaturely  (khalqi) .  The  first
mercy  (rahmat)  of  God  was  His  bringing  the  universe  into
existence  from  Himself6.  His  manifestation  pervaded  all  that
exists,  and  His  perfection  was  displayed  in  every  particle  and
atom  of  the  whole,  yet  He  remains  One  (wdhid)  in  the  Many
which  mirror  Him  and  Single  (ahad)  according  to  the  necessity
of  His  nature,  for  He  is  indivisible  and  He  created  the  world

1  K  i.  34,  14  foil. Cf.  p.  92  supra.

»  K  i.  32,  8  foil.  »  K  i.  38,  16  foil.

4  I.e.,  the  attributes  peculiar  to  the  Essence  (A^adiyya,  Wdhidiyya,  etc.)
as  well  as  those  of  the  Creator  (al-Haqq),  which  necessarily  bear  a  relation  to
created  beings,  viz.,  life,  knowledge,  power,  will,  speech,  hearing,  and  sight.

6  K  I.  39,  6.

II]  The  Perfect  Man  99

from  Himself.  It  is  wrong  to  say  that  God  "lends"  His
attributes  to  things;  the  things  are  really  His  attributes,  to
which  He  lends  the  name  of  creatureliness  (khalqiyya)1,  in
order  that  the  mysteries  of  Divinity  and  the  antithesis
inherent  in  it  may  be  revealed.  God  is  the  substance  (hayuld)
of  the  universe.  The  universe  is  like  ice,  and  God  is  the  water
of  which  it  is  made :  the  name  "ice  "  is  "lent "  to  the  congealed
mass,  but  its  true  name  is  "water."  Jili  pursues  this  analogy
in  four  verses  which  he  quotes  from  an  ode  of  his  own
composition2.  He  says  in  the  second  verse  that  although
Religion  declares  the  ice  and  the  water  to  be  different,  "we
mystics  know  that  they  are  the  same."  He  asks  how  this
doctrine — the  permeation  of  existence  by  the  Essence— can
be  confounded  with  hulul  (incarnation) ,  which  affirms  contact,
i.e.,  non-identity3.  In  virtue  of  the  name  al-Rahmdn,  God
exists  in  all  the  things  that  He  brought  into  being.  His  mercy
towards  His  creatures  was  shown  by  His  manifesting  Himsejf
in  them  and  by  causing  them  to  appear  in  Himself.  "In  every
idea  that  you  form  God  is  present  as  its  Creator,  and  you  are
God  in  respect  of  its  existence  in  you,  for  you  must  needs  form
ideas  in  God  and  find  (feel  the  presence  of)  God  in  forming
them4."

Lordship  (Rububiyya)  establishes  a  necessary  relation
between  God  and  His  creatures,  since  it  typifies  the  class  of
attributes  which  involve  a  complementary  term  or  require  an
object;  e.g.,  "lord"  implies  "slave,"  and  "knower"4  refers  to
something  "known."

It  will  be  understood  that  "comparison"  (tashbiti),  i.e.,
the  bringing  of  God  into  relation  with  created  things,  is

1  Cf.  Ibnu  'l-'Arabi,  Tarjumdn  al-ashwdq,  No.  41,  vv.  11-13.

2  K  i.  39,  6  fr.  foot.  The  title  of  the  ode  is  al-nawddiru  'l-'ayniyya  fi
'l-bawddiri  'l-ghaybiyya.  Cf .  No.  19  in  the  list  of  his  works  given  by  Brockel-
mann,  n.  206.  3  K  I.  40,  5  foil.

4  K  i.  40,  9  foil.  In  another  passage  (i.  66,  3  fr.  foot  and  foil.)  Jili  argues
that  by  means  of  man  the  impossible  is  judged  to  be  necessary.  If  you
suppose  what  is  impossible,  e.g.,  a  living  being  without  knowledge,  that  being
exists  in  your  thought  and  is  a  creature  of  God,  inasmuch  as  thought  with
its  content  is  a  creature  of  God:  thus  by  means  of  man  there  came  into
existence  in  the  world  that  which  had  its  centre  of  thought  elsewhere  (i.e.,
in  the  knowledge  of  God).

7—2

ioo  Studies  in  Islamic  Mysticism  [CH.

"a  judgment  about  Him1"  and  does  not  affect  His  absolute
transcendence  (tanzih)  as  He  is  in  Himself,  which  He  alone
can  conceive  and  know2.  This  fact  is  known  intuitively  by
Perfect  Men ;  for  other  mystics  it  is  a  truth  apprehended  by
faith.  While  the  Essential  tanzih  has  no  opposite,  the  anti-
thesis of  tanzih  and  tashbih  is  associated  with  God  in  His
creative  and  creaturely  aspects  by  those  who  perceive  that
He  is  One  and  that  the  form  of  all  existent  things  is  the  form
of  Divine  excellence  (husn)*.  Considered  absolutely,  the
Divine  nature  does  not  admit  of  change.  Change  consists  in
the  relations  of  God,  i.e.,  in  the  diverse  aspects  wherein  He
manifests  Himself  to  us.  His  manifestation  of  Himself  to
Himself,  and  His  occultation  of  Himself  in  Himself,  is
eternally  one  and  the  same4.  The  notion  of  eternity,  without
beginning  and  without  end,  when  it  is  applied  to  God,
involves  no  time-relation  with  His  creatures,  but  only  a
judgment  that  His  nature  is  necessarily  timeless5.

Jili  makes  a  fourfold  division  of  the  Divine  attributes:
(i)  attributes  of  the  Essence,  e.g.,  One,  Eternal,  Real;  (2)
attributes  of  Beauty  (jamdl),  e.g.,  Forgiving,  Knowing,
Guiding  aright ;  (3)  attributes  of  Majesty  (jaldl) ,  e.g.,  Almighty,
Avenging,  Leading  astray;  (4)  attributes  of  Perfection  (kamdl),
e.g.,  Exalted,  Wise,  First  and  Last,  Outward  and  Inward*.

Every  attribute  has  an  effect  (athar) ,  in  which  its  jamdl  or
jaldl  or  kamdl  is  manifested.  Thus,  objects  of  knowledge  are
the  "effect "  of  the  Name  al-Alim,  the  Knower.  All  attributes
of  jamdl,  and  some  of  jaldl,  are  displayed  by  everything  that
exists.  Paradise  is  the  mirror  of  absolute  jamdl,  Hell  of
absolute  jaldl,  and  the  univetse  is  the  form  of  these  Divine
attributes.  Evil,  as  such,  does  not  exist,  although  it  has  its
appointed  place  in  the  world  of  opposites.  What  we  call  evil
is  really  the  relation  of  some  parts  and  aspects  of  the  whole  to
other  parts  and  aspects;  in  a  word,  all  imperfection  arises

K  i.  46,  21.  «  K  i.  45,  12  foil.

Tme  knowledge  of  God  combines  His  transcendence  with  His  imma-
e  (Fufii?,  228).
K  i.  43,  10  foil.

See  the  chapters  on  azal,  abad  and  qidam  (K  i.  85-89).
K  i.  75  foil.  A  list  of  the  attributes  in  each  class  is  given  in  K  i.  78

n]  The  Perfect  Man  101

from  our  not  looking  at  things  sub  specie  unitatis.  Sin  is  not
evil  except  in  so  far  as  we  judge  it  to  be  forbidden  by  God.
The  author's  treatment  of  the  seven  principal  attributes —
Life,  Knowledge,  Will,  Power,  Speech,  Hearing,  and  Sight-
is  marked  by  great  subtlety,  but  the  discussion  is  somewhat
arid.  I  will  give  a  few  specimens.

Life1.  The  existence  of  a  thing  for  itself  is  its  complete
life;  its  existence  for  another  is  its  relative  life.  God  exists
for  Himself.  He  is  the  Living  One  (al-Hayy) ,  and  His  life  is
the  life  complete  and  immortal.  Created  beings  in  general
exist  for  God :  their  life  is  relative  and  linked  with  death.  While
the  Divine  life  in  created  beings  is  one  and  complete,  some
manifest  it  in  a  complete  form,  e.g.,  the  Perfect  Man  and  the
Cherubim;  others  incompletely,  e.g.,  the  animal  man  (al-
insdnu  'l-hayawdni),  the  inferior  angels,  the  jinn  (genies),
animals,  plants,  and  minerals.  Yet,  in  a  certain  sense,  the  life
of  all  created  beings  is  complete  in  the  measure  suitable  to-,
their  degree  and  necessary  for  the  preservation  of  the  order
of  the  universe.  Life  is  a  single  essence,  incapable  of  diminu-
tion or  division,  existent  for  itself  in  everything;  and  that
which  constitutes  a  thing  is  its  life,  that  is  to  say,  the  life  of
God  whereby  all  things  subsist :  they  all  glorify  Him  in  respect
of  all  His  names,  and  their  glorification  of  Him  in  respect  of
His  name  "the  Living"  is  identical  with  their  existence
through  His  life.  The  author  states,  as  a  fact  known  to  few
but  revealed  to  him  by  mystical  illumination,  that  everything
exists  in  and  for  itself,  and  that  its  life  is  entirely  free  and  self-
determined.  This — which,  as  he  admits,  does  not  tally  with
what  has  been  said  above — is  confirmed  by  the  Divine
information  that  on  the  Day  of  Resurrection  each  of  a  man's
deeds  will  appear  in  visible  shape  and  will  address  him  and
say,  "I  am  thy  deed."

Knowledge2.  Although  every  attribute  is  independent  and
uncompounded,  knowledge  is  most  nearly  connected  with
life:  whatever  lives  knows3.  Jili  controverts  the  doctrine  of
Ibnu  VArabi  that  God's  knowledge  is  given  Him  by  the

1  K  i.  63,  25  foil.  2  K  i.  64,  22  foil.

8  Animals  and  insects  have  an  inspirational  knowledge.  ('Urn  ilhdmi).

IO2  Studies  in  Islamic  Mysticism  [CH.

objects  which  He  knows1.  God  certainly  decreed  that  every
individual  thing  should  be  what  its  nature  required  it  to  be,,
but  the  consequence  drawn  by  Ibnu  'l-'Arabi,  namely,  that
His  knowledge  of  things  is  derived  from  the  necessity  of  their
natures,  is  false :  on  the  contrary,  their  natures  were  necessi-
tated by  His  knowledge  of  them  before  they  were  created  and
brought  into  existence — it  was  His  knowing  them,  not  the
necessity  inherent  in  them  of  being  what  they  are,  that  caused
them  to  become  objects  of  His  knowledge.  Afterwards  (i.e.,
when  they  were  created),  their  natures  required  other  than
that  which  He  knew  of  them  at  first,  and  He  then  for  the
second  time  decreed  that  they  should  be  what  their  natures
required,  according  to  that  which  He  knew  of  them.

Will2.  The  will  of  God  is  "His  particularisation  of  the
objects  of  His  knowledge  by  existence,  according  to  the
requirements  of  His  knowledge."  Our  will  is  identical  with
the  Divine  eternal  will,  but  in  relation  to  us  it  partakes  of  our
temporality  (huduth),  and  we  call  it  "created."  Nothing  but
this  (unreal)  attribution  prevents  us  from  actualising  what-
ever we  propose :  if  we  refer  our  will  to  God,  all  things  become
subject  to  it.  Jili  enumerates  nine  phases  of  will,  beginning
with  inclination  (mayl)  and  ending  with  the  highest  and
purest  love  ('ishq),  in  which  there  is  no  lover  or  beloved,  since
both  have  passed  away  in  the  love  that  is  God's  very  essence3.
The  Divine  will  is  uncaused  and  absolutely  free,  not,  as  Ibnu
'  l-'Arabi  holds,  determined  by  the  obligation  of  the  Knower  to
act  as  His  nature  demands4.

1  See  Appendix.  a  K  I.  67,  23  foil.

•  Here  the  lover  is  named  the  beloved,  and  vice  vend.  Jill  quotes  three
verses  by  himself ;  the  last  runs :  "Thou  seest  them  as  two  separate  individuals
in  the  point  of  Love,  which  is  one."  Cf.  p.  80.

4  According  to  Ibnu  'l-'Arabi,  all  action  is  the  necessary  result  of  God's
infinite  nature  as  eternally  known  to  Himself  (see  Appendix),  and  free-will
in  the  ordinary  sense  is  excluded.  Jili  tries  to  make  room  for  it  by  ascribing
to  God  a  power  of  origination  (ikh(ird')  which  affects  the  things  written  in
the  Guarded  Tablet,  so  that  sometimes  that  which  comes  to  pass  is  the
contrary  of  what  was  decreed.  Although  the  actions  required  by  the  Divine
nature  correspond  with  the  capacity  of  the  recipient  individual  in  whom
they  are  manifested,  yet  in  consequence  of  his  weakness  and  imperfection
they  lose  their  unalterable  character  and  become  contingent,  i.e..  flfod.  wn°
is  All-wise,  determines  whether  they  shall  happen  or  not  (K  n.  8$lo  foil.).

ll]  The  Perfect  Man  103

Power1.  This  is  defined  by  Jili  as  "the  bringing  of  the  non-
existent into  existence."  Here  again  he  disagrees  with  Ibnu
'l-'Arabi,  who  asserts  that  God  did  not  create  the  world  from
not-being,  but  only  brought  it  from  being  in  His  knowledge
into  actual  being.  But  in  that  case,  Jili  argues,  the  world
would  be  co-eternal  with  God.  It  is  not  so:  the  judgment
that  God  exists  in  Himself  is  logically  prior  to  the  judgment
that  things  exist  in  His  knowledge;  and  the  former  judgment
involves  the  non-existence  of  things  and  the  existence  of  God
alone.  God  brought  things  from  not-being  into  being  and
caused  them  to  exist  in  His  knowledge,  i.e.,  He  knew  them  as
brought  into  existence  from  not-being;  then  He  brought  them
forth  from  His  knowledge  and  caused  them  to  exist  externally.
Does  it  follow,  because  they  were  produced  from  not-being,
that  they  were  unknown  to  Him  before  He  caused  them  to
exist  in  His  knowledge?  No;  the  priority  is  of  logic,  not  of
time.  There  is  no  interval  between  the  not-being  of  things
and  their  existence  in  His  knowledge.  He  knows  them  as  He
knows  Himself,  but  they  are  not  eternal  as  He  is  eternal.

IV.  THE  HEAVENLY  MAN.

Like  Jacob  Bohme2,  Jili  sets  out  from  the  principle  that
"in  order  that  the  truth  may  be  manifested  as  a  Something,
there  must  be  a  contrary  therein."  He  finds  the  ground  of
existence  in  a  Being  which,  though  essentially  One,  is  of
threefold  nature,  since  it  knows  itself  as  the  Creator  (al-Haqq)
and  the  creatures  (al-khalq).

In  another  passage  (i.  72,  i  foil.)  Jili  says  that  God  imputes  free-will  to
mankind  in  order  that  He  may  show  His  justice  by  punishing  them  with
Hell,  and  His  mercy  by  rewarding  them  with  Paradise.

1  K  i.  69,  24  foil.

2  Bohme's  three  principles,  viz.,  the  Godhead,  Divine  Wrath,  and  Divine
Love,  are  represented  in  Jili's  system  by  the  Essence  with  its  complementary
and  harmonious  attributes  of  majesty  (jaldl)  and  beauty  (jamdl).  The  German
mystic  unites  Wrath  and  Love  in  a  form  which  he  calls  "Fire":  it  is  "the
centrum  naturae,  the  point  between  the  kingdom  of  light  and  that  of  dark-
ness, between  love  and  anger,  between  good  and  evil"  (Professor  Deussen's
introd.  to  Bohme's  Three  Principles  of  the  Divine  Essence  tr.  by  John
Sparrow,  p.  Ivi  foil.).  This  exactly  answers  to  the  perfection  (kamdl)  of  the
Perfect  Man.

IO4  Studies  in  Islamic  Mysticism  [CH.

"  The  Essence,"  he  says,  "  is  '  Thou  '  and  '  I  '  —  '  Thou  '  in  respect
of  thy  deepest  self  (huwiyya,  He-ness),  not  in  respect  of  the  human
attributes  which  the  notion  '  Thou  '  admits  ;  and  '  I  '  in  respect  of
my  individual  self,  not  in  respect  of  the  Divine  attributes  which
the  notion  'I'  admits.  That  is  what  is  signified  by  the  Essence
(al-Dhdt),  '  I,'  in  respect  of  my  '  I-ness  '  (aniyya),  viewed  in  relation
to  the  judgments  which  the  notion  'I'  is  capable  of,  is  God;  and
'Thou,'  in  the  creaturely  aspect,  is  Man.  Therefore  consider  your
essence,  if  you  will,  as  'I,'  or  if  you  will,  as  'Thou,'  for  there  is
nothing  besides  the  universal  reality....
If  you  say,  that  it  (the  Essence)  is  One,  you  are  right  ;  or  if  you  say

that  it  is  Two,  it  is  in  fact  Two.
Or  if  you  say,  'No,  it  is  Three,'  you  are  right,  for  that  is  the  real

nature  of  Man.
Regard  the  Oneness  (ahadiyya)  which  is  his  essence:  say,  'He  is

One  relatively  (wdhid),  One  absolutely  (ahad),  unique  in  glory.'
But  if  the  two  essences  are  considered,  you  will  say  that  he  is  Two,

because  he  is  a  slave  (labd)  and  a  Lord  (rabb).
And  if  you  examine  his  real  nature  and  what  is  united  therein,

namely,  two  things  deemed  to  be  contrary,
You  will  contemplate  him  with  amazement:  his  lowness  is  such

that  you  will  not  call  him  lofty,  and  his  loftiness  is  such  that

you  will  not  call  him  low.
Nay,  name  that  (Man)  a  Third,  because  of  a  reality  having  two

attributes  inherent  in  the  realities  of  its  essence1.
It  (that  reality)  is  he  named  Ahmad  as  being  that  (Man),  and

Mohammed  as  being  the  true  idea  (haqiqa)  of  all  things

that  exist2."

As  an  introduction  to  the  Logos  doctrine  foreshadowed

here,  which  is  interwoven  with  a  mystical  scheme  of  cosmology,

I  will  translate  part  of  the  6oth  chapter,  "Of  the  Perfect  Man  :

showing  that  he  is  our  Lord  Mohammed,  and  that  he  stands

\f over  against  the  Creator  (al-Haqq)  and  the  creatures  (al-

1  The  Perfect  Man  is  neither  Absolute  Being  nor  Contingent  Being,  but
a  third  metaphysical  category,  i.e.,  the  Logos.  See  Nyberg,  Kleineve
Schriften  da,  Ibn  al-'Arabt,  Introd.,  p.  32  foil.,  50.

1  K  I.  10,  12  foil.  In  the  Koran  (61,  6)  Mohammed  is  named  Ahmad  and
identified  with  the  Paraclete  foretold  by  Christ.  »  K  n.  58,  22.

n]  The  Perfect  Man  105

The  Perfect  Man  is  the  Qufb  (axis)  on  which  the  spheres  of
existence  revolve  from  first  to  last,  and  since  things  came  into  being
he  is  one  (wdhid)  for  ever  and  ever.  He  hath  various  guises  and
appears  in  diverse  bodily  tabernacles  (kand'is) :  in  respect  of  some
of  these  his  name  is  given  to  him,  while  in  respect  of  others  it  is
not  given  to  him.  His  own  original  name  is  Mohammed,  his  name
of  honour  Abu  '1-Qasim,  his  description  'Abdullah1,  and  his  title
Shamsu'ddin2.  In  every  age  he  bears  a  name  suitable  to  his  guise
(libds)  in  that  age.  I  once  met  him  in  the  form  of  my  Shaykh,
Sharafu'ddin  Isma'il  al-Jabarti,  but  I  did  not  know  that  he  (the
Shaykh)  was  the  Prophet,  although  I  knew  that  he  (the  Prophet)
was  the  Shaykh.  This  was  one  of  the  visions  in  which  I  beheld  him
at  Zabid  in  A.H.  796.  The  real  meaning  of  this  matter  is  that  the
Prophet  has  the  power  of  assuming  every  form.  When  the  adept
(adib)  sees  him  in  the  form  of  Mohammed  which  he  wore  during
his  life,  he  names  him  by  that  name,  but  when  he  sees  him  in
another  form  and  knows  him  to  be  Mohammed,  he  names  him  by
the  name  of  the  form  in  which  he  appears.  The  name  Mohammed
is  not  applied  except  to  the  Idea  of  Mohammed  (al-Haqiqatu
'  l-Muhammadiyya).  Thus,  when  he  appeared  in  the  form  of
Shibli3,  Shibli  said  to  his  disciple,  "Bear  witness  that  I  am  the
Apostle  of  God";  and  the  disciple,  being  one  of  the  illuminated,
recognised  the  Prophet  and  said,  "  I  bear  witness  that  thou  art  the
Apostle  of  God."  No  objection  can  be  taken  to  this :  it  is  like  what
happens  when  a  dreamer  sees  some  one  in  the  form  of  another;  but
there  is  a  difference  between  dreaming  and  mystical  revelation,
viz.,  that  the  name  of  the  form  in  which  Mohammed  appears  to  the
dreamer  is  not  bestowed  in  hours  of  waking  upon  the  Haqiqatu
'l-Muhammadiyya,  because  interpretation  is  applicable  to  the
World  of  Similitudes:  accordingly,  when  the  dreamer  wakes  he
interprets  the  haqiqa  of  Mohammed  as  being  the  haqiqa  of  the
dream-form.  In  mystical  revelation  it  is  otherwise,  for  if  you
perceive  mystically  that  the  liaqiqa  of  Mohammed  is  displayed  in
any  human  form,  you  must  bestow  upon  the  haqiqa  of  Mohammed
the  name  of  that  form  and  regard  its  owner  with  no  less  reverence
than  you  would  show  to  our  Lord  Mohammed,  and  after  having
seen  him  therein  you  may  not  behave  towards  it  in  the  same

1  The  servant  of  God.  2  The  Sun  of  the  Religion.

3  A  famous  Suff  of  Baghdad. He  died  in  A.D.  945~6-

106  Studies  in  Islamic  Mysticism  [CH.

manner  as  before.  Do  not  imagine  that  my  words  contain  any
tincture  of  the  doctrine  of  metempsychosis.  God  forbid !  I  mean
that  the  Prophet  is  able  to  assume  whatever  form  he  wishes,  and
the  Sunna  declares  that  in  every  age  he  assumes  the  form  of  the
most  perfect  men,  in  order  to  exalt  their  dignity  and  correct  their
deviation  (from  the  truth) :  they  are  his  vicegerents  outwardly,  and
he  is  their  spiritual  essence  (haqiqa)  inwardly.

The  Perfect  Man  in  himself  stands  over  against  all  the  in-
dividualisations  of  existence.  With  his  spirituality  he  stands  over
against  the  higher  individualisations,  with  his  corporeality  over
against  the  lower.  His  heart  stands  over  against  the  Throne  of
God  (al-'Arsh),  his  mind  over  against  the  Pen  (al-Qalam),  his  soul
over  against  the  Guarded  Tablet  (al-Lawhu  'l-mahfuz)t  his  nature
over  against  the  elements,  his  capability  (of  receiving  forms)  over
against  matter  (hayuld)....He  stands  over  against  the  angels  with
his  good  thoughts,  over  against  the  genies  and  devils  with  the
doubts  which  beset  him,  over  against  the  beasts  with  his  animality.
...To  every  type  of  existence  he  furnishes  from  himself  an  anti-
type. We  have  already  explained  that  every  one  of  the  Cherubim
is  created  from  an  analogous  faculty  of  the  Perfect  Man.  It  only
remains  to  speak  of  his  correspondence  with  the  Divine  names  and
attributes.

You  must  know  that  the  Perfect  Man  is  a  copy  (nuskhd)  of
God,  according  to  the  saying  of  the  Prophet,  "God  created  Adam
in  the  image  of  the  Merciful,"  and  in  another  hadith,  "God  created
Adam  in  His  own  image."  That  is  so,  because  God  is  Living,
Knowing,  Mighty,  Willing,  Hearing,  Seeing,  and  Speaking,  and
Man  too  is  all  these.  Then  he  confronts  the  Divine  huwiyya  with
his  huwiyya,  the  Divine  aniyya  with  his  aniyya,  and  the  Divine
dhdt  (essence)  with  his  dhdt — he  is  the  whole  against  the  whole,  the
universal  against  the  universal,  the  particular  against  the  par-
ticular.... Further,  you  must  know  that  the  Essential  names  and
the  Divine  attributes  belong  to  the  Perfect  Man  by  fundamental
and  sovereign  right  in  virtue  of  a  necessity  inherent  in  his  essence,
for  it  is  he  whose  "truth  "  (haqiqa)  is  signified  by  those  expressions
and  whose  spirituality  (latlfa)  is  indicated  by  those  symbols:  they
have  no  subject  in  existence  (whereto  they  should  be  attached)
except  the  Perfect  Man.  As  a  mirror  in  which  a  person  sees  the
form  of  himself  and  cannot  see  it  without  the  mirror,  such  is  the

II]  The  Perfect  Man  107

relation  of  God  to  the  Perfect  Man,  who  cannot  possibly  see  his
own  form  but  in  the  mirror  of  the  name  Allah;  and  he  is  also  a
mirror  to  God,  for  God  laid  upon  Himself  the  necessity  that  His
names  and  attributes  should  not  be  seen  save  in  the  Perfect  Man.
This  obligation  to  display  the  Divine  attributes  is  the  "trust"
(amdna)  which  God  offered  to  the  heavens  and  the  earth :  they  were
afraid  to  accept  it,  "but  Man  accepted  it;  verily  he  is  unjust  and
ignorant"  (Kor.  33,  72),  i.e.,  unjust  to  his  own  soul  in  letting  it
suffer  degradation  (from  the  things  of  this  world)  and  ignorant  of
his  real  worth,  because  he  is  unaware  of  that  with  which  he  has
been  entrusted.... Beyond  the  plane  of  the  Names  and  Attributes,
which  are  ranged  on  the  right  and  left  of  him  according  to  their
kind,  the  Perfect  Man  feels  through  his  whole  being  "a  pervasive
delight,  which  is  named  the  delight  of  the  Godhead"  (ladhdhatu
'l-ildhiyya)....Here  he  is  independent  of  his  modes,  i.e.,  the  Names
and  Attributes,  and  regards  them  not  at  all.  He  knows  nothing
in  existence  save  his  own  nature  (huwiyya),  contemplates  the
emanation  (sudur)  from  himself  of  all  that  exists,  and  beholds  the
Many  in  his  essence,  even  as  ordinary  men  are  conscious  of  their
own  thoughts  and  qualities;  but  the  Perfect  Man  is  able  to  keep
every  thought,  great  or  small,  far  from  himself:  his  power  over
things  does  not  proceed  from  any  secondary  cause  but  is  exercised
freely,  like  other  men's  power  of  speaking,  eating,  and  drinking.

These  extracts  bring  out  the  germinal  idea  which  is
developed  by  Ji'li  into  a  psychological  and  cosmological
system.  The  Perfect  Man,  as  the  copy  of  God  and  the  arche-
type of  Nature,  unites  the  creative  and  creaturely  aspects  of
the  Essence  and  manifests  the  oneness  of  Thought  with
things.  "He  is  the  heaven  and  the  earth  and  the  length  and
the  breadth1."

Mine  is  the  kingdom  in  both  worlds:  I  saw  therein  none  but
myself,  that  I  should  hope  for  his  favour  or  fear  him.

Before  me  is  no  "before,"  that  I  should  follow  its  condition,  and
after  me  is  no  "after,"  that  I  should  precede  its  notion.

1  K  i.  26,  3  fr.  foot.  "The  length  and  the  breadth"  (al-tM  wa  'l-'ard)  is
a  formula  invented  by  Hallaj,  which  corresponds  with  Idhtit  (Divinity)  and
ndstit  (Humanity)  and  expresses  his  dualistic  conception  of  the  spiritual  and
material  universe.  Ibnu  'l-'Arabi  and  Jili  interpret  the  "two  dimensions"
in  a  monistic  sense.  See  Massignon,  Kitdb  al-Tawdsin,  p.  141  foil.

io8  Studies  in  Islamic  Mysticism  [CH.

I  have  made  all  kinds  of  perfection  mine  own,  and  lo,  I  am  the
beauty  of  the  majesty  of  the  Whole:  I  am  naught  but  It.

Whatsoever  thou  seest  of  minerals  and  plants  and  animals,
together  with  Man  and  his  qualities,

And  whatsoever  thou  seest  of  elements  and  nature  and  original
atoms  (haba')  whereof  the  substance  is  (ethereal  as)  a  perfume,

And  whatsoever  thou  seest  of  seas  and  deserts  and  trees  and  high-
topped  mountains,

And  whatsoever  thou  seest  of  spiritual  forms  and  of  things  visible
whose  countenance  is  goodly  to  behold,

And  whatsoever  thou  seest  of  thought  and  imagination  and  in-
telligence and  soul,  and  heart  with  its  inwards,

And  whatsoever  thou  seest  of  angelic  aspect,  or  of  phenomena
whereof  Satan  is  the  spirit,

******

Lo,  I  am  that  whole,  and  that  whole  is  my  theatre:  'tis  I,  not  it,

that  is  displayed  in  its  reality.
Verily,  I  am  a  Providence  and  Prince  to  mankind:  the  entire

creation  is  a  name,  and  my  essence  is  the  object  named.
The  sensible  world  is  mine  and  the  angel- world  is  of  my  weaving

and  fashioning;  the  unseen  world  is  mine  and  the  world  of

omnipotence  springs  from  me.
And  mark ! In  all  that  I  have  mentioned  I  am  a  slave  returning

from  the  Essence  to  his  Lord —
Poor,  despised,  lowly,  self-abasing,  sin's  captive,  in  the  bonds  of

his  trespasses1.

The  concluding  verses  only  say  what  Jill  repeats  in  many
places,  that  whilje  at  supreme  moments  a  man  may  lose
himself  in  God,  he  can  never  be  identified  with  God  absolutely.

In  the  second  part  of  his  work  the  author  treats  of  the
Perfect  Man  as  the  Spirit  whence  all  things  have  their  origin.
Accordingly  he  devotes  successive  chapters  to  the  organs  .and
faculties  which  make  up  the  psychological  and  intellectual
constitution  of  the  Perfect  Man — spirit,  heart,  intelligence,
reflection,  etc.,  with  the  corresponding  celestial  beings  which
are  said  to  be  "created"  from  them2.  The  highest  hypos tases
of  his  psychology  are  the  Holy  Spirit  (Ruh,u  'l-Quds)  and  the

1  K  i.  26,  last  line  and  foil.  «  K  n.  10  foil.

n]  The  Perfect  Man  109

Spirit  (al-Ruh);  the  latter  is  also  described  as  "the  angel
named  al-Ruh"  and,  in  the  technical  language  of  the  Sufis,
as  "the  haqq  by  means  of  which  the  world  is  created"  (al-
haqqu  'l-makhluq  bihi)  and  "the  Idea  of  Mohammed"  (al-
Haqiqatu  'l-Muhammadiyya).  How  these  two  Spirits  are
related  to  each  other  is  indicated  in  the  following  passage:

You  must  know  that  every  sensible  object  has  a  created  spirit
which  constitutes  its  form,  and  the  spirit  is  to  the  form  as  the
meaning  to  the  word.  The  created  spirit  has  a  Divine  spirit  which
constitutes  it,  and  that  Divine  spirit  is  the  Ruhu  'l-Quds.  Those  who
regard  the  Ruhu  'l-Quds  in  man  deem  it  created,  because  two
eternal  substances  cannot  exist:  eternity  belongs  to  God  alone,
whose  names  and  attributes  inhere  in  His  essence  because  of  the
impossibility  of  their  being  detached;  all  else  is  created  and
originated.  Man,  for  example,  has  a  body,  which  is  his  form,  and
a  spirit,  which  is  his  meaning,  and  a  consciousness  (sirr),  which  is
al-Ruh,  and  an  essential  aspect  (wajti),  which  is  denoted  by  the
terms  Ruhu  'l-Quds  (the  Holy  Spirit),  al-sirru  'l-ildhi  (the  Divine
consciousness)  and  al-wujudu  'l-sdri  (the  all-pervading  Being)1.

The  Ruhu  'l-Quds  and  the  Ruh  are  one  Spirit  viewed  as
eternal  in  relation  to  God  and  non-eternal  in  relation  to  Man;
as  the  inmost  essence  of  things  or  as  their  form  of  existence2.
The  uncreated  Spirit  of  God,  sanctified  above  all  pheno-
menal imperfections,  is  referred  to  in  the  verse,  "I  breathed
of  My  Spirit  into  Adam"  (Kor.  15,  29;  38,  72),  and  in  the
verse,  "Wheresoever  ye  turn,  there  is  the  face  (wajh)  of
Allah"  (Kor.  2,  109),  i.e.,  the  Ruhu  'l-Quds  exists,  "in-
dividualised by  its  perfection,"  in  every  object  of  sense  or
thought.  Jfli  adds  that  inasmuch  as  the  spirit  of  a  thing  is  its
self  (nafs),  existence  is  constituted  by  the  "self"  of  God;  and
His  "self  "  is  His  essence3.  Union  with  the  Ruhu  'l-Quds  comes
only  as  the  crown  and  consummation  of  the  mystical  life  to
"the  holy  one"  (qudsi)*  who  unceasingly  contemplates  the

1  KII.  it,  4  foil.  "-  Cf.  M,  4  a,  7  b.

3  K  n.  10,  6  fr.  foot  and  foil.

4  In  M,  6  b,  Jili  distinguishes  the  qudsi  (holy  one),  who  is  illuminated  by
the  Divine  attributes,  from  the  aqdasi  (most  holy  one),  who  is  united  with
the  Essence.

no  Studies  in  Islamic  Mysticism  [CH.

Divine  consciousness  (sirr)  which  is  his  origin,  so  that  its  laws
are  made  manifest  in  him  and  God  becomes  his  ear,  eye,  hand
and  tongue :  he  touches  the  sick  and  they  are  healed,  he  bids
a  thing  be  and  it  is,  for  he  has  been  strengthened  with  the
Holy  Spirit,  even  as  Jesus  was  (Kor.  2,  Si)1.

It  will  now  be  seen  that  Jill  considers  the  created  Ruh  or
the  archetypal  Spirit  of  Mohammed  as  a  mode  of  the  uncreated
Holy  Divine  Spirit  and  as  the  medium  through  which  God
becomes  conscious  of  Himself  in  creation2.

God  created  the  angel  named  Ruh  from  His  own  light,  and  from
him  He  created  the  world  and  made  him  His  organ  of  vision  in  the
world.  One  of  his  names  is  the  Word  of  Allah  (Amr  Allah)9.  He
is  the  noblest  and  most  exalted  of  existent  beings:  there  is  no
angel  above  him,  and  he  is  the  chief  of  the  Cherubim.  God  caused
the  mill-stone  of  existent  beings  to  turn  on  him,  and  made  him
the  axis  (qutb]  of  the  sphere  of  created  things.  Towards  every  thing
that  God  created  he  has  a  special  aspect  (wajh),  in  virtue  of  which
he  regards  it  and  preserves  it  in  its  appointed  place  in  the  order  of
existence.  He  has  eight  forms,  which  are  the  bearers  of  the  Divine
Throne  (al-'Arsh)*.  From  him  were  created  all  the  angels,  both  the
sublime  and  the  elemental.  The  angels  stand  to  him  in  the  relation
of  drops  of  water  to  the  sea,  and  the  eight  bearers  of  the  'Arsh
stand  in  the  same  relation  to  him  as  the  eight  faculties  which
constitute  human  existence  to  the  spirit  of  man.  These  faculties
are  intelligence  (aql),  judgment  (wahm),  reflection  (fikr),  phantasy
(khaydl),  imagination  (al-musawwira) ,  memory  (al-hdfiza),  per-
ception (al-mudrika),  and  the  soul  (nafs).  The  Ruh  exercises  a
Divine  guardianship,  created  in  him  by  God,  over  the  whole
universe.  He  manifests  himself  in  his  perfection  in  the  Haqiqaiu
'l-Muhammadiyya :  therefore  the  Prophet  is  the  most  excellent  of
mankind.  While  God  manifests  Himself  in  His  attributes  to  all
other  created  beings,  He  manifests  Himself  in  His  essence  to  this

1  K  ii.  ii,  7  fr.  foot  and  foil.  *  K  n.  12,  6  foil.

*  For  the  use  of  amr  (which  is  radically  connected  with  the  Jewish
memrd)  in  the  sense  of  Logos,  see  H.  Hirschfeld,  New  researches  into  the
composition  and  exegesis  of  the  Qoran,  p.  15.  Cf.  Kor.  17,  87.

«  See  Kor.  69,  17,  and  cf.  Nyberg,  Kleinere  Schriften  des  Ibn  al-'Arabi,

Introd.,  p.  146.  The  'Arsh  is  the  Universal  Body  (^J&\  >o— %Jt)  or  the
frame  of  the  Cosmos  (»ju»»j  ^UJ!  J£jk),  K  n.  5-6.

n]  The  Perfect  Man  in

angel  alone.  Accordingly  the  Ruh  is  the  Qutb  of  the  present  world
and  of  the  world  to  come.  He  does  not  make  himself  known  to  any
creature  of  God  but  to  the  Perfect  Man.  When  the  saint  (wali)
knows  him  and  truly  understands  the  things  which  the  Ruh
teaches  him,  he  becomes  a  pole  (qutb)  on  which  the  entire  universe
revolves;  but  the  Poleship  (Qutbiyya)  belongs  fundamentally  to
the  Ruh,  and  if  others  hold  it,  they  are  only  his  delegates1.  He  is
the  first  to  receive  the  Divine  command,  which  he  then  delivers
to  the  angels;  and  whenever  a  command  is  to  be  executed  in  the
universe,  God  creates  from  him  an  angel  suitable  to  that  command,
and  the  Ruh  sends  him  to  carry  it  out.  All  the  Cherubim  are
created  from  him,  e.g.,  Seraphiel,  Gabriel,  Michael,  and  Azrael,  and
those  above  them,  such  as  the  angel  named  al-Nun2,  who  is
stationed  beneath  the  Guarded  Tablet,  and  the  angel  named  the
Pen  (al-Qalam),  and  the  angel  named  al-Mudabbir,  whose  station
is  beneath  the  Kursi3,  and  the  angel  named  al-Mufassil,  who

1  Jili's  identification  of  the  Ruh  with  the  Qutb,  taken  in  conjunction  with
the  fact  that  the  Ruh  is  essentially  God  regarded  as  the  Holy  Spirit  or  as
the  First  Intelligence  (see  pp.  109  and  112),  suggests  an  explanation  of  the
mysterious  doctrine  broached  by  Ghazali  in  the  Mishkdtu  'I- Anwar,  where
he  asserts  that  in  very  truth  the  Mover  of  all  is  not  Allah  but  a  Being,
described  as  "the  Obeyed  One"  (al-mutd'),  "whose  nature  is  left  obscure,
since  our  only  information  about  him  is  that  he  is  not  the  Real  Being.
Allah's  relation  to  this  Vicegerent,  the  supreme  controller  of  the  Universe,
is  compared  to  the  relation  of  the  impalpable  light-essence  to  the  sun,  or
of  the  elemental  fire  to  a  glowing  coal"  (W.  H.  T.  Gairdner,  Al-Ghazdll's
Mishkdt  al-Anwdr  and  the  Ghazdll-problem  in  Der  Islam,  1914,  p.  121  foil.).
I  agree  with  Canon  Gairdner  that  Ghazali  would  not  have  accepted  the
ordinary  hierarchical  Qutb  doctrine  current  amongst  the  Sufis  of  the  5th
century  A.H.,  if  not  earlier. But  an  hypostatised  Qutb  is  another  matter.
The  Perfect  Man,  though  not  himself  the  Absolute,  in  no  way  impairs  the
absolute  Divine  unity  which  he  objectifies. It  looks  to  me  as  if  Ghazali's
esoteric  teaching,  which  he  keeps  back  from  his readers  because  they
"cannot  bear  it,"  was  not  different  in  substance  from  the  Logos  doctrine
of  the  Insdnu  'l-kdmil. His  allusions  to  ineffable  arcana,  centring  in  the
tradition  that  Adam  was  created  in  the  image  of  God,  are  extremely  sig-
nificant. [Cf.  now  Tor  Andrae,  Die  person  Muhammeds,  p.  335  and  Nyberg,
op.  cit.,  Introd.,  p.  106  foil.]

2  See  Koran,  68,  i. Al-Nun  symbolises  the  Divine  knowledge  (K  n.

22,  3)-

3  The  Footstool  under  the  Divine  Throne  ('Arsh). Those  who  are  not
familiar  with  these  and  other  details  of  Mohammedan  cosmogony  may
consult  E.  J.  W.  Gibb's  History  of  Ottoman  Poetry, vol.  I.  p.  34  foil.  According
to  Jili,  the  creatures  (al-khalq)  are  first  individualised  occultly  and  without
differentiation in the Divine knowledge, then brought  into  existence.

112  Studies  in  Islamic  Mysticism  [CH.

stands  beneath  the  Imamu  '1-Mubin1:  these  are  the  Sublime
Angels,  who  were  not  commanded  to  worship  Adam.  God  in  His
wisdom  did  not  command  them,  for  had  they  been  commanded  to
worship,  every  one  of  Adam's  descendants  would  have  known
them.  Consider  how,  inasmuch  as  the  angels  were  commanded  to
worship  Adam,  they  appear  to  men  in  the  forms  of  the  Divine
similitudes  whereby  God  reveals  Himself  to  the  dreamer.  All  those
forms  are  angels,  who  descend  in  diverse  shapes  by  command  of
the  angel  entrusted  with  the  making  of  similitudes.  For  this
reason  a  man  dreams  that  lifeless  things  speak  to  him :  unless  they
were  really  spirits  assuming  the  form  of  lifelessness,  they  would
not  have  spoken.  The  Prophet  said  that  a  true  dream  is  an  in-
spiration from  God — because  an  angel  brings  it — and  also  that  a
true  dream  is  one  of  the  forty-six  parts  of  prophecy.  Since  Iblis,
though  he  did  not  worship  Adam,  was  amongst  those  commanded
to  worship,  the  devils  who  are  his  offspring  were  commanded  to
appear  to  the  dreamer  in  the  same  forms  as  the  angels:  hence  false
dreams.  According  to  this  argument,  the  Sublime  Angels  are  un-
knowable except  by  "the  divine  men"  (al-ildhiyyun) ,  on  whom
God  bestows  such  knowledge  as  a  gift  after  their  release  from  the
limitations  of  humanity.

The  Ruh  has  many  names  according  to  the  number  of  his
aspects.  He  is  named  "The  Most  Exalted  Pen"  and  "The  Spirit
of  Mohammed"  and  "The  First  Intelligence"  and  "The  Divine
Spirit,"  on  the  principle  of  naming  the  original  by  the  derivative,
but  in  the  presence  of  God  he  has  only  one  name,  which  is  "The
Spirit"  (al-Ruh).

Jili  gives  a  long  account  of  a  vision  in  which  the  Ruh
conversed  with  him  and  spoke  darkly  concerning  the  mystery
of  his  nature,  saying,  "I  am  the  child  whose  father  is  his  son
and  the  wine  whose  vine  is  its  jar.... I  met  the  mothers  who

synthetically  and  virtually,  in  the  'Arsh  (cf.  K 11.  5,  12  foil.),  then  manifested
analytically  in  the  Kursi  (cf.  K  11.  6,  u  foil.).  All  these  individualisations
are  "unseen"  (ghayb),  i.e.,  in  God,  so  to  speak.  The  first  objective  indivi-
dualisation  takes  place  in  the  Pen  (al-Qalam),  which  distinguishes  the
creatures  from  the  Creator  and  imprints  their  forms  of  existence  on  the
Guarded  Tablet  (al-Lawfr  al-mahfuz),  as  the  mind  imprints  ideas  on  the  soul.
Hence  it  is  said  in  the  Prophetic  Tradition  that  the  Pen  or  the  Intelligence
(al-'aql)  was  the  first  thing  that  God  created  (K  n.  6,  last  line  and  foil.).

1  The  Imamu  '1-Mubin  is  identified  with  the  First  Intelligence  (K  u.
22,  i),  and  with  the  human  spirit  (M  7  b).

n]  The  Perfect  Man  1 1 3

bore  me,  and  I  asked  them  in  marriage,  and  they  let  me  marry
them1/'  In  the  course  of  this  colloquy  the  Idea  of  Mohammed

(al-Haqiqatu  'l-Muhammadiyya)  says:

God  created  Adam  in  His  own  image — this  is  not  doubted  or
disputed — and  Adam  was  one  of  the  theatres  (mazdhir)  in  which  I
displayed  myself :  he  was  appointed  as  a  vicegerent  (khalifa)  over
my  externality.  I  knew  that  God  made  me  the  object  and  goal  of
all  His  creatures,  and  lo,  I  heard  the  most  gracious  allocution  from
the  Most  Great  Presence:  "Thou  art  the  Qutb  whereon  the  spheres
of  beauty  revolve,  and  thou  art  the  Sun  by  whose  radiance  the
full-moon  of  perfection  is  replenished;  thou  art  he  for  whom  We
set  up  the  pattern2  and  for  whose  sake  We  made  fast  the  door-
ring3;  thou  art  the  reality  symbolised  by  Hind  and  Salma  and
'Azza  and  Asma4.  O  thou  who  art  endued  with  lofty  attributes
and  pure  qualities,  Beauty  doth  not  dumbfound  thee  nor  Majesty
cause  thee  to  quake,  nor  dost  thou  deem  Perfection  unattainable :
thou  art  the  centre  and  these  the  circumference,  thou  art  the
clothed  and  these  the  splendid  garments5."

In  some  aspects  the  spiritual  organ  which  Sufis  call  "the
heart"  (qalb)  is  hardly  distinguished  from  the  spirit  (ruh):
indeed  Jili  says  that  when  the  Koran  mentions  the  Divine
spirit  breathed  into  Adam,  it  is  the  heart  that  is  signified.  He

1  K  ii.  14,  23  foil.  The  commentator  explains  that  the  Rdfy  is  the  object
of  Divine  knowledge  whose  father  (Divine  knowledge)  is  produced  by  the
object  of  knowledge  and  is  therefore  its  son. Cf.  the  verse  of  Badru'ddin
al-Shahid:

My  mother  bore  her  father — lo,  that  is  a  wondrous  thing —

And  my  father  is  a  little  child  in  the  bosom  of  those  who  suckle  it.

The  mother  is  Nature.  Adam,  her  son  in  one  sense,  is  her  father  in  another,

because  he  (as  the  microcosm)  is  the  origin  of  all  created  things,  like  the

date-kernel  which  is  both  the  seed  of  the  palm  and  its  fruit  (Comm.  K  17  6).

2  I.e.,  the  First  Intelligence,  the  archetype  of  created  things,  which  in
relation  to  the  Perfect  Man  is  named  the  Spirit  of  Mohammed  (cf.  K  n.  6,
penult,  and  foil.).

3  I.e.,  the  Perfect  Man  is  the  door-keeper  of  the  temple  of  the  Godhead,
and  he  alone  can  reveal  its  mysteries.  The  text  has  *Jy>jJ ,  but  according

to  Comm.  K  (foil.  19  b)  the  correct  reading  is  JH>*)J  =  *r>lijl  ***^  »*•«••
the  ring  into  which  a  chain  was  inserted,  so  that  it  served  as  a  padlock.  Cf.
Vullers'  Persian  lexicon  under  &*jjj  •

4  These  names  are  typical  of  the  women  whose  charms  are  celebrated  by
Arabian  poets.  6  K  n.  15,  10  foil.

•VT f TV  O

Studies  in  Islamic  Mysticism

[CH.

describes  it  as  "the  eternal  light  and  the  sublime  conscious-
ness (sirr)  revealed  in  the  quintessence  (ayri)  of  created  beings
(Mohammed),  that  God  may  behold  Man  thereby1";  as  "the
Throne  of  God  (al-Arsh)  and  His  Temple  in  Man... the  centre
of  Divine  consciousness  and  the  circumference  of  the  circle
of  all  that  exists  actually  or  ideally2."  It  reflects  all  the
Divine  names  and  attributes  at  once,  yet  quickly  changes
under  the  influence  of  particular  names.  Like  a  mirror,  it  has
a  face  and  a  back.  The  face  is  always  turned  towards  a  lighi
called  the  attention  (al-hamm) ,  which  is  the  eye  of  the  heart
so  that  whenever  a  name  becomes  opposite  to,  or  as  we  shoulc
say,  strikes  the  attention,  the  heart  sees  it  and  receives  the
impression  of  it ;  then  this  name  disappears  and  is  succeedec
by  others.  The  "back"  of  the  heart  is  the  place  from  which
the  attention  is  absent3.  Jili  illustrates  his  meaning  by  the
diagram  reproduced  here:

i  n  a  n

names

1  K  II.  18,  2.  »  K  n.  16,  25  foil.

*  The  position  of  the  hamm  varies  in  different  men.  It  may  face  upward
or  downward  or  to  the  right  or  to  the  left,  i.e.,  in  the  direction  of  the  nafs
(appetitive  soul),  which  is  located  in  the  left  rib.  The  hearts  of  profound
mystics  have  no  hamm  and  no  back  (qafd) :  these  men  face  with  their  whole
being  the  whole  of  the  Divine  names  and  attributes  and  are  with  God
essentially  (K  n.  18,  penult,  and  foil.).

ll]  The  Perfect  Man  115

The  Divine  names  and  attributes  are  the  heart's  true
nature,  in  which  it  was  created.  Some  men  are  so  blessed  that
they  have  little  trouble  to  keep  it  pure,  but  most  of  us  must
needs  undergo  painful  self-mortifications  in  order  to  wash  out
the  stains  of  the  flesh1.  Recompense  for  good  works  depends
on  the  merit  imputed  by  God  to  His  creatures  according  to
the  original  individualisations  in  which  He  created  them :  it  is
a  necessary  right,  not  an  arbitrary  gift2.  The  heart  reflects
the  world  of  attributes,  or  rather,  as  Jili  holds,  is  itself
reflected  by  the  universe.  "Earth  and  heaven  do  not  contain^'
Me,  but  the  heart  of  My  believing  servant  containeth  Me":
if  the  universe  were  primary  and  the  heart  secondary,  i.e.,
if  the  heart  were  only  a  mirror,  then  the  power  of  containing
and  comprehending  would  have  been  ascribed  to  the  universe,
not  to  the  heart;  but  in  fact,  it  is  the  heart  alone  that  com-
prehends God — by  knowledge,  by  contemplation,  and  finally
by  transubstantiation3.

When  God  created  the  whole  world  from  the  Light  of
Mohammed,  He  created  from  the  heart  of  Mohammed  the
angel  Israfil  (Seraphiel),  the  mightiest  of  the  angels  and  the
nearest  to  God4.

The  faculty  of  Reason  has  three  modes,  viz.,  the  First
Intelligence  (al-aqlu  'l-awwal),  Universal  Reason  (al-aqlu
'l-kulli),  and  ordinary  reason  (aqlu  'l-ma'dsh)5.  Jili  identifies
the  First  Intelligence,  as  the  faithful  treasurer  of  Divine

1  K  ii.  19,  15  foil.

2  Therefore  the  illuminations  (tajalliydt)  of  the  Essence  are  not  named
""a  gift"  (n.  20,  10). Jili  quotes  a  verse  of  "our  Shaykh,  Shaykh  'Abdu
'1-Qadiral-Jilani":

I  ceased  not  pasturing  in  the  fields  of  quietism  until  I  reached  a  dignity
which  is  not  bestowed  by  favour.

3  K  n.  20,  23  foil.  This  agrees  with  Ibnu  'l-'Arabf 's  doctrine  in  the  Fusus,
145  foil.  The  three  kinds  of  comprehension  are  denoted  by  the  terms  wus'u
'l-'ilm  ('ilm  in  this  connexion  is  synonymous  with  ma'rifa),  wus'u  'l-mushd-
hada,  and  wus'u  'l-khildfa.  In  the  last  stage  Man  is  essentialised  and  becomes
the  khalifa  or  vicegerent  of  God.  Jili,  however,  maintains  a  distinction  even
here.  The  Perfect  Man  knows  the  perfection  of  the  Divine  nature  as  mani-
fested in  him,  not  the  perfection  of  the  Divine  nature  in  itself,  which  is  in-
finite and  (since  the  Essence  cannot  be  comprehended  by  one  of  its  attributes)
ultimately  unknowable.  We  can  only  say  that  God  knows  Himself  according
to  the  necessity  of  His  knowledge  (fraqqu  'l-ma'nfa).

4  K  ii.  21,  16  foil.  6  K  ii.  22,  4.

8—2

n6  Studies  in  Islamic  Mysticism  [CH.

Knowledge,  with  Gabriel,  "the  trusted  Spirit"  (al-Ruhu  7-
amin) 1,  and  as  a  locus  for  the  form  of  Divine  Knowledge  in
existence — the  first  objective  analysis  of  the  Divine  synthesis
—with  the  Pen  (al-Qalam)  which  transmits  the  particulars
contained  as  a  whole  in  God's  consciousness  to  the  Guarded
Tablet  (al-Lawhu  'l-mahfuz)2.  Universal  Reason  is  "the
percipient  luminous  medium  whereby  the  forms  of  knowledge
deposited  in  the  First  Intelligence  are  made  manifest3  " ;  not
the  sum  of  individual  intelligences,  for  in  this  case  Reason
would  be  plural,  while  in  reality  it  is  a  single  substance,  the
common  element,  so  to  speak,  of  human,  angelic,  and  demonic
spirits.  Ordinary  reason  is  "the  light  (of  Universal  Reason)
measured  by  the  rule  of  reflection  (fikr),  and  does  not  appre-
hend save  by  means  of  reflection  " :  therefore  it  cannot  reach
the  unconditioned  First  Intelligence,  often  misses  its  mark,
and  fails  to  perceive  many  things.  Universal  Reason,  on  the
other  hand,  is  infallible,  since  it  weighs  all  with  the  twin  scales
of  Wisdom  and  Power4,  but  it  never  penetrates  beyond  the
sphere  of  creation.  Neither  universal  (intuitive)  nor  ordinary
(discursive)  reason  can  attain  to  knowledge  of  God.  The
contrary  doctrine  has  only  a  demonstrative  and  controversial
value.  True  gnosis  (ma'rifa)  is  given  by  faith,  which  does  not
depend  on  proofs  and  effects  (dthdr)  but  on  the  Divine
attributes  themselves5.

The  judgment  (wahm)  of  Mohammed  was  created  from  the
light  of  the  Divine  Name  al-Kdmil  (the  Perfect),  and  God
created  from  the  light  of  Mohammed's  judgment  Azrael,  the
Angel  of  Death6.  Wahm  is  the  strongest  of  the  human
faculties :  it  overpowers  the  understanding,  the  reflection,  and
the  imagination '...nothing  in  the  world  apprehends  more

1  K II.  24,  5  foil.  Gabriel  was  created  from  the  First  Intelligence  regarded
as  the  rational  principle  of  Mohammed,  who  is  therefore  "the  father  of
Gabriel."  2  I.e.,  Universal  Soul  (see  K  n.  7,  15  foil.).

*  Universal  Reason  is  a  mode  of  Universal  Soul  (K  n.  7,  3  fr.  foot  and
foil.);  it  perceives  the  forms  of  existence  imprinted  on  Universal  Soul  by  the
First  Intelligence.

4  Jill  likens  the  First  Intelligence  to  the  sun,  Universal  Reason  to  water
irradiated  by  sunbeams,  and  ordinary  reason  to  the  light  reflected  from  the
water  upon  a  wall  (K  n.  22,  4  fr.  foot  and  foil.).

•  K  ii.  23,  9  foil.  «  K  ii.  24,  21  foil. 7  Cf.  Fu?i4?t  229.

ll]  The  Perfect  Man  117

quickly;  it  is  what  enables  men  to  walk  on  the  water  and  fly
in  the  air ;  it  is  the  light  of  certainty  (yaqin)  and  the  basis  of
dominion ;  he  that  has  it  at  his  command  exercises  sway  over
all  things  high  and  low,  while  he  that  is  ruled  by  its  might
becomes  stupefied  and  bewildered1.  The  spirit,  on  entering
the  body2,  either  acquires  angelic  dispositions  and  ascends  to
Paradise,  or  assumes  bestial  dispositions  and  sinks  to  Hell :  it
ascends  when  it  judges  the  limitations  of  its  human  form,  e.g.,
grossness  and  weakness,  to  be  merely  negative  and  capable  of
being  thrown  off,  since  the  spirit  always  retains  its  original
qualities  potentially.  At  death  Azrael  appears  to  the  spirit
in  a  form  determined  by  its  beliefs,  actions,  and  dispositions
during  life3.  Or,  again,  he  appears  disembodied  and  invisible,
so  that  a  man  may  "die  of  a  rose  in  aromatic  pain"  or  of  a
stench4.  When  the  spirit  sees  Azrael,  it  becomes  enamoured  of
him,  and  its  gaze  is  entirely  withdrawn  from  the  body5,  where-
upon the  body  dies.  The  spirit  does  not  quit  its  bodily  form
at  once  but  abides  in  it  for  a  while,  like  one  who  sleeps  without
seeing  any  vision6.  After  this  dreamless  sleep,  which  is  its
death  (mawtu  'l-arwdh) ,  the  spirit  passes  into  the  intermediate
state  (al-barzakti) .

Meditation  (himma)  is  the  noblest  of  the  spiritual  lights

1  K  ii.  27,  14  foil. Wahm  is  generally  denned  as  the  "bodily"  faculty
which  perceives  the  qualities  of  a  sensible  object  and  forms  a  judgment
concerning  it,  e.g.,  that  the  sheep  runs  away  from  the  wolf. Jili  regards  it
as  the  faculty  whereby  things  are  judged  intuitively  to  be  what  they  really
are :  he  says  that  by  means  of  wahm  God  made  His  creatures  worship  Him
as  their  Lord  (ta'abbada  'l-'dlam).

2  I.e.,  on  becoming  conscious  of  itself  as  the  essence  (huwiyya)  of  the  body.
"  Spirits  dwell  in  the  place  towards  which  they  look,  without  being  separated
from  their  original  centre"  (K  n.  25,  9  foil.).

3  Sometimes  in  the  form  of  the  Prophet,  which  the  Cherubim,  having
been  created  from  his  spiritual  faculties,  are  able  to  assume,  unlike  Iblis  and
the  devils  who  were  created  from  his  fleshly  nature  (K  II.  26,  2  foil.).

4  K  ii.  26,  22  foil.

6  Jili  objects  to  the  expression  "goes  forth  from  the  body  "  on  the  ground
that  it  implies  hultil.

6  Against  the  opinion  that  no  sleep  is  visionless,  though  some  dreams  are
not  remembered  on  waking,  Jili  sets  the  fact,  revealed  to  him  (as  he  says)  by
Divine  illumination,  that  it  is  possible  to  sleep  dreamlessly  for  a  period  of  two
days  or  more,  which  seems  to  pass  in  the  twinkling  of  an  eye.  Conversely,
God  may  so  extend  a  single  moment  of  time  that  within  it  an  individual
lives  many  lives  and  marries  and  has  children  (K  ii.  27,  I  foil.).

n8  Studies  in  Islamic  Mysticism  [CH.

(faculties),  for  it  has  no  object  but  God1.  Yet  one  must
beware  of  resting  in  it  in  order  to  enjoy  its  fruits:  the  master-
mystic  will  leave  it  before  it  has  yielded  all  its  secrets  to  him,
lest  it  become  a  barrier  to  his  further  advance2.  Michael,  the
angel  created  from  it,  is  charged  with  the  duty  of  dispensing
the  portions  of  fate  allotted  by  eternal  necessity  to  each
recipient3.

From  the  reflection  (fikr)  of  Mohammed  God  created  the
spirits  of  the  celestial  and  terrestrial  angels,  and  appointed
them  to  guard  the  higher  and  lower  spheres  of  existence  until
the  Last  Day,  when  they  shall  be  translated  to  the  intelligible
world4.  One  of  the  keys  to  that  world  is  reflection,  leading  to
true  knowledge  of  the  nature  of  Man,  which  is  set  with  all  its
aspects  over  against  the  aspects  of  the  Merciful  (al-Rahmdri).
But  the  pure  region  oifikr  lies  open  to  mystics  alone :  the  path
of  speculative  philosophy  ends  in  a  mirage5.

As  we  have  already  seen6,  thought  (khaydl),  i.e.,  the  faculty
that  retains  what  the  fancy  perceives  of  the  forms  of  sensible
objects  after  their  substance  has  disappeared7,  is  declared  by
Jili  to  be  the  stuff  of  the  universe.  In  Hegelian  language  "the
things  that  we  know  about  are  appropriately  described  when
we  say  that  their  being  is  established  not  on  themselves,  but
on  the  Divine  Idea."  Nothing  exists  otherwise  than  as  a
dream  in  the  perception  of  the  dreamer,  and  the  cosmos  is
"a  thought  within  a  thought  within  a  thought"  (khaydl™ fi
khaydlin  fi  khaydl)3.  It  must  be  added,  however,  that  while
every  thing,  i.e.,  every  thought,  expresses  some  reality,  the
Perfect  Man  (though  he  is  not  Reality  itself)  is  the  complete
self-expression  of  Reality9.

Imagination,  memory,  and  perception,  which  the  author

1  K  II.  28,  14.  Himma  denotes  the  utmost  concentration  of  the  heart
(qalb)  upon  God.  Cf.  Jurjani's  Ta'rifdt,  p.  278.

*  K  IT.  30,  7  foil.  »  K  ii.  30,  13  foil.  *  K  II.  32,  15  foil.

6  K  ii.  31,  8  foil. Jili  confesses  that  he  was  once  in  danger  of  being  en-
gnlfed  in  this  "deadly  science"  and  was  only  saved  by  the  blessing  of  God
and  the  watchful  care  of  his  Shaykh,  Sharafu'ddin  ibn  Isma'fl  al-Jabarti
(K  ii.  32,  4  foil.).  •  P.  9*  supra.

7  Jurjani,  Ta'rlfdi,  p.  107.  8  K  n.  34,  16.

•  The  term  al-insdnu  'l-kdmil  signifies  "  the  manifestation  of  the  Divine
essence,  attributes,  and  names"  (K  I.  80,  14).

n]  The  Perfect  Man  119

enumerated  amongst  the  eight  spiritual  faculties1,  find  no
place  in  this  discussion.

After  a  preliminary  chapter  on  the  Form  of  Mohammed
(al-suratu  'l-Muhammadiyya),  which  I  will  omit  for  the
present,  he  concludes  his  psychology  with  an  account  of  the
nature  of  the  soul.

Ascetic  and  devotional  Sufism,  in  agreement  with  orthodox
Islam,  distinguishes  sharply  between  the  spirit  (ruh)  and  the
soul  (nafs) 2.  The  latter  term  may,  indeed,  be  used  to  denote
a  man's  spiritual  "self"-  -"he  that  knows  himself  (nafsahu)
knows  his  Lord  " — but  as  a  rule  when  Sufis  refer  to  the  nafs
they  mean  the  appetitive  soul,  the  sensual  "self"  which,  from
their  point  of  view,  is  wholly  evil  and  can  never  become  one
with  God  3.  Jili  makes  short  work  of  this  dualistic  doctrine.  The
heading  of  his  59th  chapter  promises  to  show  that  the  nafs  is
the  origin  of  Iblis  and  all  the  devils,  and  he  begins  as  follows:

The  nafs  is  the  consciousness  (sirr)  of  the  Lord,  and  the  essence
(of  God) :  through  that  Essence  it  hath  in  its  essence  manifold
delights.  It  is  created  from  the  light  of  the  attribute  of  Lordship:
many,  therefore,  are  its  lordly  qualities.... God  created  the  nafs
of  Mohammed  from  His  own  nafs  (and  the  nafs  of  a  thing  is  its
essence) ;  then  He  created  the  nafs  of  Adam  as  a  copy  of  the  nafs
of  Mohammed4.

With  great  boldness  Jili  argues  that  the  Fall  of  Man  is  the
necessary  consequence  of  his  Divine  nature.  Adam  ate  the
forbidden  fruit  because  his  soul  manifests  a  certain  aspect  of
Deity,  viz.',  Lordship  (rububiyya) ;  for  it  is  not  in  the  nature  of
Lordship  to  submit  to  a  prohibition.  The  soul  knew  that,  if  it
ate  the  fruit5,  it  would  inevitably  descend  into  the  material

1  P.  no  supra.

2  Cf.  Prof.  D.  B.  Macdonald, The  religious  attitude  and  life  in  Islam,
p.  224  foil.

3  How  far  Ibnu  'l-'Arabi,  Ibnu  '1-Farid,  and  Jili  have  advanced  beyond
the  old  Sufism  appears  from  the  way  in  which  they  speak  of  the  body.
Although  on  account  of  its  grossness  it  is  an  imperfect  medium  and  therefore
relatively  a  cause  of  evil,  its  faculties  are  necessary  for  the  attainment  of
spiritual  perfection. A  man  born  blind  could  know  nothing,  either  here  or
hereafter,  of  the  Divine  wisdom  that  is  communicated  through  the  eye  (M  41 ).
Cf.  the  Td'iyya,  vv.  677-9,  and  note  ad  loc.  *  K  n.  48,  2  foil.

6  The  forbidden  fruit  symbolises  the  darkness  of  Nature which  is  tke

I2O  Studies  in  Islamic  Mysticism  [CH.

world  and  would  suffer  misery,  but  on  the  other  hand  it  was
aware  of  the  blessedness  of  its  inherent  sovereignty.  Thus  it
became  perplexed,  and  its  perplexity  (iltibds)  brought  about
its  fall.  The  choice  of  the  soul  is  at  once  determined  and  free:
determined,  because  in  the  last  resort  its  act  proceeds  from  a
fundamental  difference  in  the  nature  of  God ;  free,  because  the
soul  acts  in  accordance  with  its  knowledge  of  itself  and,  had
it  not  been  blinded  by  pride,  would  have  perceived  that  its
true  nature  requires  obedience  to  the  Divine  command,  inas-
much as  disobedience  renders  the  spirit  miserable,  and  misery
is  inconsistent  with  Lordship.

When  God  created  the  soul  of  Mohammed  from  His  own
Essence,  which  comprises  all  contraries,  He  created  from  the
soul  of  Mohammed  (i)  the  Sublime  Angels  in  respect  of  His
attributes  of  Beauty,  Light,  and  Leading,  and  (2)  Iblis  and
his  followers  in  respect  of  His  attributes  of  Majesty,  Darkness,
and  Misleading1.  Now,  the  name  of  Ibh's  was  'Azazfl:  he  had
worshipped  God  for  thousands  of  years  before  the  creation  of
the  world,  and  God  had  forbidden  him  to  worship  aught  else.
Therefore,  when  God  created  Adam  and  commanded  the
angels  to  bow  down  before  him,  Iblis  refused,  for  he  did  not
know  that  to  worship  by  God's  command  is  equivalent  to
worshipping  God2.  Instead  of  justifying  his  disobedience  or
repenting  of  it  and  asking  God  to  forgive  him,  he  silently
acknowledged  that  God  wills  and  acts  in  conformity  with  the
eternal  and  unchangeable  principles  of  His  nature.  Iblfs  was
banished  from  the  Divine  presence  and  a  curse  was  laid  upon
him  "until  the  Day  of  Judgment"  (Kor.  15,  35),  i.e.,  for  a
finite  period3.  After  the  Day  of  Judgment  the  creatureliness
which  hinders  the  spirit  from  knowing  God  as  He  really  is

cause  of  disobedience,  just  as  the  light  of  Spirit  is  the  cause  of  obedience;
but  Nature  and  Spirit,  like  their  opposite  effects,  only  differ  correlatively.

1  K  ii.  50,  7  foil.

*  JHf  derives  the  name  Iblfs  from  the  doubt  and  confusion  (talbis)  which
was  produced  in  the  mind  of  'Azazil  by  the  command  to  worship  Adam

1  The  Days  of  God  (ayydm  Allah)  are  the  epiphanies  by  which  He  reveals
His  perfections  (K  I.  89,  25  foil.).  The  Day  of  Judgment  signifies  "an
omnipotent  epiphany  before  which  all  existent  beings  abase  themselves"
(K  i.  in,  15),  or  in  other  words,  the  return  of  created  things  to  God  (K  11.
50,  last  line).

n]  The  Perfect  Man  121

will  be  counted  amongst  its  perfections1,  and  Iblis  will  then
be  restored  to  his  place  beside  God2.

Jill  mentions  five  phases  of  the  soul,  or  ascending  grades
of  spiritual  life:  (i)  the  animal  soul,  i.e.,  the  spirit  regarded
as  governing  the  body;  (2)  the  commanding  (evil-prompting)
soul3,  i.e.,  the  spirit  regarded  as  subject  to  the  passions ;  (3)  the
inspired  soul,  i.e.,  the  spirit  which  God  inspires  to  do  good;
(4)  the  self-reproaching  soul,  i.e.,  the  spirit  regarded  as  turning
penitently  towards  God;  (5)  the  tranquil  soul,  i.e.,  the  spirit
regarded  as  at  rest  with  God4.

V.  THE  MACROCOSM.

As  Man  is  created  in  the  image  of  God,  so  the  universe  is
created  in  the  image  of  Man5,  who  is  its  spirit  and  life6.  In
describing  its  creation  Jili  combines  mystical  ideas  with  an
old  cosmological  myth,  in  the  following  manner7:

Before  the  creation  God  was  in  Himself,  and  the  objects  of
existence  were  absorbed  (mustahlik]  in  Him  so  that  He  was  not
manifested  in  any  thing.  This  is  the  state  of  "being  a  hidden
treasure8"  or,  as  the  Prophet  expressed  it,  "the  dark  mist  above
which  is  a  void  and  below  which  is  a  void9,"  because  the  Idea

1  Because  the  spirit,  having  regained  its  absoluteness,  will  be  one  with
the  Essence  which  is  both  Creator  and  creature.

2  The  view  that  Iblis  suffered  damnation  rather  than  compromise  the
doctrine  of  the  Divine  unity  (tawhid)  is  derived  from  Hallaj.  See  Massignon,
Kitdb  al-Tawdsin,  p.  5  and  41  foil.

3  In  so  far  as  the  soul  does  what  its  creaturely  nature  requires,  it  may  be
described  as  ammdra  (bi  'l-sti'),  i.e.,  "commanding  itself  (to  do  evil)."

4  K  ii.  58,  3  foil.

6  Mohammed,  as  the  Logos,  is  the  spiritual  essence  of  Adam  and  of  all
things.

6  Cf.  K  ii.  79,  6  foil. "God  caused  Adam  to  dwell  in  the  heaven  of  this
world,  because  Adam  is  the  world-spirit  (rtifau  'l-'dlam) :  through  him  God
beheld  the  existent  things  and  had  mercy  on  them  and  made  them  live  by
the  life  of  Adam  in  them.  The  world  will  not  cease  to  be  living  so  long  as
humankind  continues  there.  When  humankind  departs,  the  world  will  perish
and  collapse,  as  the  body  of  an  animal  perishes  when  the  spirit  leaves  it."

7  K  ii.  77,  10  foil. Cf.  Nyberg,  Kleinere  Schriften  des  Ibn  ai-'Arabl,
Introd.,  p.  1 46  foil.

8  According  to  the  Hadith,  "  I  was  a  hidden  treasure  and  I  desired  to  be
known,  therefore  I  created  the  creatures  in  order  that  I  might  be  known."

*  See  p.  94  fol.

122  Studies  in  Islamic  Mysticism  [CH.

of  Ideas1  is  beyond  all  relations.  The  Idea  of  Ideas  is  called  in
another  Tradition  "the  White  Chrysolite2,  in  which  God  was
before  He  created  the  creatures."  When  God  willed  to  bring
the  world  into  existence,  He  looked  on  the  Idea  of  Ideas  (or
the  White  Chrysolite)  with  the  look  of  Perfection,  whereupon  it
dissolved  and  became  a  water;  for  nothing  in  existence,  not  even
the  Idea  of  Ideas,  which  is  the  source  of  all  existence,  can  bear
the  perfect  manifestation  of  God.  Then  God  looked  on  it  with
the  look  of  Grandeur,  and  it  surged  in  waves,  like  a  sea  tossed
by  the  winds,  and  its  grosser  elements  were  spread  out  in  layers
like  foam,  and  from  that  mass  God  created  the  seven  earths  with
their  inhabitants.  The  subtle  elements  of  the  water  ascended,
like  vapour  from  the  sea,  and  from  them  God  created  the  seven
heavens  with  the  angels  of  each  heaven.  Then  God  made  of  the
water  seven  seas  which  encompass  the  world.  This  is  how  the
whole  of  existence  originated.

Jfli  surveys  the  celestial,  terrestrial  and  aqueous  universe
at  considerable  length3,  but  I  will  not  attempt  to  give  more
than  an  outline  of  his  map.  He  takes  first  the  seven  heavens,
which  rise  in  concentric  and  gradually  widening  circles  above
the  spheres  of  earth,  water,  air,  and  fire.  Mystics,  he  remarks,
have  seen  them  and  can  interpret  them  to  sublunary  men.

1.  The  Heaven  of  the  Moon.

This  is  not  the  earth-born  vapour  which  we  call  the  sky,  but  is
invisible  on  account  of  its  farness  and  subtlety.  God  created  it
from  the  nature  of  the  Spirit  (al-Ruh)*,  that  it  might  have  the  same
relation  to  the  earth  as  the  spirit  has  to  the  body ;  and  He  made
it  the  dwelling-place  of  Adam  5.  Its  colour  is  whiter  than  silver.

2.  The  Heaven  of  Mercury.

God  created  it  from  the  nature  of  reflection  (fikr)  and  placed
in  it  all  the  angels  who  help  craftsmen.  Its  colour  is  grey.

3.  The  Heaven  of  Venus.

It  is  created  from  the  nature  of  phantasy  (khaydl]  and  is  the
locality  of  the  World  of  Similitudes  (dlamu  'l-mithdl).  Its  colour

1  ffaqiqatu  'l-haqd'iq,  i.e.,  the  whole  content  of  God's  knowledge,  the
Divine  consciousness,  the  First  Intelligence,  the  Logos.  It  is  identical  with
the  Haqlqatu  'l-Muhammadiyya.  Cf.  Nyberg,  op.  cit.,  Introd.,  p.  33  foil,
and  50.  »  al-Ydqutatu  'l-bayid.  *  K  n.  78,  5—98,  22.

4  See  p.  108  foil.  »  Cf.  p 121,  note  6.

II]  The  Perfect  Man  123

is  yellow. Jili  describes  the  various  tasks  assigned  to  the  angels
whom  he  saw  in  this  heaven,  where  he  also  met  the  Prophet  Joseph1.

4.  The  Heaven  of  the  Sun.

It  is  created  from  the  light  of  the  heart  (qalb).  The  Sun  in  his
heaven  is  like  the  heart  in  man — a  mirror  of  Deity :  while  the  heart
displays  the  sublime  degrees  of  existence  connoted  by  the  name
Allah,  the  Sun  is  the  source  and  principle  of  the  elemental  world.
Idris,  Jesus,  Solomon,  David,  and  most  of  the  prophets  dwell  in
the  heaven  of  the  Sun ;  its  ruling  angel  is  Israfil.

5.  The  Heaven  of  Mars.

Azrael,  the  Angel  of  Death,  presides  over  this  blood-red
heaven,  which  is  created  from  the  light  of  judgment  (wahm).

6.  The  Heaven  of  Jupiter.

Its  colour  is  blue.  God  created  it  from  the  light  of  meditation
(himma).  The  angels  of  the  Sixth  Heaven,  of  whom  Michael  is  the
chief,  are  angels  of  mercy  and  blessing.  Some  have  the  shapes  of
animals  and  birds  and  men;  others  appear  as  substances  and
accidents  which  bring  health  to  the  sick  or  as  solids  and  liquids
which  supply  created  beings  with  food  and  drink;  others  are
formed  half  of  fire  and  half  of  ice.

Here  Jili  beheld  Moses,  "drunken  with  the  wine  of  the
revelation  of  Lordship,"  who  explained  to  him  the  meaning  of
"Thou  shall  not  see  Me"  (Kor.  7,  139).

7.  The  Heaven  of  Saturn.

The  Seventh  Heaven  was  the  first  to  be  created.  It  was
created  from  the  light  of  the  First  Intelligence,  and  its  colour  is
black.  Between  it  and  the  Starless  Heaven  (al-falaku  'l-atlas)  there
are  three  heavens  which  have  only  a  logical,  not  an  actual,
existence:  the  Heaven  of  Matter  (falaku  'l-hayula),  which  is  the
highest  of  the  three;  the  Heaven  of  Atoms  (falaku  'l-habd)2;  and
the  Heaven  of  the  Elements  (falaku  'l-andsir) ;  some  philosophers
add  a  fourth,  viz.,  the  Heaven  of  Natural  Properties  (falaku
'l-tabai'}.

1  K  ii.  83,  22  foil.

2  The  universe,  being  in  space,  requires  a  locus  (mahall).  This  locus  is
al-habd. It  is  "logical"  (hukmi),  since  it  cannot  be  homogeneous  with  the
universe;  otherwise  it  would  need  a  locus  for  itself.  Mystics  call  it  "  the  First
Intelligence"  and  "the  Spirit  of  Mohammed"  (M  35  a). Cf.  Nyberg,  op.
cit.,  Introd.,  p.  157.

124  Studies  in  Islamic  Mysticism  [CH.

The  author  proceeds  to  describe  the  seven  limbos  of  the
Earth1.

1.  The  Earth  of  Souls  (ardu  'l-nufus).

God  created  it  whiter  than  milk  and  sweeter  than  musk,  but
when  Adam  walked  on  it  after  the  Fall  it  became  dust-coloured,
except  one  region  in  the  North,  never  reached  by  any  sinner,
which  is  ruled  by  al-Khadir  and  inhabited  by  the  Men  of  the
Unseen  World  (rijdlu  'l-ghayb)2.

2.  The  Earth  of  Devotions  (ardu  'l-'ibdddt}.

In  colour  it  resembles  an  emerald.  Its  inhabitants  are  those  of
the  Jinn  (genies)  who  believe  in  God:  their  night  is  our  day,  and
their  day  our  night.  After  the  sun  sets  in  our  earth,  they  appear
on  it  and  fall  in  love  with  the  children  of  men.  Most  of  these
spirits  envy  the  disciples  of  the  Mystic  Way,  and  taking  them
unawares  bring  them  to  ruin.  Jili  affirms  that  he  had  seen  some
Sufis  who  were  in  bondage  to  them  and  were  made  so  deaf  and
blind  that  they  could  neither  hear  nor  understand  the  Word  of
God,  unless  the  reciter  were  one  of  the  Jinn.

3.  The  Earth  of  Nature  (ardu  'l-tab').

Its  colour  is  saffron-yellow.  The  unbelieving  Jinn  who  inhabit
it  appear  in  human  shape  amongst  mankind  and  cause  them  to
neglect  the  worship  of  God.

4.  The  Earth  of  Lust  (ardu  'l-shahwa).

Its  colour  is  blood-red.  It  is  inhabited  by  different  sorts  of
devils  who  are  the  offspring  of  the  soul  of  Iblis.

5.  The  Earth  of  Exorbitance  (ardu  'l-ttighydn).

Its  colour  is  indigo  blue.  'Afrits  and  potent  demons  dwell  in  it,
who  busy  themselves  with  seducing  men  to  commit  great  sins.

6.  The  Earth  of  Impiety  (ardu  'l-ilhdd}.

Its  colour  is  black  as  night.  It  is  the  abode  of  the  mdrids  (the
most  evil  and  rebellious  of  the  Jinn)3.

1  K  ii.  89,  1 8  foil.

1  He  says  that  it  is  near  to  the  land  of  Bulghar  and  that  in  winter  they
are  not  obliged  to  perform  the  evening-prayer,  because  the  dawn  rises  before
sunset.

'  Jili  inserts  here  a  short  passage  in  which  he  distinguishes  four  species
of  Jinn  according  as  their  nature  is  elemental,  fiery,  airy,  or  earthly.  The
"elementals"  are  akin  to  the  angels  and  never  go  outside  of  the  spiritual
world.

II]  The  Perfect  Man  125

7. The  Earth  of  Misery  (ardu  'l-shaqdwa).

It  is  the  floor  of  Gehenna  (Jahannum)  and  is  inhabited  by
enormous  snakes  and  scorpions,  which  God  placed  there  in  order
that  it  might  be  a  pattern  of  the  torments  of  Hell  to  the  people
of  this  world1.

Concerning  the  Seven  Seas,  which  were  originally  two —
one  of  salt  and  the  other  of  fresh  water — Jill  has  much  to  say2,
but  his  description  of  them  is  somewhat  confused  and  we
must  now  pass  on  to  matters  of  greater  interest.

VI.  THE  RETURN  TO  THE  ESSENCE.

The  gist  of  Jill's  philosophy,  as  I  understand  it,  is  the
notion  of  One  Being,  which  is  One  Thought,  going  forth  from
itself  in  all  the  forms  of  the  universe,  knowing  itself  as  Nature
and  yet,  amidst  the  multiformity  of  Nature,  reasserting  its
unity  in  Man — in  Man  whom  self-knowledge  has  enlightened
and  made  perfect,  so  that  ceasing  to  know  himself  as  an
individual  he  sinks  into  his  Divine  element,  like  a  wave  into
the  sea.  This  language,  apart  from  its  inadequacy,  conveys  a
wrong  impression  by  translating  in  terms  of  time  and  space
what  does  not  belong  to  these  categories.  All  interpretations
of  ideal  and  mystical  experience  are  more  or  less  fictitious.

The  word  commonly  used  to  denote  the  self-manifestation
of  God  in  His  essence,  attributes,  and  names  is  tajalli,  which
implies  that  something  hidden  before  is  now  clearly  seen,  as
the  splendour  of  the  sun  emerging  from  eclipse  or  the  beauty
of  a  bride  when  she  unveils.  The  Divine  tajalli,  in  respect  of
the  person  to  whom  it  is  made,  may  be  called  an  illumination,
for  it  is  the  light  whereby  the  mystic's  heart  has  vision  of  God.
Accordingly,  the  ontological  descent  from  the  Absolute  and
the  mystical  ascent  or  return  to  the  Absolute  are  really  the

1  Similarly,  God  set  over  the  Heaven  of  the  Stars  a  prince  (fdghiya)  like
the  people  of  Paradise  to  serve  as  a  pattern  of  the  j  oys  of  Paradise.  Moreover,
the  images  stored  in  the  left  side  of  the  seat  of  khaydl  (see  p.  91)  in  the
human  brain  are  a  copy  of  the  Earth  of  Misery,  while  those  in  the  right  side
are  a  copy  of  the  houris  and  other  Paradisal  pleasures. Otherwise,  Jili
argues,  the  intellect  could  not  know  Paradise  and  Hell  and  would  not  be
obliged  to  believe  in  them  (K  n.  92,  22  foil.).

2  K  n.  93,  9  foil.

126  Studies  in  Islamic  Mysticism  [CH.

'same  process  looked  at  from  different  points  of  view1.  The
self-revelation  of  God  necessarily  involves  the  manifestation
of  His  nature  by  those  who  possess  an  inborn  capacity  for
realising  it  in  themselves.  Jili  divides  the  ascending  move-
ment of  this  consciousness  into  four  stages — the  Illumination
of  the  Actions,  the  Illumination  of  the  Names,  the  Illumina-
tion of  the  Attributes,  and  the  Illumination  of  the  Essence —
which  correspond  in  reverse  order  to  the  devolution  of  Pure
Being  from  its  primal  simplicity  to  the  manifestation  of  its
effects  in  the  sensible  world.

(a)  The  Illumination  of  the  Divine  actions2.

To  one  thus  illumined  it  becomes  plain  that  human  agency  is
naught,  that  he  has  no  power  or  will  of  his  own,  and  that  all  things
are  done  by  the  power  of  God  who  moves  them  and  brings  them  to
rest.  Sometimes  the  Divine  will  is  made  known  to  him  before  the
act :  consequently,  he  may  disobey  the  command  of  God  in  order
to  comply  with  His  will ;  in  which  case  his  disobedience  is  essentially
obedience  and  lies  between  him  and  God,  though  "it  remains  for
us  to  exact  from  him  the  penalty  which  God  has  imposed  in  the
Koran  and  the  Sunna  upon  those  who  break  His  commandment3."

(b)  The  Illumination  of  the  Divine  names4.

The  mystic  to  whom  God  reveals  Himself  in  one  of  His  Names
vanishes  (from  consciousness  of  individuality)  under  the  radiance
of  the  Name ;  and  if  you  invoke  God  by  that  Name,  the  man  will
answer  you,  because  the  Name  is  applicable  to  him.... If  God
reveal  Himself  in  His  Name  Allah,  the  man  will  disappear  and
God  will  call  to  him,  saying,  "Lo,  I  am  Allah";  and  if  you  cry
"O  Allah!"  the  man  will  answer  you  with  the  words  "At  thy
service  (labbayka) !  "5  Then,  if  he  mount  higher6  and  God  strengthen

1  Cf.  K  I.  94,  penult.  "The  Wise  Koran  (al-Qur'dnu  'l-hakitn)  is  the
descent  (tanazzul)  of  the  Divine  individualisations  (fyaqd'iq)  by  means  of  the
gradual  ascent  of  man  towards  perfect  knowledge  of  them  in  the  Essence,
according  to  the  requirement  of  Divine  Wisdom. ...He  that  is  moulded  after
the  Divine  nature  ascends  in  it  and  gains,  step  by  step,  such  knowledge
thereof  as  is  revealed  to  him  in  a  Divinely  determined  order."

1  K  i.  47,  penult.  «  Cf.  p.  54  and  p.  120. *  K  i.  50,  10.

6  I.e.,  he  is  the  unconscious  centre  of  manifestation,  mafhar,  of  the  Name
Allah.  Cf.  the  passage  (K  I.  22,  20  foil.)  translated  on  p.  93.

•  I.e.,  from  the  plane  of  Wdhidiyya  (unity  in  plurality)  to  the  plane  of
A  hadiyya  (abstract  unity),  together  with  Wdhidiyya  and  the  degrees  below

n]  The  Perfect  Man  127

him  and  let  him  abide  in  consciousness  after  his  passing-away
(fand),  God  will  answer  any  one  who  calls  the  man,  so  that  if  you
say,  for  instance,  "O  Muhammad!"  God  will  respond  to  you,
saying,  "At  thy  service  I"1  In  proportion  as  he  is  strengthened  to
ascend,  God  will  reveal  Himself  to  him  in  His  subordinate  Names,
viz.,  the  Merciful  (al-Rahmdn),  the  Lord  (al-Rabb),  the  King  (al-
Malik),  the  Omniscient  (al-Alim],  the  Omnipotent  (al-Qddir),  etc.
The  self-revelation  of  God  in  each  of  these  Names  is  superior  to
His  self-revelation  in  the  Name  preceding  it,  because  as  regards
the  Illumination  of  the  Names  analysis  is  superior  to  synthesis,
and  the  manifestation  of  each  lower  Name  is  an  analysis  of  the
synthesis  which  is  manifested  by  the  one  immediately  above  it.

As  regards  illuminations  of  the  Essence,  it  is  otherwise ;  here
the  more  general  is  above  the  more  particular:  al-Rahmdn  is
superior  to  al-Rabb,  and  Allah  to  either.  Finally,  all  the
Divine  Names  seek  to  apply  themselves  to  the  illumined
man,  even  as  the  name  seeks  the  object  named,  and  then
he  sings :

One  calls  Her  by  Her  name  and  I  answer  him,  and  when  I  am

called  (by  my  own  name)  'tis  Layla  (the  Beloved)  that  answers

for  me.
That  is  because  we  are  the  spirit  of  One,  though  we  dwell  by  turns

in  two  bodies — a  marvellous  thing !
Like  a  single  person  with  two  names: thou  canst  not  miss  by

whichever  name  thou  callest  him.

Jili  only  speaks  of  what  he  himself  has  experienced,  since
every  Name  is  revealed  in  different  ways  to  different  indi-
viduals. From  his  account  of  these  illuminations  I  take  a
passage  which  exhibits  his  characteristic  blend  of  logic  and
mysticism :

it,  or  in  other  words,  from  fand  (the  naughting  of  all  that  is  not  God)  to
baqd  (union  with  the  Divine  consciousness).

1  Cf  K.  n.  23,  i  foil.:  "Then,  when  he  becomes  cleansed  from  the
defilement  of  not-being  and  ascends  to  knowledge  of  the  being  of  the
Necessary  (Absolute),  and  when  God  purifies  him  from  the  foulness  of
temporality  by  the  manifestation  of  eternity,  he  becomes  a  mirror  for  the
Name  Allah,  and  in  that  moment  he  and  the  Name  are  like  two  opposite
mirrors,  each  of  which  exists  in  the  other.  And  in  this  vision  it  is  God
Himself  that  answers  those  who  invoke  him  (the  mystic);  his  anger  is  the
cause  of  God's  anger,  and  his  satisfaction  is  the  cause  of  God's  satisfaction."

128  Studies  in  Islamic  Mysticism  [CH.

The  way  to  the  illumination  of  the  Name  al-Qadim  (the
Eternal)  is  through  a  Divine  revelation  whereby  it  is  shown  to  any
one  that  he  existed  in  the  knowledge  of  God  before  the  Creation,
inasmuch  as  he  existed  in  God's  knowledge  through  the  existence
of  that  knowledge,  and  that  knowledge  existed  through  the
existence  of  God:  the  existence  of  God  is  eternal  and  the  know-
ledge is  eternal  and  the  object  of  knowledge  is  inseparable  from
the  knowledge  and  is  also  eternal,  inasmuch  as  knowledge  is  not
knowledge  unless  it  has  an  object  which  gives  to  the  subject  the
name  of  Knower.  The  eternity  of  existent  beings  in  the  knowledge
of  God  necessarily  follows  from  this  induction,  and  the  (illumined)
man  returns  to  God  in  respect  of  His  Name,  the  Eternal.  At  the
moment  when  the  Divine  eternity  is  revealed  to  him  from  his
essence,  his  temporality  vanishes  and  he  remains  eternal  through
God,  having  passed  away  from  (consciousness  of)  his  temporality1.

(c) The  Illumination  of  the  Divine  Attributes2.

When  God  desires  to  reveal  Himself  to  a  man  by  means  of  any
Name  or  Attribute,  He  causes  the  man  to  pass  away  (fand)  and
makes  him  naught  and  deprives  him  of  his  (individual)  existence ;
and  when  the  human  light  is  extinguished  and  the  creaturely
spirit  passes  away,  God  puts  in  the  man's  body,  without  incarna-
tion (huh'd),  a  spiritual  substance,  which  is  of  God's  essence  and  is
neither  separate  from  God  nor  joined  to  the  man,  in  exchange  for
what  He  deprived  him  of;  which  substance  is  named  the  Holy
Spirit  (ruhu  'l-quds)3.  And  when  God  puts  instead  of  the  man  a
spirit  of  His  own  essence,  the  revelation  is  made  to  that  spirit.
God  is  never  revealed  except  to  Himself,  but  we  call  that  Divine
spirit  "a  man"  in  respect  of  its  being  instead  of  the  man.  In
reality  there  is  neither  "slave"  nor  "Lord,"  since  these  are
correlated  terms.  When  the  "slave"  is  annulled,  the  "Lord"  is
necessarily  annulled,  and  nothing  remains  but  God  alone.

Mystics  receive  these  illuminations  in  proportion  to  their
capacities,  the  abundance  of  their  knowledge,  and  the  strength
of  their  resolution.  Taking  each  of  the  seven  chief  attributes
in  turn,  the  author  describes  the  effects  of  the  illumination  on
himself  or  on  others,  and  the  different  forms  which  it  may

'  K  i.  51,  14  foil.  2  K  i.  53,  7.

'  This  doctrine  of  substitution  was  taught  by  many  Christian  mystics  in
the  Middle  Ages. Cf.  Inge,  Christian  Mysticism,  p.  364.

II]  The  Perfect  Man  129

assume.  Concerning  Life  and  Knowledge  something  has  been
said  above1.  Those  endowed  with  Hearing  hear  the  language
of  angels,  animals,  plants,  and  minerals2.  As  for  the  mu-
kallamun,  who  receive  the  illumination  of  Speech,  the  Word
(kaldm)  comes  to  them  sometimes  audibly  and  from  a  certain
direction,  sometimes  from  no  direction  and  not  through  the
ear,  sometimes  as  an  inner  light  having  a  definite  shape ;  and
in  oneness  with  God  they  realise  that  all  existent  beings  are
their  Word  and  that  their  words  are  without  end3.  According
to  Jili,  the  illumination  of  Power  is  marked  in  its  initial  stages
by  a  phenomenon  characteristic  of  prophetic  inspiration —
the  ringing  of  a  bell  (salsalatu  'l-jaras),  which  is  produced,
as  he  quaintly  writes,  by  "the  dashing  of  realities  one  against
another  in  order  that  men's  hearts  may  not  dare  to  enter  the
presence  of  Divine  Majesty4."  "In  this  illumination,"  he  says,
"I  heard  the  ringing  of  bells.  My  frame  dissolved  and  my
trace  vanished  and  my  name  was  rased  out.  By  reason  of  the
violence  of  what  I  experienced  I  became  like  a  worn-out
garment  which  hangs  on  a  high  tree,  and  the  fierce  blast
carries  it  away  piece  by  piece.  I  beheld  naught  but  lightnings
and  thunders,  and  clouds  raining  lights,  and  seas  surging  with
fire5."

(d) The  Illumination  of  the  Divine  essence.

While  every  illumination  of  a  Name  or  Attribute  reveals
the  Essence  in  a  particular  relation,  the  Illumination  of  the
I  absolute  Essence  is  not  identical  with  any  or  all  of  these
illuminations.  Jili  refers  the  difference  to  the  Divine  sub-
stance, which,  as  we  have  seen,  God  "  puts  instead  of  the  man  "
so  that  the  subject  and  object  of  illumination  are  really  one.
This  substance  may  be  either  attributal  (sifdti)  or  essential
(dhdti).  Only  in  the  latter  case  does  "the  man"  become  the
God-man.  Such  a  one  is

1  See  p.  101.  2  K  i.  55,  3.  »  K  i.  55,  8.

*  K  i.  90,  penult.  The  Prophet  declared  that  when  inspiration  descended
j  upon  him  it  was  often  like  the  ringing  of  a  bell.  Cf.  Prof.  D.  B.  Macdonald,
i  The  religious  attitude  and  life  in  Islam,  p.  46.

6  K  i.  57,  9.  A  similar  description  occurs  in  the  thirty-second  chapter,
"On  the  ringing  of  the  bell."  See  K  i.  91,  3  foil.

N.  S.  II  9

130  Studies  in  Islamic  Mysticism  [CH.

the  Perfect  Unit  (al-fardu  'l-kdmil)  and  the  Microcosmic  Pole  (al-
ghawthu  'l-jdmi')  on  whom  the  whole  order  of  existence  revolves ;
to  him  genuflexion  and  prostration  in  prayer  are  due,  and  by
means  of  him  God  keeps  the  universe  in  being.  He  is  denoted  by
the  terms  al-Mahdi  and  al-KMtam  (the  Seal)1,  and  he  is  the  Vice-
gerent (khalifa)  indicated  in  the  story  of  Adam2.  The  essences  of  all
things  that  exist  are  drawn  to  obey  his  command,  as  iron  is  drawn
to  the  magnet.  He  subdues  the  sensible  world  by  his  might  and
does  what  he  will  by  his  power.  Nothing  is  barred  from  him,  for
when  the  Divine  substance  is  in  this  wali  as  a  simple  essence,  un-
conditioned by  any  degree  appertaining  to  the  Creator  or  to  the
creature,  he  bestows  on  every  degree  of  existent  things  its  haqq,  i.e.
what  it  requires  and  is  capable  of  receiving,  and  nothing  can  hinder
him  from  doing  so.  That  which  hinders  the  Essence  is  merely  its
limitation  by  a  degree  or  name  or  quality;  but  the  simple  Essence
has  nothing  to  hinder  it :  therefore  with  it  all  things  are  actual,  not
potential,  while  in  other  essences  things  are  sometimes  potential
and  sometimes  actual.

It  would  seem,  then,  that  the  Illumination  of  the  Absolute
^  / is  given  to  the  Heavenly  Man  (Mohammed)  alone  and  trans-
mitted through  him  to  the  Perfect  Men  who  are  his  repre-
sentatives on  earth3.

VII. RELIGION,  REVELATION  AND  PROPHECY.

Religious  belief  may  be  denned  as  man's  thought  about
God,  and  we  have  learned  that  all  things  and  thoughts  in  the
universe  are  attributes  of  God,  i.e.,  aspects  in  which  He  reveals
Himself  to  human  minds.  Moreover,  the  attributes  are
identical  with  the  Essence  in  so  far  as  they  are  nothing  but
the  Essence  regarded  from  every  possible  point  of  view.
Therefore  God  is  the  essence  of  all  thought ;  and  all  thought  is

1  The  Perfect  Man  is  the  First  and  the  Last:  in  his  outward  form  he  is
the  last  of  the  Prophets  and  in  his  inward  essence  the  last  of  the  Saints,  yet
he  is  the  source  of  all  prophecy  and  all  saintship  (Fu$ii$,  34  foil.).

«  Koran,  2,  28.

'  Cf.  Fttfii?,  34.  Therefore,  while  God  is  the  essential  being  ((ayn)  of  all
things,  none  of  them  is  the  'ayn  of  God  except  the  Logos  or  Heavenly  Man.
Contemplation  of  the  Perfect  Man  serves  instead  of  contemplation  of  God
(M  12  a).

II]  The  Perfect  Man  131

about  God.  In  the  light  of  such  principles  the  author's
philosophy  of  religion  is  easy  to  understand.

Divine  worship,  he  says,  is  the  end  for  which  all  things  are
created1,  and  therefore  belongs  to  their  original  nature  and
constitution.  The  different  forms  of  worship  result  from  the
variety  of  Names  and  Attributes  by  which  God  manifests
Himself  in  creation.  Every  Name  and  Attribute  produces  its
own  characteristic  eifect.  For  example,  God  is  the  true  Guide
(al-Hddi);  but  He  is  also  the  Misleader  (al-Mufcll) ,  for  the
Koran  says,  "Allah  shall  lead  the  wicked  into  error."  He  is
the  Avenger  (al-Muntaqim)  as  well  as  the  Forgiver  (al-
Mun'im) .  If  any  one  of  His  Names  had  remained  ineffectual
and  unrealised,  His  self-manifestation  would  not  have  been
complete.  Therefore  He  sent  His  prophets,  in  order  that  those
who  followed  them  might  worship  Him  as  the  One  who  guides
mankind  to  salvation,  and  that  those  who  disobeyed  them
might  worship  Him  as  the  One  who  leads  mankind  to  per-
dition2.

All  God's  creatures  worship  Him  in  accordance  with  His
will,  and  every  form  of  worship  expresses  some  aspect  of  His
nature.  Infidelity  and  sin  are  effects  of  the  Divine  activity
and  contribute  to  the  Divine  perfection.  Satan  himself
glorifies  God,  inasmuch  as  his  disobedience  is  subordinate  to
the  eternal  will.  Yet  some  aspects  in  which  God  shows
Himself,  such  as  Majesty  and  Wrath,  are  relatively  less
perfect  than  others,  such  as  Beauty  and  Mercy.  And,  again,
the  more  completely  and  universally  the  idea  of  God  is
presented  in  any  form  of  worship,  the  more  perfect  that  form
must  be.  Religions  revealed  through  a  prophet  contain  the
fullest  measure  of  truth,  and  amongst  these  the  most  excellent
is  Islam.

Jili  mentions  ten  principal  "religious"  sects  from  which
all  the  rest  are  derived3.  It  is  an  odd  catalogue,  comprising
(i)  the  Idolaters  or  Infidels;  (2)  the  Physicists,  who  worship
the  four  natural  properties,  namely,  heat,  cold,  dryness  and
moisture;  (3)  the  Philosophers,  who  worship  the  seven
planets;  (4)  the  Dualists,  who  worship  light  and  darkness;

1  Koran,  51,  56.  2  K  n.  98  foil.  3  K  n.  100.

9—2

132  Studies  in  Islamic  Mysticism  [CH.

(5)  the  Magians,  who  worship  fire;  (6)  the  Materialists  (Dah-
riyyun),  who  abandon  worship  entirely;  (7)  the  Brahmans
(Bardhima),  who  claim  to  follow  the  religion  of  Abraham;
(8)  the  Jews;  (9)  the  Christians;  (10)  the  Mohammedans.

The  author  proceeds  to  explain  that  God  is  the  truth  or
essence  of  all  these  forms  of  belief1.  The  Infidels  disbelieved
in  a  Lord,  because  God,  who  is  their  essence,  has  no  lord  over
Him,  but  on  the  contrary  is  Himself  the  absolute  Lord.  They
worshipped  God  according  to  the  necessity  of  their  essential
natures.  Idolaters  worship  Him  as  the  Being  who  permeates
every  atom  of  the  material  world  without  infusion  or  com-
mixture. God  is  the  "truth  "  of  the  idols  which  they  worship,
and  they  worship  none  but  Him.  This  is  the  mystery  of  their
following  the  Truth  in  themselves2,  because  their  hearts  bore
witness  to  them  that  the  good  lay  in  their  so  doing.  On
account  of  that  spirit  of  belief  in  the  reality  of  their  worship,
the  thing  as  it  really  is  shall  be  revealed  to  them  in  the  next
world.  "  Every  sect  is  rejoicing  in  that  which  it  hath  "  (Koran,
23,  55),  i.e.,  here  they  rejoice  in  their  acts,  and  hereafter  they
shall  rejoice  in  their  spiritual  states.  Their  joy  is  everlasting8.
Therefore,  even  if  the  Infidels  had  known  the  torment  which
they  must  suffer  in  consequence  of  their  worship,  they  would
have  persisted  in  it  by  reason  of  the  spiritual  delight  which
they  experience  therein;  for  when  God  wills  to  punish  any
one  with  torment  in  the  life  to  come,  He  creates  for  him  in
that  torment  a  natural  pleasure  of  which  his  body  becomes
enamoured ;  and  God  does  this  in  order  that  the  sufferer  may
not  have  an  unquestionable  right  to  take  refuge  with  Him  from
the  torment,  but  may  remain  in  torment  so  long  as  the  pleasure
continues  to  be  felt  by  him.  When  God  wills  to  alleviate  his
torment,  He  causes  him  to  lose  the  sense  of  pleasure,  and  he
then  takes  refuge  in  the  mercy  of  God,  "who  answers  the
sorely  distressed  when  they  pray  to  Him"  (Koran,  27,  63)*.

1  K  ii.  101  foil.

•  Cf.  Koran,  47,  3,  where  it  is  said  of  the  Infidels  that  they  followed
Falsehood,  and  of  the  Believers  that  they  followed  "the  Truth  from  their
Lord,"  i.e.  the  Revelation  given  to  Mohammed.

•  This  is  inferred  by  the  author  from  the  form  farihtin  (which  implies
continuance)  in  the  Koranic  text.  *  K  n.  101.

II]  The  Perfect  Man  133

Similarly,  the  Physicists  really  worship  the  four  essential
attributes  of  God,  namely,  Life,  Knowledge,  Power, and  Will;
the  Philosophers  worship  His  names  and  attributes  as
manifested  in  the  planets;  the  Dualists  worship  Him  as
Creator  and  creature  in  one;  the  Magians  worship  Him  as  the
Unity  in  which  all  names  and  attributes  pass  away,  just  as
fire  destroys  all  natural  properties  and  transmutes  them  to
its  own  nature;  the  Materialists,  who  deny  the  existence  of  a
Creator  and  believe  in  the  eternity  of  Time,  worship  God  in
respect  of  His  He-ness  (Huwiyya),  in  which  He  is  only
potentially,  but  not  actually,  creative;  the  Brahmans  wor-
ship Him  absolutely,  without  reference  to  prophet  or
apostle1.

As  regards  the  future  life,  since  all  worship  God  by  Divine
necessity,  all  must  be  saved.  But  the  seven  sects  above-
mentioned  (unlike  the  Jews,  Christians  and  Moslems,  who
received  their  religions  from  a  prophet)  invented  their  forms
of  worship  for  themselves.  Consequently,  they  are  doomed
to  misery  hereafter.  That  which  constitutes  their  misery  is
the  fact  that  their  felicity,  though  ultimately  assured,  is  far
off  and  is  not  revealed  to  them  until  they  have  suffered
retribution.  On  the  other  hand,  those  who  worship  God
according  to  the  mode  ordained  by  a  prophet  enjoy  immediate
felicity,  which  is  revealed  to  them  continuously  and  gradually.
It  is  true  that  the  Jews  and  Christians  suffer  misery,  but  why
is  this?  Because  they  have  altered  God's  Word  and  sub-
stituted something  of  their  own.  Otherwise,  they  would  have
come  under  the  rule  that  God  never  sent  a  prophet  to  any
people  without  placing  in  his  apostolic  mission  the  felicity  of
those  who  followed  him2.

Here,  perhaps,  it  will  not  be  inopportune  to  give  some
details  of  the  author's  eschatology.  We  must  remember  that
in  his  view  all  experience  is  perception  by  the  human  spirit

1  Therefore  the  book  which  the  Brahmans  ascribe,  as  the  author  supposes,
to  Abraham  did  not  come  to  them  from  God  but  was  written  by  Abraham
himself.  Jili  says  that  it  contains  five  parts.  The  fifth  part  on  account  of  its
profundity  is  forbidden  to  most  Brahmans. He  adds:  "It  is  notorious
among  them  that  those  who  read  this  fifth  part  invariably  become  Moslems."

2  K  II.  104.

134  Studies  in  Islamic  Mysticism  [CH.

of  the  nature  and  destiny  eternally  stamped  upon  it.  "I
Myself  am  Heaven  and  Hell."

"Life"  denotes  the  spirit's  contemplation  of  its  bodily
form:  the  spirit  assumes  the  form  of  the  object  contemplated,
just  as  sunbeams  falling  on  green  or  red  glass  take  the  form
and  colour  of  the  glass.  After  death,  i.e.,  after  the  withdrawal
of  the  spirit's  gaze  from  the  body,  the  spirit  remains  wholly
in  the  spiritual  world,  while  wearing  the  same  corporeal  aspect
as  it  had  before1.  Those  mystics  who  deny  the  resurrection
of  the  body  are  in  the  wrong.  "We  know  by  Divine  informa-
tion that  bodies  are  raised  from  the  dead  with  their  spirits."
The  death  of  the  spirit  consists  in  its  detachment  from  the
body  and  resembles  the  dreamless  sleep  which  is  akin  to  not-
being2,  since  the  sleeper  has  neither  perception  of  the  sensible
nor  vision  of  the  unseen3.

During  the  intermediate  state  (barzakh)  between  death
and  resurrection  every  one  moves  in  a  world  of  phantasy
(khaydf)  peopled  by  the  forms,  ideas,  and  essential  characters
of  the  actions  which  he  or  she  committed  in  their  earthly  life4.
The  drunkard  quaffs  fiery  wine  in  a  cup  of  fire;  the  sinner
whom  God  has  forgiven  passes  into  forms  of  good  works,  each
fairer  than  the  last ;  and  he  whose  good  works  have  been  done
in  vain  becomes  imbued  with  the  form  of  his  eternal  fate,
ever-changing  images  of  woe  which  his  resurrection  shall
reveal  to  him  as  realities6.  The  present,  intermediate,  and
future  states  are  one  existence  (wujud  wdhid),  and  you  by
virtue  of  your  inmost  nature  (huwiyya)  are  the  same  in  them
all,  but  while  the  things  of  this  world  are  free  (ikhtiydri),  the
things  hereafter  are  determined  by  what  happens  here8.

The  world,  having  been  created,  must  die :  its  death  is  its

1  Ibnu  'l-'Arabi  says  (Fu?4$,  211)  that  after  death  the  spirit  receives
an  immortal  body  homogeneous  with  the  world  to  which  it  has  been
translated.

•  Cf.  p.  117.  »  K  ii.  71,  15  foil.

•  So  long  as  the  spirit  remains  in  the  barzakh,  i.e.,  limited  by  the  pro-
perties of  the  body,  it  does  not  enjoy  full  freedom. Only  after  the  Resur-
rection is  it  entirely  free  to  act  according  to  its  nature,  i.e.,  to  seek  good  or
r M!  in  conformity  with  its  state  in  the  present  life  (K  11.  72,  20  foil.).

' K  11.  73,  2  foil.

•  K  ii.  74,  2  foil. As  to  the  question  of  free-will,  see  p.  102,  note  4.

ll]  The  Perfect  Man  135

passing  away  (fand)  under  the  might  of  the  Divine  Reality
which  manifests  itself  in  the  guise  of  individuals;  and  its
resurrection  is  the  manifestation  of  that  Reality  with  the
signs  foretold  in  the  Koran1.  The  universal  or  greater  resur-
rection (al-sd'atu  'l-kubrd)  includes  the  particular  or  lesser
resurrection  (al-sd'atu  'l-sughrd),  i.e.,  the  resurrection  of  eveiy
individual,  and  their  signs  correspond.  For  example,  Dajjal
(Antichrist)  is  an  emblem  of  the  flesh  (nafs) :  as  Dajjal  shall
be  slain  by  Christ  (the  Spirit  of  God,  Ruh  Allah),  so  shall  the
flesh  be  destroyed  by  the  spirit  (mh) 2.  Again,  the  coming  of
the  Mahdi,  who  shall  reign  for  forty  years,  symbolises  the
perfection  of  the  Perfect  Man  uniting  and  consummating  the
forty  grades  of  existence3.  God  beholds  this  world  through
the  medium  of  Man ;  therefore,  after  the  Resurrection,  it  will
not  exist  otherwise  than  in  God's  knowledge,  even  as  Paradise
and  Hell  exist  in  His  knowledge  to-day.  But  when  Man  shall
have  been  removed  to  the  next  world,  God  will  behold
Paradise  and  Hell  through  him,  and  they  will  then  exist
actually4.

God  created  the  Form  of  Mohammed  (al-suratu  'l-Muham-
madiyya)  from  the  light  of  His  Name  the  Almighty  Maker  (al-
Badi'u  'l-Qddir),  and  regarded  it  with  His  Name  the  All-subduing
Giver  (al-Manndnu  'l-Qdhir) ;  then  He  displayed  Himself  to  it  in
His  Name  the  Gracious  Pardoner  (al-Latifu  'l-Ghdfir).  Thereupon,
because  of  this  illumination,  it  split  in  two  halves,  and  God  created
Paradise  from  the  half  on  the  right  hand,  and  Hell  from  the  half
on  the  left  hand  5.

Jill's  description  of  the  Eight  Paradises  is  not  specially
interesting6.  In  the  first  Paradise  good  works  are  rewarded,
in  the  second  good  thoughts  and  beliefs  concerning  God.  The
third,  which  is  gained  solely  by  Divine  grace,  surpasses  all
the  rest  in  magnitude  and  contains  persons  of  every  religion,
sect,  and  nationality.  Theoretically  it  is  possible  for  any
human  being  to  enter  this  Paradise,  if  such  fortune  be
vouchsafed  to  him  in  some  Divine  illumination,  but  the

1  K  ii.  64,  21  foil. 2  K  ii.  69,  2.  3  K  ii.  69,  7  foil.

*  K  n.  65,  8  foil.  6  K  ii.  38,  15  foil.  •  K  n.  44,  18  foil.

136  Studies  in  Islamic  Mysticism  [CH.

author  adds:  "We  saw  in  mystical  vision  that  only  a  few  of
each  sect  are  there1."  The  four  highest  Paradises  have  no
trees,  pavilions,  or  houris,  and  are  inhabited  (except  the
highest  of  all)  by  contemplatives  and  saints  in  an  ascending
scale  of  holiness.  The  floor  of  the  eighth  Paradise  is  the  roof
of  the  Throne  of  God  (al-Arsh).  Thither  none  may  come —
for  it  is  the  Paradise  of  the  Essence,  "the  Lauded  Station"
(ai-Maqdm  al-mahmud)  which,  as  the  Tradition  tells  us,  was
promised  by  God  to  Mohammed.

With  the  people  of  Paradise  every  idea  immediately
becomes  an  object  of  sensation.  When  Adam,  whose  form  is
a  copy  of  the  form  of  Mohammed,  went  down  from  Paradise,
he  lost  the  life  of  his  form,  i.e.,  the  power  of  materialising  his
thoughts.  In  the  present  world  this  power  depends  on  the
spirit,  and  since  most  of  mankind  are  dead  spiritually,  belongs
only  to  mystics  endued  with  God's  everlasting  life2.

Hell  is  the  manifestation  of  Divine  Majesty  (jaldl).  When
God  created  the  Fire,  He  revealed  Himself  to  it  seven  times,
appearing  each  time  in  a  different  Name.  These  theophanies
clove  the  Fire  into  seven  valleys,  which  are  the  limbos  of
Hell8.

Pantheism  cannot  allow  evil  to  be  permanent.  Jili  cites
the  Tradition,  "My  Mercy  preceded  My  Wrath,"  and  infers
that  while  the  latter  attribute  is  a  mode  of  Divine  Justice,
Mercy  is  essential  and  prevails  in  the  end4.  Hell,  according  to
him,  is  a  temporary  state5,  and  not  necessarily  an  altogether

1  K  ii.  45,  12  foil.

1  K  ii.  47.  18  foil.  According  to  Ibnu  'l-'Arabi  (Fu$ti$,  go  foil.),  the
gnostic  ('drif)  creates  by  means  of  his  meditation  (himma)  ideas  which  have
an  objective  existence  in  sensation,  phantasy,  or  higher  planes  of  perception.
His  creative  power  differs  from  that  of  God,  inasmuch  as  his  consciousness
is  not  universal,  i.e.,  it  does  not  comprehend  every  plane  of  perception
simultaneously.  Cf.  Massignon,  Kitdb  al-J'awdsin,  p.  183.

»  K  ii.  40,  21  foil.  *  K  ii.  39,  10  foil.

•  "Whenever  God  creates  torment  ('adhdb)  by  Hell-fire,  He  also  CK
in  the  sufferers  the  power  of  enduring  it,  for  otherwise  they  would  perish  and
•o  escape.  Hence,  their  skins  are  periodically  renewed  (Koran,  4,  59),  and
they  receive  fresh  powers  of  endurance,  in  virtue  of  which  they  feel  a
presentiment  of  new  torments;  but  the  powers  with  which  they  endured  the
former  torments  do  not  cease,  inasmuch  as  these  powers  are  given  to  them
by  God,  and  God  never  takes  back  His  gifts.  Thus  their  powers  of  endurance

II]  The  Perfect  Man  137

undesirable  one.  Of  course,  he  had  been  there  in  his  visions,
and  he  tells  of  a  meeting  with  Plato,  "whom  the  formal
theologians  account  an  infidel,  but  I  saw  that  he  filled  the
unseen  world  with  light,  and  that  his  rank  was  such  as  few
amongst  the  saints  possess1."  Some  of  the  damned  are  more
excellent  than  many  of  the  Paradisal  folk:  God  has  placed
them  in  Hell,  that  He  may  be  revealed  to  them  therein2.  Jili
expatiates  on  the  variety  of  pleasures  enjoyed  by  those  who
burn  in  the  Fire3.  Some  feel  a  pleasure  comparable  to  the
joy  of  battle,  for  although  the  soldier  is  conscious  of  pain  he
often  has  a  keen  delight  in  the  fray  into  which  "the  Lordship
lurking  in  his  soul"  impels  him  to  plunge.  Another  of  their
pleasures  resembles  that  felt  when  any  one  rubs  an  itch,  even
if  he  should  chance  to  break  the  skin.  Then  they  have  subtler
pleasures,  like  the  self-satisfaction  of  the  fanatic  who  persists
in  a  wrong  way  of  thinking,  or  the  philosopher's  happy  sense
of  superiority  in  preferring  his  own  wretched  condition  to  the
rich  man's  luxury  and  ignorance.

Their  states  are  diverse :  some,  notwithstanding  that  they
suffer  the  most  intense  torment,  would  not  exchange  it  for
Paradise;  some  long  for  a  breath  of  the  air  of  Eden  and  a
draught  of  its  water;  some,  having  no  pleasure  in  their  pain,
feel  the  utmost  bitterness  of  loathing  in  themselves.

It  is  well  known  that  Mohammed  asserted  the  essential
unity  of  Revelation.  From  the  beginning  of  the  world,  as  he
believed,  one  and  the  same  faith  had  been  revealed  to  mankind
through  a  succession  of  prophets,  of  whom  he  himself  was  the
last.  Abraham,  Moses,  David,  and  Jesus  taught  the  same
religion,  the  religion  of  Islam.  It  followed,  in  the  first  place,
that  the  Pentateuch,  the  Psalms,  and  the  Gospel  are  identical

continue  to  grow,  until  there  appears  in  them  a  Divine  power  which
extinguishes  the  Fire,  because  no  one  is  doomed  to  misery  after  the  Divine
attributes  become  manifest  in  him"  (K  n.  38,  6  fr.  foot  and  foil.).  Else-
where, on  the  ground  that  Hell-fire  is  an  eternal  object  of  God's  knowledge,
Jili  denies  that  it  is  extinguished  absolutely  (M  44  b).  "You  may  say,  if
you  wish,  that  it  remains  as  it  was,  but  that  the  torment  of  the  damned  is
changed  to  pleasure"  (K  n.  40,  2).

1  K  n.  43,  9.  2  K  n.  44,  15.  3  K  n.  43,  16  foil.

138  Studies  in  Islamic  Mysticism  [CH.

in  substance  with  the  Koran,  and  secondly,  that  since  the
Jews  and  Christians  would  neither  accept  Islam  nor  acknow-
ledge Mohammed  as  the  prophet  foretold  in  their  books,  they
must  be  giving  a  false  account  of  what  these  books  actually
contained.  The  argumentum  ad  homines  needed  firm  handling.
Uninspired  Moslems  would  rather  say  that  the  books  in  their
present  form  are  corrupt  or  incomplete.  From  quite  another
standpoint  the  $uffs  agree  with  their  Prophet  that  the  Word
of  God  is  essentially  one.  For  them,  indeed,  all  that  exists
,  is  His  Word,  which  is  revealed  to  His  prophets  and  saints
/  under  different  aspects  and  in  varying  degrees  of  perfection.

J  The  historical  and  temporal  is  only  a  symbol  of  the  mystical
and  eternal  revelation.  As,  in  the  former,  Christianity
occupies  the  middle  place  between  Judaism  and  Islam,  so  in
the  latter,  where  these  religions  typify  the  progressive  ascent
of  the  soul  to  God,  the  Illumination  of  the  Names  is  denoted
by  the  Pentateuch,  the  Illumination  of  the  Attributes  by  the

v Gospel,  and  the  Illumination  of  the  Essence  by  the  Koran1.

No  one  who  reads  the  Insdnu  'l-Kdmil  can  fail  to  discern

I  that  its  author  was  profoundly  influenced  by  Christian  ideas,

'  though  it  is  not  always  possible  to  separate  these  from  the

Jewish,  Gnostic  and  other  elements  with  which  they  are

intermingled2. I  need  only  allude  to  the  Trinitarian  basis  of

the  Divine  nature8  and  the  prominence  given  to  the  Holy

Spirit  as  the  source  and,  in  relation  to  man,  the  organ  and

»  K  i.  104,  i  foil.

1  Naturally,  the  main  original  source  is  Philo,  from  whom  many  parallels
might  be  quoted.  The  Logos,  made  in  the  image  of  God,  is  described  both
at  an  d/>x^TwroJ  M«  and  as  a  seal  (<r<f>payls,  xo-po-xrijp)  impressing  itself  on
things.  He  is  called  an  archangel,  the  instrument  (6pyavov)  of  creation,  the
heavenly  man  (cf.  Corinthians,  15,  45  foil.),  God's  interpreter  and  prophet
(ipwfiit  Kal  Tpo0^T7jt).  As  a  mediator  between  man  and  God,  he  is  com-
pared with  the  High-priest  (Apxupcvs)  who,  like  the  Moslem  saint,  passes
away  in  God :  "  he  shall  be  no  man  when  he  goeth  in  to  the  Holy  of  Holies,"
according  to  Philo's  rendering  of  Leviticus,  16,  17  (Siegfried,  Philo  von
Alexandria,  p.  224  foil.).

*  Cf.  Ibnu  'l-'Arabl's  verse  (Tarjumdn  al-ashwaq,  xn.  4):  "My  Beloved
is  three  although  He  is  one,  even  as  the  (three)  Persons  (of  the  Trinity)  are
made  one  Person  in  essence  " ;  and  his  statement  that  of  all  the  Divine  names
only  three  are  cardinal,  viz..  Allah,  al-Rahman,  and  al-Rabb  (op.  cit.  p.  71).
For  his  doctrine  of  "triplicity"  (tathlith)  see  Appendix  11.

II]  The  Perfect  Man  139

sustaining  principle  of  spiritual  life1.  Jili  criticises  the
Christian  doctrine,  but  so  mildly  and  apologetically  that  one
passage  of  his  work  is  declared  by  the  Moslem  editor  to  be  an
interpolation  which  only  a  heretic  could  have  written2.  The
Pentateuch,  he  says,  was  sent  down  to  Moses  in  nine  tables3,
two  of  which,  containing  the  mysteries  of  Lordship  and
Power,  he  was  forbidden  to  communicate  to  any  one  ;  and  as
the  Jews  remained  ignorant  of  their  contents,  Moses  was  the
last  of  that  people  to  gain  perfect  knowledge  of  God.  On  the
other  hand,  both  Jesus  and  Mohammed  revealed  the  mystery
of  Lordship;  but  whereas  Mohammed  cloaked  it  in  symbols
and  made  it  an  esoteric  matter4,  Jesus  proclaimed  it  openly,
with  the  result  that  his  followers  became  infidels  and  wor-
shipped him  as  the  third  of  three  Divine  Persons,  namely,
the  Father,  the  Mother,  and  the  Son5.  This  form  of  Trinity,
by  the  way,  appears  in  the  Koran6;  it  is  not  a  grotesque
blunder  on  the  part  of  Mohammed,  but  a  Christian  heresy
which  still  survives  amongst  the  tribes  of  the  Syrian  desert7.

1  Massignon  points  out  (Kitdb  al-Tawdsin,  p.  134,  note  3)  that  in  the
treatises  of  the  Ikhwanu  '1-Safa  (Bombay,  A.H.  1306,  iv.  107  fol.)  "the  in-
breathing of  the  Spirit"  (nafkhu  'l-Rtili)  is  mentioned  as  a  doctrine  specially
characteristic  of  Christian  mysticism.

a  K  i.  105.  Ibnu  'l-'Arabi  (Fustis,  176  foil.)  is  more  critical  and  orthodox
than  Jili.

8  Amongst  the  matters  contained  in  the  fourth  table  Jflf  mentions
(K  i.  ioi,  13  foil.)  the  science  of  High  Magic  (al-sihru  'l-'dli),  which  resembles
the  miracles  of  the  saints  and  does  not  depend  on  drugs,  formulae,  etc.,  but
solely  on  the  magical  powers  in  man.  "  In  the  way  of  Divine  unity,"  he  says,
"I  have  had  some  experience  of  this,  and  if  I  had  desired  I  could  have
assumed  any  shape  in  the  world  and  done  any  deed,  but  I  knew  it  to  be
pernicious  and  therefore  abandoned  it.  Then  God  endowed  me  with  the
secret  potency  which  He  placed  between  K  and  N"  (i.e.  His  creative  Word,

4  There  is  a  Tradition  to  the  effect  that  Mohammed,  on  the  night  of  his
ascension,  received  three  kinds  of  knowledge:  one  kind  (external  religion)
he  was  commanded  to  impart  to  his  people,  another  (the  spiritual  doctrine)
he  was  left  free  to  communicate  or  not,  and  the  last  (concerning  the
mysteries  of  the  Godhead)  he  was  forbidden  to  divulge.  Some,  however,
learn  it  by  mystical  revelation  (K  i.  99,  10  foil.).

6  K  i.  97,  15  foil.  According  to  Jili,  the  Gospel  was  revealed  to  Jesus  in
Syriac,  and  its  opening  words  are  Bismi  'l-ab  wa  'l-umm  wa  'l-ibn,  "In  the
name  of  the  Father  and  the  Mother  and  the  Son"  (K  i.  105,  15  foil.).

•  Kor.  5,  116.  '  Musil,  Arabia  Petvaea,  ill.  91.

140  Studies  in  Islamic  Mysticism  [CH.

While  Jesus  spoke  the  Truth  allegorically,  the  Christians  have
taken  his  words  literally1.  Polytheists  as  they  are,  God  after
punishing  them  for  their  error  will  pardon  them  because  of
the  inward  sincerity  of  their  belief,  for  "they  acted  in
accordance  with  the  knowledge  which  He  bestowed  upon
them:  therefore  blame  them  not,  since  their  polytheism  was
essentially  belief  in  One  God  (kdna  shirkuhum  'ayna  'l-tawhid)  2."
It  is  this  sentence  and  others  of  like  tenor  that  the  editor
would  erase,  and  we  can  understand  his  indignation,  though
Jili  is  simply  applying  to  a  special  case  the  monistic  doctrine
which  has  been  explained  already.  Of  all  non-Islamic
religious  communities  he  holds  that  the  Christians  are  nearest
to  God,  for  while  they  worship  Him  in  Jesus,  Mary,  and  the
Holy  Ghost,  they  assert  the  indivisibility  of  the  Divine  nature
and  that  God  is  prior  to  His  existence  in  the  created  body  of
Christ.  Thus  they  recognise  the  two  complementary  sides  of
true  belief  concerning  God,  namely  that  from  the  one  point
of  view  (tanzih)  He  is  above  all  likeness  and  that  from
the  other  (tashbih)  He  reveals  Himself  in  the  forms  of  His
creatures8.  But,  in  addition  to  the  grave  error  of  anthro-.
pomorphism  (tajsim),  they  are  at  fault  in  restricting  the
Divine  self-manifestation  to  these  three.  God  said,  "I
breathed  My  Spirit  into  Adam*,"  and  here  the  name  "Adam  "
i  ties  every  human  individual5.  The  contemplation  of  those
who  behold  God  in  Man  is  the  most  perfect  in  the  world.
Something  of  this  vision  the  Christians  possess,  and  their
doctrine  about  Jesus  will  lead  them  at  last,  "when  the  Thing

1  "The  Christians  supposed  that  the  Father  was  the  Spirit
the  Mother  Mary,  and  the  Son  Jesus;  then  they  said  'God  is  the  Third  of
Three,'  not  knowing  that  'the  Father'  signifies  the  Name  Allah,  and  that
'the  Mother*  signifies  the  Ummu  'l-Kitdb  ('the  Mother  of  the  Book,'  an
expression  generally  understood  as  meaning  the  fundamental  part  of  the
Koran),  i.«.,  the  ground  of  the  Essence,  and  that  '  the  Son  '  signifies  the  Book.
which  is  Absolute  Being  because  it  is  a  derivative  and  product  of  the  afore-
said ground"  (K  i.  105,  17  foil.).

•  K  i.  106,  2.  »  K  ii.  105,  16  foil.

4  Koran,  15,  29.  JIH  declares  that  the  entire  Gospel  is  contained  in  this
verse,  and  that  the  Moslems  alone  have  fulfilled  the  true  doctrine  of  the
Gospel,  which  is  "  the  manifestation  of  the  Creator  (al-Ifaqq)  in  the  creatures
(al-kholq)."

•  K  i.  107,  i  foil.

II]  The  Perfect  Man  141

shall  be  discovered  as  it  really  is1/'  to  the  knowledge  that
mankind  are  like  mirrors  set  face  to  face,  each  of  which
contains  what  is  in  all ;  and  so  they  will  behold  God  in  them-
selves and  declare  Him  to  be  absolutely  One2.

Jili  concludes  his  work  with  a  mystical  interpretation  of
Islam,  "the  crown  of  religions3."  Much  of  what  he  says  has
no  interest  except  for  specialists,  e.g.,  his  definitions  of
technical  terms  used  by  Sufis  and  his  explanations  of  the
esoteric  meanings  which  he  finds  under  every  detail  of
Mohammedan  ritual.  He  is  careful  to  guard  against  anti-
nomianism.  Certain  Sufi  saints  claimed  to  have  outdistanced
the  prophets4,  but  Jili  decides  in  favour  of  the  latter.  He
admits  that  saintship — the  revelation  of  the  Divine  attributes
to  man — is  the  essence  of  prophecy,  and  that  the  prophet  qua
saint  is  superior  to  the  prophet  qua  prophet.  Every  prophet
has  "the  prophecy  of  saintship"  (nubuwwatu  }l-wildyat),  al-
though some,  like  Jesus  and  al-Khadir,  have  nothing  more5;
others,  like  Moses  and  Mohammed,  have  also  "the  prophecy  of
institution"  (nubuwwatu  'l-tashri'),  i.e.,  they  were  sent  to  pro-
mulgate and  establish  a  new  religious  code.  The  Sufi  Shaykhs,
whom  God  brings  back  from  the  state  of  trance  (fand)  in  order
that  they  may  guide  the  people  to  Him,  are  vicegerents
(khulafd)  of  Mohammed  and,  as  such,  are  invested  with  "the
prophecy  of  saintship"  and  bound  to  observe  the  laws. of  the
last  of  the  institutional  prophets,  Mohammed,  who  in  both
respects  is  supreme  and  unique6.  Jili  must  be  called  a  pan-
theist in  so  far  as  he  takes  "There  is  no  god  but  AllaE^in
tKeTsense  of  "Nothing  really  exists  but  the  Divine  Essence
with  its  creative  and  creaturely  modes  of  being."  These  modes
are  unified  in  the  abstraction  of  intellect  as  well  as  in  the
mystic's  flight  to  God,  but  the  author  of  the  Insdnu  'l-Kdmil
is  neither  a  pure  philosopher  at  any  time  nor  an  ecstatic
always.  "Perception  of  the  Essence,"  he  writes,  "consists

1  At  the  Resurrection.  2  K  II.  105,  20  foil.  3  K  u.  106,  4  foil.

4  K  i.  105,  6  foil.  Jili  cites  an  assertion  of  the  superiority  of  the  saints
by  his  ancestor,  'Abdu  '1-Qadir  al-Jilani.

6  On  the  other  hand,  Ibnu  'l-'Arabi  says  that  the  Jews  believed  in  Jesus
until  he,  as  an  apostle,  reformed  the  Mosaic  law  (Fustis,  205).

6  K  n.  109,  5  foil. Cf.  Fusus,  34  foil.,  203  foil.

142  Studies  in  Islamic  Mysticism  [CH.  II

in  thy  knowing  that  thou  art  He  and  that  He  is  thou,  and
that  this  is  not  identification  or  incarnation,  and  that  the
slave  is  a  slave  and  the  Lord  a  Lord,  and  that  the  slave
does  not  become  a  Lord  nor  the  Lord  become  a  slave1.'*
Even  the  Perfect  Man  is  a  reality  (haqq),  not  the  Reality
(al-ffaqq)  which  displays  itself  in  the  mirror  of  his  con-
sciousness as  God  and  Man2.

1  K  i.  29, 16  foil.

1  K  i.  26,  5  from  foot.  So  the  Logos  of  Philo  is  0e6s,  but  not  6  Oe6j
(Bigg,  Christian  Platonists  of  Alexandria,  2nd  ed.,  p.  42,  note  2).  Cf.  Ibnu
'l-'Arabi,  cited  by  Massignon,  Kitdb  al-Tawdsln,  p.  184.

143

APPENDIX  I

'AYNIYYA

Mention  has  been  made  (p.  99,  note  2  supra)  of  Jili's  ode
entitled  al-  Nawddiru  'l-ayniyyafi'l-bawddiri  'l-ghaybiyya.  In
the  Insdnu  'l-Kdmil  he  cites  36  of  its  534  verses  (i.  30,  3  ;  39,
6  fr.  foot;  52,  17;  66,  19;  and  76,  15)  and  describes  it  as  a
magnificent  and  unique  composition,  too  sublime  to  be  fully
understood.  It  is,  however,  little  more  than  a  versified
summary  of  matter  set  forth  in  the  Insdnu  'l-Kdmil,  though
in  some  instances  the  author  expresses  himself  with  a  freedom
and  boldness  which  would  hardly  be  tolerated  in  a  prose
treatise.  As  a  poem,  apart  from  its  ungraceful  style,  it  suffers
from  expounding  a  theory  of  mystical  philosophy  and  cannot
bear  comparison  with  Ibnu  '1-Farid's  Td'iyya  —  the  poetry  of
pure  mysticism.  The  extracts  given  below  have  been  copied
from  a  manuscript  in  the  British  Museum  (Or.  3684;  Rieu's
Suppl.  to  the  Catalogue  of  Arabic  MSS.  No.  245)  containing
the  text  together  with  a  commentary  by  'Abdu  '1-Ghani  al-
Nabulusi.

i  (f.  1306)

u.  r.  Instead  of  "there  is  no  god  but  Allah"  the  poet  says,  "there  is
nothing  but  Absolute  Beauty  (jamdl)  and  phenomenal  beauty  (frusn),"
these  being  the  inward  and  outward  aspects  of  the  Beloved.

144  Studies  in  Islamic  Mysticism  [CH.

2(1  139*)

Jfb

*

« L;  1  1 JA *

*

otJJI

UUtLJl JUJI

-l  JUoJI  ^  JX^JI
A5U

vv.\  —  v.  The  individualisations  of  the  Divine  Essence  are  named
"the  creatures  of  God,"  but  in  reality  they  are  no  other  than  the  Essence
itself.

v.  \\. K  (i.  76,  16):  .»*;„».  Pi*  v>>.

v.  »r. The  MS.  and  K  read

n]

JOt's  'Ayniyya

3(11466)

145

IJ.JLA <uj  *  U L> ,LJ Jj

~
t1.  \1. The  MS.  reads  J^J  for

r.  v*.  The  rhyme  in  this  poem  is  muqayyad.  Even  Jflf  could  not  have
written  ajljj  here,  or  iSlSj  (4,  v.  re).  He  neglects  the  rule  that  in  this
form  of  fawil  the  third  foot  of  the  second  hemistich  should  be  -  -  -  (not

N.  S.  II

146

Studies  in  Islamic  Mysticism

[CH.

I,  variant

v.  1. MS.  UpC*  J«3j. Cf.  p.  123  supra.
v.  A  foil. The  terms  "ascent"  and  "descent"  arc  improperly  applied

to  the  spirit,  which  has  its  being  in  God  (A^  in  v.  \  •  means  JJaJI  L5J).
In  order  to  distinguish  it  from  God,  we  say  that  it  is  particularised  and
individualised,  i.e.  created;  and  we  give  the  name  of  "spirit"  to  this
i ml i vnl utilisation,  by  means  of  which  God  displays  Himself  as  in  a  mirror.

v.  u. dgfan*;  is  a  correction  of  the  MS.  reading

II]  Jill's  'Ayniyya  147

*  *t-* OUULJt

*  5b

5  (f.  1636)

*
*

*

*  *  *

UJb .^ J U. *  UuLU  i

LJI

JJU ^-i

* -3*-  Uuk  sO

jJUiJ  A^J  ^^U LyJ A-.^  *  J-b, ^1  Otrf U  JyUI

*  A5i J-.J AJ! Sll ^

w.  f  \. MS.  ^.^J.  5,  ^-  t  foil.  Cf.  p.  151  infra.

v.  \  V  foil.  Cf.  p.  126  supra.

10—2

148

Studies  in  Islamic  Mysticism  [CH.  II

JUAJI

*

6  (f.  170  6)

OIJJI  0)

Ul 4J U

*

*

*

*
*

*

*

13!

*  £,u  Jot

*  A^-» jJ  U

iL.

149

APPENDIX  II

SOME  NOTES  ON  THE  FUSU$U  >L-HIKAM^

I  have  already  referred  to  the  work  of  Ibnu  'l-'Arabi,
bearing  a  title  which  may  be  rendered  "The  Bezels  of  Divine
Wisdom,"  and  have  pointed  out  that  its  subject-matter
coincides,  to  a  large  extent,  with  that  of  the  Insdnu  'l-Kdmil,
while  both  writers  are  not  only  inspired  by  the  same  mystical
philosophy  but  use  similar  methods  in  order  to  develop  their
ideas2.  The  following  notes,  inadequate  as  they  are,  will  at
least  show  the  magnitude  of  Jili's  debt  to  his  predecessor,
besides  making  clearer  some  fundamental  principles  which  in
the  Insdnu  'l-Kdmil  are  assumed  rather  than  expounded.  The
Fusus  purports  to  be  a  treatise  on  the  nature  of  God  as
manifested  through  prophecy,  each  of  its  27  chapters  being
attached  to  the  logos  (kalima)  of  a  prophet  typifying  a
particular  Divine  attribute.  Since  God  does  not  reveal
Himself  completely  except  in  Man,  the  first  chapter  treats  of
Adam  as  the  microcosm,  the  Perfect  Man,  the  absolute  mirror
of  Divinity.  Often  Ibnu  'l-'Arabi  takes  a  text  of  the  Koran
and  elicits  his  doctrine  from  it  in  a  fashion  well  known  to
students  of  Philo  and  Origen.  The  theories  set  forth  in  the
Fusus  are  difficult  to  understand  and  even  more  difficult  to
explain.  Many  years  ago  I  translated  the  greater  part  of  the
work,  with  the  commentary  by  'Abdu  '1-Razzaq  al-Kashani,
for  my  own  use,  but  the  author's  language  is  so  technical,
figurative,  and  involved  that  a  literal  reproduction  would
convey  very  little.  On  the  other  hand,  if  we  reject  his
terminology,  we  shall  find  it  impossible  to  form  any  precise
notion  of  his  ideas.  By  collecting  and  arranging  illustrative
passages  and  by  availing  myself  of  the  commentator's  aid
I  may,  perhaps,  throw  some  light  on  a  peculiarly  recondite
phase  of  mystical  scholasticism.

1  The  edition  used  is  that  published  at  Cairo  in  A.H.  1321.

2  See  p.  88.

150  Studies  in  Islamic  Mysticism  [CH.

The  Divine  Essence,  which  is  all  that  exists,  may  be
regarded  from  two  aspects:  (a)  as  a  pure,  simple,  attributeless
essence;  (b)  as  an  essence  endowed  with  attributes.  God,
considered  absolutely,  is  beyond  relation  and  therefore  beyond
knowledge  —  the  Neoplatonic  One,  inconceivable  and  ineffable.
From  this  point  of  view  God,  in  a  sense,  is  not  God.  "Some
philosophers  and  Abu  Hamid  (al-Ghazali)  have  asserted  that
God  is  known  without  reference  to  the  universe,  but  they  are
mistaken.  An  eternal  Essence  is  known,  but  it  is  not  known
to  be  a  god,  i.e.,  an  object  of  worship  (ildh),  until  the  ma'luh
(the  logical  complement  of  ildh)  is  known1."  Here  we  are
introduced  to  a  dialectic  which  dominates  the  Fu§u§.  While
God  is  independent  of  created  beings  in  respect  of  His  essence,
He  requires  them  in  respect  of  His  divinity2.  His  existence  is
absolute,  theirs  is  relative,  i.e.,  it  is  Real  Being  limited  and
individualised  by  appearing  as  a  relation  of  Reality.  Hence
all  things  are  attributes  of  God.  As  such,  they  are  ultimately
identical  with  God,  apart  from  whom  they  are  nothing8.
Regarded  externally,  they  depend  on  the  universals  of  which
they  are  the  particulars.  Thus,  a  "living  "  person  is  not  judged
to  be  "living"  unless  he  have  in  him  the  universal  "life"
which,  though  as  a  universal  it  exists  only  in  the  mind,  has  an
external  existence  in  so  far  as  it  is  attached  to  phenomena.
Universals,  being  mental  concepts,  imply  a  subject  and  an
object.  As  the  universal,  knowledge,  necessarily  predicates
of  any  one  endowed  with  it  that  he  is  "knowing,"  so  the
person  endowed  therewith  necessarily  predicates  of  the
knowledge  that  it  is  originated  in  relation  to  himself,  eternal

74.

*  This  mode  of  thought  leads  Ibnu  'l-'Arabf  to  indulge  in  daring  para-
doxes, e.g.,  "He  praises  me  (by  manifesting  my  perfections  and  creating  me
in  His  form),  and  I  praise  Him  (by  manifesting  His  perfections  and  obeying
Him).  How  can  He  be  independent  when  I  help  and  aid  Him?  (because  the
Divine  attributes  derive  the  possibility  of  manifestation  from  their  corre-
lates). For  that  cause  God  brought  me  into  existence,  and  I  know  Him  and
bring  Him  into  existence  (in  my  knowledge  and  contemplation  of  Him)."
Fu&f.  78.

1  God  is  the  'ayn  (identity)  of  the  attributes,  in  the  sense  that  they  are
not  superadded  to  His  Essence  but  are  relations  of  the  Essence  as  subject  to
itself  as  object  (Fuftif,  226).  The  universe  is  the  objectified  sum  of  these
relations.

n]  Some  Notes  on  the  Fustisu  9l-Hikam  151

in  relation  to  God1.  The  Divine  Essence,  in  knowing  itself,
knows  all  things  in  itself  and  distinguishes  them  from  itself  as
objects  of  its  knowledge.  The  difference,  of  course,  does  not
impair  the  essential  unity  of  knowledge,  knower,  and  known,
but  is  none  the  less  inherent  in  the  nature  of  things,  i.e.,  in
Reality  as  manifested  to  us.  "Triplicity  (tathlith)  is  the
foundation  of  becoming2."  God  is  single  (fard),  but  according
to  Ibnu  'l-'Arabi  the  first  single  (odd)  number  is  3,  not  i.
"One"  is  the  object  of  numeration,  whence  all  numbers  from
2  upwards  are  derived.  Creation  depends  on  knowledge  and
therefore  involves  tathlith.  That  which  is  brought  into  exist-
ence is  a  correlate3,  which  already  exists  ideally  and  contains
in  itself  the  potentiality  of  existing  objectively,  inasmuch  as
it  must  correspond  with  the  knowledge  and  will  of  God  con-
cerning it ;  otherwise,  it  would  not  exist  either  potentially  or
actually4.  The  essences  (a'ydri)  of  things  are  eternally  known
to  God  and  "give"  His  knowledge  to  Him  in  virtue  of  their
being  that  which  He  knows  of  them.  His  creative  Word
(Kun,  "Be!")  actualises  their  existence,  but  properly  they
bring  themselves  into  existence,  because  He  only  wills  what
they  have  it  in  them  to  become.  From  the  proposition  that
"knowledge  is  a  relation  depending  on  the  object  known  (al-
'ilm  nisbatun  tdbi'at™  li  'l-ma'lum),  and  the  object  known
is  thou  and  all  appertaining  to  thee5,"  Ibnu  l-'Arabi  infers
that  human  actions  are  logically  self-determined6.  The  fate  of
every  individual  is  his  'ayn  ihdbiia  or  essential  character  as  it
exists  from  eternity  in  the  Divine  knowledge.  Men  receive  of
good  and  evil  just  what  the  necessity  of  their  natures  demands.
The  verse,  "Had  God  willed,  He  would  have  guided  you  all
aright "  (Koran,  6, 150),  means  that  God  could  not  will  the  im-
possible. His  wisdom  requires  that  the  infinite  diversity  of  His
attributes  should  be  matched  by  infinitely  diverse  capacities
in  the  objects  wherein  these  attributes  are  displayed7.

1  Fustis,  16  fol.  *  Ibid.  142.

3  Mtijad  (the  thing  brought  into  existence)  implies  mtijid  (one  who
brings  it  into  existence).

4  Fustis,  139  foil.  6  Ibid.  76.

•  Ibid.  77.  The  determining  "self"  is  really  an  individualisation  (baqiqai)
of  God.  7  Ibid.  75-6.

152  Studies  in  Islamic  Mysticism  [CH.

Mystics  see  that  God  is  One  and  All,  and  One  in  All.

Sublimity  (uluww)  belongs  to  God  alone.  The  essences  (a'ydn)
of  things  are  in  themselves  non-existent,  deriving  what  existence
they  possess  from  God,  who  is  the  real  substance  (ayri)  of  all  that
exists.  Plurality  consists  of  relations  (nisab),  which  are  non-
existent things.  There  is  really  nothing  except  the  Essence,  and
this  is  sublime  (transcendent)  for  itself,  not  in  relation  to  any-
thing, but  we  predicate  of  the  One  Substance  a  relative  sublimity
(transcendence)  in  respect  of  the  modes  of  being  attributed  to  it :
hence  we  say  that  God  is  (huwa)  and  is  not  (Id  huwa).  Kharraz1,
who  is  a  mode  of  God  and  one  of  His  tongues,  declared  that  God
is  not  known  save  by  His  uniting  all  opposites  in  the  attribution
of  them  to  him  (Kharraz)2:  He  is  the  First,  the  Last,  the  Out-
ward, the  Inward;  He  is  the  substance  of  what  is  manifested  and
the  substance  of  what  remains  latent  at  the  time  of  manifestation ;
none  sees  Him  but  Himself,  and  none  is  hidden  from  Him,  since
He  is  manifested  to  Himself  and  hidden  from  Himself;  and  He  is
the  person  named  Abu  Sa'id  al-Kharraz  and  all  the  other  names  of
originated  things.  The  inward  says  "No"  when  the  outward  says
"I,"  and  the  outward  says  "No"  when  the  inward  says  "I,"  and
so  in  the  case  of  every  contrary,  but  the  speaker  is  One,  and  He  is
substantially  identical  with  the  hearer.... The  Substance  is  One,
although  its  modes  are  different.  None  can  be  ignorant  of  this,
for  every  man  knows  it  of  himself3,  and  Man  is  the  image  of  God.

Thus  things  became  confused  and  numbers  appeared,  by  means
of  the  One,  in  certain  degrees4.  The  One  brought  number  into
being,  and  number  analysed  the  One,  and  the  relation  of  number
was  produced  by  the  object  of  numeration.... He  that  knows  this
knows  that  the  Creator  who  is  declared  to  be  incomparable
(munazzah)  is  the  creatures  which  are  compared  (mushabbah)  with
Him — by  reason  of  His  manifesting  Himself  in  their  forms — albeit
the  creatures  have  been  distinguished  from  the  Creator.  The

1  Abii  Sa'id  al-Kharraz  (ob.  A.D.  890)  was  a  well-known  Stiff  of  Baghdad.
See  Kashf  al-Mahjub,  translation,  p.  241  foil.

•  The  mystic  cannot  know  God  unless  he  is  illuminated  by  all  the  Divine
attributes,  so  that  he  becomes  a  haqq. See  p.  128.

•  Every  individual  is  conscious  of  having  different  faculties  and  qualities.

•  One  in  the  first  degree  is  one,  in  the  second  ten,  in  the  third  a  hundred,
in  the  fourth  a  thousand,  and  each  of  these  degrees  comprises  simple  and
complex  numbers,  just  as  species  comprise  individuals  and  genera  species.

n]  Some  Notes  on  the  Fustisu  'l-Hikam 153

Creator  is  the  creature,  and  the  creature  is  the  Creator:  all  this
proceeds  from  One  Essence;  nay,  He  is  the  One  Essence  and  the
many  (individualised)  essences.... Who  is  Nature  and  Who  is  all
that  is  manifested  from  her1?  We  did  not  see  her  diminished  by
that  which  was  manifested  from  her,  or  increased  by  the  not-being
of  aught  manifested  that  was  other  than  she.  That  which  was
manifested  is  not  other  than  she,  and  she  is  not  identical  with  what
was  manifested,  because  the  forms  differ  in  respect  of  the  predica-
tion concerning  them :  this  is  cold  and  dry,  and  this  is  hot  and  dry :
they  are  united  by  dryness  but  separated  by  cold  and  heat.  Nay,
the  Essence  is  (in  reality)  Nature.  The  world  of  Nature  is  many
forms  in  One  Mirror;  nay,  One  Form  in  diverse  mirrors2.  Bewilder-
ment arises  from  the  difference  of  view,  but  those  who  perceive  the
truth  of  what  I  have  stated  are  not  bewildered3.

We  do  not  find  in  the  Fusus  any  systematic  scheme  of
Plotinian  emanation  or  process  of  self-propulsive  thought  such
as  Jili  ascribes  to  the  Absolute4.  Ibnu  'l-'Arabi  indicates  the
relation  of  the  One  to  the  Many  by  means  of  metaphors,  e.g.,
tajalli  (self-unveiling) ,  fay  $  (overflowing),  takhallul  (permea-
tion)5, and  ta'thir  (producing  an  effect  or  impression)6.
Contingent  Being  resembles  a  shadow  cast  by  a  figure  (Real
Being),  falling  on  a  place  (the  forms  of  phenomena),  and
made  visible  by  a  light  (the  Divine  Name  al-Zdhir,  "the
Outward").  The  universe  is  imaginary  if  we  deem  it  external
to  God  and  self-subsistent ;  it  is  real  only  as  an  aspect  of  the
Real7.  It  is  "the  breath  of  the  Merciful"  (nafasu  'l-Rahmdn).
God  exhales,  as  it  were,  the  essences  and  forms  of  things  which
are  contained  potentially  in  His  nature,  and  unites  the  active
and  passive  elements  in  one  medium  of  self-expression,  just
as  words  and  letters  are  united  in  the  breath  of  man8.

1  Real  Being,  when  limited  by  a  universal  individualisation,  is  Nature,
from  which  are  manifested  secondary  and  tertiary  individualisations,  viz.,
natural  bodies  of  various  kinds.

8  Nature  may  be  regarded  either  as  all  the  particular  forms  in  which
Reality  reveals  itself  or  as  the  universal  form  of  Reality  revealing  itself  in
all  particular  forms.

3  Fustis,  63  foil.  *  See  p.  94-

5  Fustis,  72  fol.  6  Ibid.  230  fol.

'  Ibid.  113  foil.  8  Ibid.  182.

154  Studies  in  Islamic  Mysticism  [CH.

Phenomena  are  perpetually  changing  and  being  created  anew1,
while  God  remains  as  He  ever  was,  is,  and  shall  be.  The  whole
infinite  series  of  individualisations  is  in  fact  one  eternal  and
everlasting  tajalli  which  never  repeats  itself.  Ibnu  'l-'Arabi
observes  that  his  doctrine  agrees  superficially  with  that  of  the
Ash'arite  atomists,  who  held  the  universe  to  be  homogeneous
in  substance  but  dissimilar  in  quality.  On  the  other  hand,  he
points  out  that  instead  of  identifying  the  substance  with  God,
and  the  sum  of  those  forms  and  relations  which  they  call
"accidents,"  with  the  universe,  the  Ash'arites  postulate
certain  monads:  these,  although  by  definition  they  are  com-
posed of  accidents,  are  regarded  (he  says)  as  having  an
independent  existence,  as  a  reality  (haqq)  but  not  essentially
the  Reality  (al-Haqq)2.  To  our  minds  the  atoms,  which  have
extension  neither  in  space  nor  in  time,  seem  insubstantial
enough.  But  Ibnu  'l-'Arabi  will  brook  no  secundum  quid,
not  even  one  that  only  endures  for  a  moment.  God  is  both
the  spirit  and  the  form  of  the  universe.  We  must  not  say  that
the  universe  is  a  form  of  which  He  is  the  spirit3.

What  has  been  said  in  the  foregoing  essay  regarding  the
nature  and  function  of  Man  was  first  put  forth  by  Ibnu
'l-'Arabf.  A  few  quotations  will  make  this  clear.

When  God  willed  in  respect  of  His  Beautiful  Names  (attributes),
which  are  beyond  enumeration,  that  their  essences  (a'ydri) — or  if
you  wish,  you  may  say  "His  essence  ('aynuhu)  " — should  be  seen,
He  caused  them  to  be  seen  in  a  microcosmic  being  (kawn  jdmi')
which,  inasmuch  as  it  is  endowed  with  existence4,  contains  the
whole  object  of  vision,  and  through  which  the  inmost  conscious-
ness (sirr)  of  God  becomes  manifested  to  Him.  This  He  did,  because
the  vision  that  consists  in  a  thing's  seeing  itself  by  means  of  itself
is  not  like  its  vision  of  itself  in  something  else  that  serves  as  a

1  But  there  is  no  moment  of  not-being  between  the  successive  acts  of
creation  (Fuftif.  196  fol.).  The  author  compares  this  with  the  Ash'arite
tajdidu  'l-a'rdj.

«  Fuft$,  153  foil.,  239.  Cf.  Macdonald,  Development  of  Muslim  Theology,
p.  201  foil.

•  Fufiif.  46,  132.  The  attributes  are  really  latent  in  the  Essence  and
identical  with  it. Cf.  p.  90  supra.

*  I.e.,  relative  existence,  wherein  Absolute  Being  is  reflected.

ll]  Some  Notes  on  the  Fustisu  'l-Hikam  155

mirror  for  it :  therefore  God  appears  to  Himself  in  a  form  given  by
the  place  in  which  He  is  seen  (i.e.,  the  mirror),  and  He  would  not
appear  thus  (objectively)  without  the  existence  of  this  place  and
His  epiphany  to  Himself  therein.  God  had  already  brought  the
universe  into  being  with  an  existence  resembling  that  of  a  fashioned
soulless  body,  and  it  was  like  an  unpolished  mirror1.  No-v,  it
belongs  to  the  Divine  decree  (of  creation)  that  He  did  not  fashion
any  place  but  such  as  must  of  necessity  receive  a  Divine  soul,
which  God  has  described  as  having  been  breathed  into  it;  and  this
denotes  the  acquisition  by  that  fashioned  form  of  capacity  to
receive  the  emanation  (fayd),  i.e.,  the  perpetual  self -manifestation
(tajalli)  which  has  never  ceased  and  never  shall.  It  remains  to
speak  of  the  recipient  (of  the  emanation).  The  recipient  proceeds
from  naught  but  His  most  holy  emanation,  for  the  whole  affair
(of  existence)  begins  and  ends  with  Him:  to  Him  it  shall  return,
even  as  from  Him  it  began2.

The  Divine  will  (to  display  His  attributes)  entailed  the
polishing  of  the  mirror  of  the  universe.  Adam  (the  human  essence)
was  the  very  polishing  of  that  mirror  and  the  soul  of  that  form,
and  the  angels  are  some  of  the  faculties  of  that  form,  viz.,  the  form
of  the  universe  which  the  Sufis  in  their  technical  language  describe
as  the  Great  Man,  for  the  angels  in  relation  to  it  are  as  the  spiritual
and  corporeal  faculties  in  the  human  organism3.... The  aforesaid
microcosmic  being  is  named  a  Man  (insdn)  and  a  Vicegerent
(khalifa).  He  is  named  a  Man  on  account  of  the  universality  of  his

1  The  world  of  things  was  brought  into  existence  before  the  creation  of
Man,  in  so  far  as  every  Divine  attribute  (universal)  logically  implies  the
existence  of  its  corresponding  particular, which  is  the  Essence  indivi-
dualised by  that  relation,  whereas  Man  alone  is  the  Essence  individualised
by  all  relations  together.  Since  the  universe  could  not  manifest  the  unity  of
Being  until  Man  appeared  in  it,  it  was  like  an  unpolished  mirror  or  a  body
without  a  soul.

2  The  "most  holy  emanation"  (al-faydu  'l-aqdas)  is  the  eternal  mani-
festation of  the  Essence  to  itself.  This  emanation  is  received  by  the  essences
of  things  (al-a'ydnu  'l-thdbita)  in  the  plane  of  unity-in-plurality  (wdhidiyya),
i.e.,  in  the  Divine  knowledge  where  no  distinctions  exist.  From  one  point  of
view,  God  is  never  revealed  except  to  Himself;  from  another,  He  is  revealed
to  "recipient"  modes  of  Himself,  to  each  in  accordance  with  its  "capacity."

3  I  have  omitted  a  few  lines  here,  to  the  effect  that  Man  unites  all
aspects  of  God — the  oneness  of  the  Essence,  the  plurality  of  the  Divine
attributes,  and  the  world  of  Nature.  This  truth,  the  author  adds,  cannot  be
apprehended  save  by  mystical  perception.

156  Studies  in  Islamic  Mysticism  [CH.

organism  and  because  he  comprises  all  realities1.  Moreover,  he
stands  to  God  as  the  pupil  (insdn),  which  is  the  instalment  of
vision,  to  the  eye;  and  for  this  reason  he  is  named  a  Man.  By
means  of  him  God  beheld  His  creatures  and  had  mercy  on  them2.
He  is  Man,  the  originated  (in  his  body),  the  eternal  (in  his  spirit) ;
the  organism  everlasting  (in  his  essence),  the  Word  that  divides
and  unites.  The  universe  was  completed  by  his  existence,  for  he  is
to  the  universe  what  the  bezel  is  to  the  seal — the  bezel  whereon
is  graven  the  signature  that  the  King  seals  on  his  treasuries3.
Therefore  He  named  him  a  Vicegerent,  because  he  guards  the
creatures  (of  God)  just  as  the  King  guards  his  treasuries  by  sealing
them ;  and  so  long  as  the  King's  seal  remains  on  them,  none  dares  to
open  them  save  by  his  leave.  God  made  him  His  Vicegerent  in  the
guardianship  of  the  universe,  and  it  continues  to  be  guarded
whilst  this  PERFECT  MAN  is  there.  Dost  not  thou  see  that  when  he
shall  depart  (to  the  next  world)  and  his  seal  shall  be  removed  from
the  treasury  of  this  world,  there  shall  no  more  remain  in  it  that
which  God  stored  therein,  but  the  treasure  shall  go  forth,  and  every
type  shall  return  to  its  (ideal)  antitype,  and  all  existence  shall  be
transferred  to  the  next  world  and  sealed  on  the  treasury  of  the  next
world  for  ever  and  ever4?

This  was  the  knowledge  of  Seth,  and  it  is  his  knowledge  that
replenishes  every  spirit  that  discourses  on  such  a  theme  except  the
spirit  of  the  Seal  (the  Perfect  Man),  to  whom  replenishment  comes
from  God  alone,  not  from  any  spirit;  nay,  his  spirit  replenishes  all
other  spirits.  And  though  he  does  not  apprehend  that  of  himself
during  the  time  of  his  manifestation  in  the  body,  yet  in  respect  of
his  real  nature  and  rank  he  knows  it  all  essentially,  just  as  he  is
ignorant  thereof  in  respect  of  his  being  compounded  of  elements.
He  is  the  knowing  one  and  the  ignorant,  for  as  the  Origin  (God)  is
capable  of  endowment  with  contrary  attributes — the  Majestical,
the  Beautiful,  the  Inward,  the  Outward,  the  First,  the  Last — so  is
he  capable  thereof,  since  he  is  identical  (ayn)  with  God,  not  other

1  I.e..  the  etymological  explanation  of  the  name  insdn  is  that  Man
yu'nis  or  yu'dnis  (knows  or  is  familiar  with)  all  things:  the  three  Arabic
words  are  derived  from  the  same  root.

1  By  bringing  them  into  existence. Cf.  p.  98  supra.

1  Man's  heart  (qalb)  bears  the  impression  of  the  Greatest  Name  of  God
(f.«..  the  Essence)  together  with  all  the  other  Divine  Names.
f,  8  foil.

ll]  Some  Notes  on  the  Fustisu  'l-Hikam  157

than  He1.  Therefore  he  knows  and  knows  not,  perceives  and  per-
ceives not,  beholds  and  beholds  not2.

Mohammed  is  the  Logos  who  unites  the  Essence,  the
Attributes,  and  the  Names  in  his  single  nature  (fardiyya)3.

His  wisdom  is  singular  (fardiyya),  because  he  is  the  most
perfect  being  in  the  human  species :  therefore  existence  was  begun
and  ended  with  him,  for  he  was  a  prophet  whilst  Adam  was  water
and  clay4.

We  have  seen  whither  these  principles  lead  when  applied
in  the  sphere  of  positive  religion5.  Ibnu  'l-'Arabi's  doctrine
that  knowledge  is  sequent  to  the  object  known6  enables  him
formally  to  assert  men's  individual  responsibility  for  their
actions.

Fate  (Qadd),"  he  says,  "is  the  decree  of  God  concerning  things,
which  is  conditioned  by  His  knowledge  of  them;  and  His  knowledge
of  them  depends  on  what  they  give  Him  of  their  essential  nature.
Determination  (Qadar)  is  the  temporal  limitation  of  a  thing's
essential  nature.  Whatsoever  Fate  decrees  concerning  a  thing  is
decreed  (not  by  an  external  agent,  but)  by  means  of  the  thing
itself.  This  is  the  essence  of  the  mystery  of  Determination  (sirru
'l-Qadar)7."

In  other  words,  God's  knowledge  of  His  essence  is  His
knowledge  of  all  individual  souls :  the  soul  as  a  mode  of  Divine
being  determines  its  own  destiny.  Every  one's  portion  in  this
world  is  that  which  God  knows  he  will  receive,  and  which  is
all  that  he  is  capable  of  receiving.  God  Himself  cannot  alter
it8.  The  true  believer  here  and  now  was  a  true  believer  when
his  soul  existed  only  as  an  idea  in  God,  the  infidel  of  to-day
has  been  an  infidel  from  eternity.  Hence  God  says  in  the
Koran  (50,  28):  "I  am  not  unjust  to  My  servants,"  i.e.,  "I
did  not  ordain  the  unbelief  which  dooms  them  to  misery  and

1  Man  is  Absolute  Being  limited  by  individualisation  (ta'ayyun).  This
limitation,  however,  is  negative  and  unreal :  it  consists  in  failure  to  receive
all  individualisations,  to  be  endowed  with  all  attributes,  to  be  named  with
all  names.  In  so  far  as  Man  is  a  reality  (haqq)  he  is  not  a  human  creature
(khalq).  *  Fusus,  39  fol.

8  "Single"  is  equivalent  to  "threefold."  Cf.  p.  151  supra.

*  Fusus,  267.  6  P.  130  foil.  6  See  p.  151  supra.

7  Fusus,  161.  8  Jili  denies  this. See  p.  102.

158  Studies  in  Islamic  Mysticism  [CH.

then  demand  of  them  what  lay  not  in  their  power  to  perform.
...If  there  be  injustice,  they  are  the  unjust1."  "Therefore  do
not  praise  any  one  but  yourself  or  blame  any  one  but  yourself.
All  that  remains  to  God  is  praise  for  having  given  you
existence,  for  that  (existence)  is  His,  not  yours2."

Ibnu  'l-'Arabf  makes  the  same  distinction  as  Hallaj3
between  the  Divine  uncreated  will  (mashi'a),  which  decrees
nothing  that  does  not  come  to  pass,  and  the  mediate  com-
mand (amr),  which  is  the  religious  law  (shar1)  and  is  often
disobeyed.  God  decrees  the  establishment  of  the  law,  but  not
the  practice  of  what  is  enjoined  by  the  law.  "Sin"  is  dis-
obedience to  the  law  :  it  cannot  be  disobedience  to  the  Divine
will.

In  reality  the  Divine  will  decrees  only  the  coming  into  existence
of  the  act  itself  and  is  not  directed  towards  the  agent  in  whom  the
act  is  manifested.  That  the  act  should  not  occur  is  impossible,  but
in  the  individual  who  is  its  locus  (i.e.,  the  particular  agent)  it  is
sometimes  named  "obedience  to  the  Divine  command"  and  some-
times "disobedience  to  the  Divine  command,"  and  is  followed  by
praise  or  blame  accordingly4.

Thus,  although  the  sinner  violates  God's  law,  the  act  named
"sin"  by  us  is  necessitated  by  the  Divine  nature,  which
reveals  itself  in  acts  of  various  quality  corresponding  with  the
variety  of  its  attributes.  Reward  and  punishment  in  the
future  life  may  be  regarded  as  effects  of  obedience  or  dis-
obedience, i.e.,  Divine  manifestations  determined  by  the  state
of  the  individual  soul,  but  it  is  a  more  profound  view  that
God  Himself  feels  the  pleasure  and  the  pain5.

159.  «  Ibid.  77.

1  See  p.  54,  note  5.  *  Fu?ii?,  206  fol. Cf.  108-9.

•  Ibid.  105-6.  Job's  prayer  that  God  might  relieve  his  pain  is  justified
on  the  ground  that  in  praying  God  to  remove  it  he  really  removed  it  from
God,  inasmuch  as  man  is  the  outward  form  of  God.  Such  prayer  does  not
evince  a  want  of  submission  to  the  Divine  decree  (qadd),  but  dissatisfaction
with  the  thing  decreed  (al-magdl  bihi),  which  —  as  explained  above  —  is
decreed  by  means  of  the  individual  soul,  i.e.,  a  particular  mode  of  God,  not
the  absolute  God  (ibid.  218-9).  All  particular  modes,  together  with  the
effects  attached  to  them,  are  (as  such)  relations  devoid  of  reality.  "Effect
(athar)  belongs  to  the  non-existent"  (ibid.  224).  This  distinction  appears  in

n]  Some  Notes  on  the  Fususu  'l-Hikam  159

The  finite  God  of  religion  is  contrasted  with  the  infinite
God  of  mysticism  in  many  passages,  e.g.  :

The  believer  praises  the  God  who  is  in  his  form  of  belief  and
with  whom  he  has  connected  himself.  He  praises  none  but  himself,
for  his  God  is  made  by  himself,  and  to  praise  the  work  is  to  praise
the  maker  of  it  :  its  excellence  or  imperfection  belongs  to  its  maker.
For  this  reason  he  blames  the  beliefs  of  others,  which  he  would  not
do,  if  he  were  just.  Beyond  doubt,  the  worshipper  of  this  particular
God  shows  ignorance  when  he  criticises  others  on  account  of  their
beliefs.  If  he  understood  the  saying  of  Junayd,  "  The  colour  of  the
water  is  the  colour  of  the  vessel  containing  it1,"  he  would  not
interfere  with  the  beliefs  of  others,  but  would  perceive  God  in  every
form  and  in  every  belief.  He  has  opinion,  not  knowledge  :  there-
fore God  said,  "I  am  in  My  servant's  opinion  of  Me,"  i.e.,  "I  do
not  manifest  Myself  to  him  save  in  the  form  of  his  belief."  God  is
absolute  or  restricted,  as  He  pleases  ;  and  the  God  of  religious  belief
is  subject  to  limitations,  for  He  is  the  God  who  is  contained  in  the
heart  of  His  servant.  But  the  absolute  God  is  not  contained  by
any  thing,  for  He  is  the  being  of  all  things  and  the  being  of  Himself,
and  a  thing  is  not  said  either  to  contain  itself  or  not  to  contain
itself2.

It  may  be  noted  that  while  Ibnu  VArabi  admits  the
immutability  of  the  Koranic  revelation,  he  claims  for  Moslem
saints  the  right  to  modify  by  abrogation  or  addition  the
religious  code  that  is  based  on  ijtihdd,  i.e.,  on  non-Prophetic
authority,  and  to  put  aside  any  hadith  in  which  their  inner
light  detects  a  flaw3.

Like  Jili,  he  is  confident  that  all  souls  will  be  saved  at  last,
and  argues  it  in  his  own  scholastic  way:

Every  one  whom  Mercy  remembers  is  blessed,  and  there  is

a  verse  by  Jalalu'ddin  Rumi,  which  has  puzzled  Mr  Whinfield:
C^-wLa3  ^  .t^auLc  j&£*  O-sj'  "*  sa^  *°  him«  'Infidelity  is  the  thing
decreed,  not  the  decree  '  "  (Masnavi-i  Ma'navi,  tr.  and  abridged  by  E.  H.
Whinfield,  and  ed.,  p.  125).

1  I.e.,  God  is  revealed  in  different  forms  of  belief  according  to  the  capacity
of  the  believer.  The  mystic  alone  sees  that  He  is  One  in  all  forms,  for  the
mystic's  heart  (qalb)  is  all-receptive:  it  assumes  whatever  form  God  reveals
Himself  in,  as  wax  takes  the  impression  of  the  seal  (Fusus,  145).

2  Fustis,  282. Cf.  135.  3  Ibid.  205.

i6o  Studies  in  Islamic  Mysticism  [CH.

nothing  that  Mercy  has  not  remembered.  Mercy's  remembrance
(dhikr)  of  things  is  identical  with  her  bringing  them  into  existence1 :
therefore  every  existent  thing  is  an  object  of  mercy.  Do  not  let
thy  perception  of  what  I  say  be  hindered  by  the  doctrine  of  ever-
lasting punishment.  Know,  first,  that  Mercy's  bringing  into
existence  comprises  all,  so  that  the  pains  of  Hell  were  brought  into
existence  by  Mercy.  Then,  secondly,  Mercy  has  an  effect  in  two
ways :  (i)  an  essential  effect,  which  is  her  bringing  into  existence
every  'ayn  (individual  idea)  without  regard  to  purpose  or  absence
of  purpose,  or  to  what  is  congruous  or  incongruous,  for  she  was
beholding  every  'ayn  as  it  existed  in  the  knowledge  of  God  before
its  actual  existence,  and  therefore  she  saw  the  reality  (haqq),
created  in  men's  beliefs,  as  a  potentially  existent  'ayn,  and  showed
mercy  to  it  by  bringing  it  into  existence  (in  their  beliefs).  Accord-
ingly, we  have  said  that  the  reality  created  in  men's  beliefs  was
the  first  object  of  mercy,  after  mercy  was  shown  by  bringing  into
existence  the  individual  believers.  (2)  An  effect  produced  by
asking  (su'dl) :  those  who  are  veiled  from  the  truth  ask  God2  to
have  mercy  upon  them  in  their  belief,  but  the  mystics  ask  God
that  Mercy  may  subsist  in  them3,  and  they  ask  for  mercy  in
God's  name,  saying,  "O  God,  have  mercy  upon  us!  "  That  which
has  mercy  upon  them  is  the  subsistence  of  Mercy  in  them4.

The  remainder  of  this  passage,  though  one  can  readily  sec
its  drift,  is  too  abstruse  and  technical  to  bear  translation.
Ibnu  'l-'Arabf  agrees  with  Jili  that  the  damned,  even  if  they
remain  in  Hell-fire,  ultimately  cease  to  suffer  pain5.  Religious
intolerance  appeals  as  little  to  the  pantheist  who  says  "All  is
God  "  as  to  the  freethinking  pessimist  who  cries  out  that  all  is
vanity;  but  here  Ibnu  'l-'Arabf  feels  more  deeply  and  pleads
more  earnestly  than  Ma'arri.  What  God  created  in  His  own

1  Cf.  p.  98  foi.

1  I.e.,  the  finite  Lord  (rabb)  who  stands  in  a  special  and  different  relation
to  every  object  of  lordship  (marbilb).  Cf.  Fupii?,  95.

1  I.e.,  the  true  mystic  prays  that  he  may  be  "  illumined  "  with  the  Divine
attribute  of  Mercy  so  as  to  become  a  rdhim  (Aeu>?),  which  necessarily
involves  a  marhiim  (Aeoi'/pecot).  and  to  know  himself  as  a  mode  of  the
absolute  God  who  is  in  reality  both  the  rdhim  and  the  margin.

4  Fufiij,  225.

*  Ibid.  212.  Cf.  100.  They  may  experience  a  positive  pleasure  like  that
of  the  inhabitants  of  Paradise  (ibid.  137).

ll]  Some  Notes  on  the  Fusiisu  yl-I}ikam  161

image  let  none  take  upon  himself  to  destroy  except  by  God's
command.  Men  are  not  blameworthy  in  their  real  nature:
their  actions  are  praised  or  blamed,  but  all  action  belongs  to
God.  As  regards  those  who  legally  deserve  death — infidels  and
idolaters — God  rebuked  David  for  slaying  them,  and  when  he
said,  "For  Thy  sake,  O  Lord,"  God  answered  and  said,  "Yea,
but  are  not  they  My  servants?  "  It  is  right  to  be  indignant  on
God's  behalf,  yet  "compassion  towards  His  servants  has  the
greater  claim1."  Love  is  the  highest  form  in  which  God  is
worshipped2.  Ibnu  'l-'Arabi  anticipates  Wordsworth3  in  a
reasoned  tribute  to  the  heavenly  influence  of  children.

The  child  affects  the  father's  disposition,  so  that  he  descends
from  his  authority  and  plays  with  him  and  prattles  to  him  and
brings  his  mind  down  to  the  child's,  for  unconsciously  he  is  under
his  sway;  then  he  becomes  engrossed  with  educating  and  protecting
his  child  and  with  seeking  what  is  good  for  him  and  amusing  him,
that  he  may  not  be  unhappy.  All  this  is  the  work  of  the  child
upon  the  father  and  is  owing  to  the  power  of  his  state,  for  the  child
was  with  God  a  short  while  ago  (hadithu  'ahdin  bi-rabbihi)  since  he
is  newly  come  into  the  world,  whereas  the  father  is  further  away;
and  one  that  is  further  from  God  is  subject  to  one  that  is  nearer  to
Him4.

1  Ibid.  209  fol.

2  Ibid.  245. Elsewhere  (272)  he  remarks  that  God  is  never  seen  im-
materially and  that  the  vision  of  Him  in  women  is  the  most  perfect  of  all.

8  "Heaven  lies  about  us  in  our  infancy."  *  Fusus,  250.

N.  S.  II  T  I

162

CHAPTER  III

THE  ODES  OF  IBNU  'L-FARID1

Pcnsando  al  belctt  etci  non  cangia  o  verno.

MICHAEL  ANGELO.

ONE  of  the  deepest  differences  between  Arabs  and  Persians
shows  itself  in  the  extent  and  character  of  the  mystical  poetry
of  each  people.  As  regards  Persia,  the  names  of  Sana'i,  'Attar,
Jalalu'ddin  Rumi,  Sa'di,  Hafiz,  and  Jami  are  witnesses  enough.
Whether  quantity  or  quality  be  considered,  the  best  part
of  medieval  Persian  poetry  is  either  genuinely  mystical  in
spirit  or  is  so  saturated  with  mystical  ideas  that  it  will  never
be  more  than  half  understood  by  those  who  read  it  literally.
When  we  turn  to  Arabic  poetry  of  the  period  subsequent  to
the  rise  and  development  of  Sufism,  what  do  we  find?  No
lack  of  poets,  certainly,  though  few  of  them  reach  the  first
rank  and  their  output  is  scanty  compared  with  the  opulent
genius  of  their  Persian  contemporaries.  But  from  Mutanabbi
and  Ma'arrf  down  to  the  bards  unknown  in  Europe^  who
flourished  long  after  the  Baghdad  Caliphate  had  fallen,  it  is

1 I  have  used  the  following  editions  and  commentaries:

.  (a)  Diwdn  of  Ibnu  '1-Farid,  ed.  by  Rushayyid  b.  Ghalib  al-Dahdah

(Marseilles, 1853). This  contains  the  minor  poems,  with  a  grammatical

commentary  by  Hasan  al-Burini  as  well  as  extracts  from  the  mystical

commentary  of  'Abdu  '1-Ghani  al-Nabulusf.

(6) The  Td'iyyatu  'l-kubrd,  with  the  commentary  of  'Abdu  '1-Razzaq

al-Kashanf  bearing  the  title  Kashfu  'l-wujuhi  'l-ghurr  li-ma'dni  na?mi  'l-durr

(Cairo,  A.M.  1319).

(c)  The Td'iyyalu 'l-kubrd, with the  commentary  of  al-Nabulusl
entitled  Kashfu  'l-sirri  'l-ghdmid  fi  sharhi  Diwdn  Ibni  'l-Fdrid  (MS.  in  the
British  Museum,  Add.  7564-5  Rich.).  The  commentary  on  the  Td'iyya begins
at  f.  176  of  the  first  volume.

(d)  The  Td'iyyatu  'l-kubrd,  ed.  with  a  German  verse-translation  by
Hammer- Purgstall  (Vienna,  1854).

Concerning  the  Italian  translation  of  the  Td'iyyatu  'l-kubrd  by  Sac.
Ignazio  Di  Matteo  (Rome,  1917)  and  the  valuable  notice  of  it  by  Prof.
Nallino  which  appeared  in  Rivista  degli  studi  orientali,  vol.  vm  (Rome,  1919),
some  remarks  will  be  found  in  the  preface  to  this  volume.

The  abbreviations  Diwdn,  K.  and  N.  refer  to  (a),  (b)  and  (c)  respectively.

CH.  in]  The  Odes  of  Ibnu  yl-Fdrid  163

remarkable  how  seldom  they  possess  the  note  (as  Newman
would  say)  of  mysticism.  The  main  reason,  I  think,  lies  in
racial  endowment.  The  Arab  has  no  such  passion  for  an
ultimate  principle  of  unity  as  has  always  distinguished  the
Persians  and  Indians1.  He  shares  with  other  Semitic  peoples  an
incapacity  for  harmonising  and  unifying  the  particular  facts
of  experience :  he  discerns  the  trees  very  clearly,  but  not  the
wood.  Like  his  art,  in  which  "we  everywhere  find  a  delicate
sense  for  detail,  but  nowhere  large  apprehension  of  a  great  and
united  whole2,"  his  poetry,  intensely  subjective  in  feeling  and
therefore  lyrical  in  form,  presents  only  a  series  of  brilliant
impressions,  full  of  life  and  colour,  yet  essentially  fragments
and  moments  of  life,  not  fused  into  the  substance  of  universal
thought  by  an  imagination  soaring  above  place  and  time.
While  nature  keeps  Arabian  poetry  within  definite  bounds,
onvention  deprives  the  Arabic- writing  poet,  who  is  not
necessarily  an  Arab,  of  the  verse-form  that  is  most  suitable  for
continuous  narrative  or  exposition — the  allegorical,  romantic,
or  didactic  mathnawi — and  leaves  him  no  choice  but  to  fall
back  upon  prose  if  he  cannot  make  the  qasida  or  the  ghazal
answer  his  purpose.  Both  these  types  of  verse  are  associated
with  love :  the  ghazal  is  a  love-lyric,  and  the  qasida,  though  its
proper  motive  is  praise,  usually  begins  "with  the  mention  of
women  and  the  constantly  shifted  habitations  of  the  wandering
tribesmen  seeking  pasture  throughout  the  Winter  and  Spring;
the  poet  must  tell  of  his  love  and  its  troubles,  and,  if  he  likes,
may  describe  the  beauty  of  his  mistress3."  Thus  the  models  of
Arabic  mystical  poetry  are  the  secular  odes  and  songs  of  which
this  passion  is  the  theme;  and  the  imitation  is  often  so  close
that  unless  we  have  some  clue  to  the  writer's  intention,  it  may
not  be  possible  to  know  whether  his  beloved  is  human  or

1  Even  Zoroastrianism  does  not  exclude  the  monistic  principle.  It  seems
to  be  uncertain  whether  Ormuzd  and  Ahriman  stood  in  direct  and  equal
antagonism  to  each  other,  or  whether  Anra  Mainyu  (Ahriman),  the  evil
spirit,  and  Spenta  Mainyu,  the  good  spirit,  were  conceived  as  opposite
emanations  of  One  (Ormuzd)  who  is  above  them  both. In  any  case,  the
struggle  between  Ormuzd  and  Ahriman  ends  with  the  complete  destruction
of  the  latter.

2  Noldeke,  Sketches  from  Eastern  History,  tr.  by  J.  S.  Black,  p.  20.

3  Sir  Charles  Lyall,  Ancient  Arabian  Poetry,  p.  xix.

II— 2

164  Studies  in  Islamic  Mysticism  [CH.

divine — indeed,  the  question  whether  he  himself  always  knows
is  one  which  students  of  Oriental  mysticism  cannot  regard  as
impertinent.

Ibnu  'l-'Arabf,  a  great  theosophist  rather  than  a  great

poet,  deserves  to  be  mentioned  amongst  the  few  Arabs  who

have  excelled  in  this  ambiguous  style1 ;  but  its  supreme  master

is  Sharafu'ddfn  'Umar  Ibnu  '1-Farifl,  a  native  of  Cairo,  who  was

born  seventeen  years  after  Ibnu  'l-'Arabi  and  died  five  years

before  him  (A.D.  n82-i235)2.  The  two  seem  never  to  have  met.

The  description  of  Ibnu  'l-'Arabi  as  Ibnu  '1-Farid's  teacher

(ustddh)  rests  upon  a  far-fetched  interpretation  of  the  verse,

0  camel-driver  crossing  the  wilderness  with  thy  howdahs,

Kindly  halt  beside  the  hills  of  Tayyi' !

Here  N.  detects  an  allusion  to  Ibnu  'l-'Arabi,  who  belonged
to  the  Jayyi'  tribe3.

It  rarely  happens  that  the  outward  lives  of  mystics  are
eventful.  The  poet's  chief  biographer — his  grandson,  'Ali—
has  much  to  say  about  his  personal  beauty,  his  ecstatic
temperament,  his  generosity  and  unselfishness,  his  seclusion
from  the  world,  and  the  veneration  in  which  he  was  held  by
all4.  As  his  name  declares,  he  was  the  son  of  a  notary  (fdri$) .
In  his  youth  he  practised  religious  austerities  on  Mt  Muqattam
near  Cairo,  returning  at  intervals  to  attend  the  law-courts
with  his  father  and  study  theology.  One  day  he  encountered  a
saint  in  the  guise  of  an  old  greengrocer,  who  told  him  that  the
hour  of  his  illumination  was  at  hand,  but  that  he  must  go  to
the  Hijaz  to  receive  it.  Accordingly  Ibnu  '1-Farid  set  out  for
Mecca,  where  the  promise  was  fulfilled.  Many  of  his  odes
celebrate  the  hills  and  valleys  in  the  neighbourhood  of  the

1  The  present  writer  has  edited  and  translated  a  collection  of  mystical
odes  by  Ibnu  'l-'Arabi,  entitled  Tarjumdn  al-Ashwdq,  in  the  Oriental
Translation  Fund,  New  Series,  voL  xx  (London,  1911).

*  The  date  of  his  birth  is  usually  given  as  A.D.  1181,  but  see  Nallino,
op.  cit.,  p.  i,  note  3.

•  Diwdn.  p.  4,  1.  13  foil,  and  p.  75,  1.  i  foil.

4  The  Life  of  Ibnu  '1-Farid  by  his  grandson  has  been  printed  as  an  intro-
duction to  the  Diwdn  (pp.  3-24).  A  shorter  notice,  extracted  from  my  MS.
of  the  Shadhardtu  'l-dhahab,  was  published  in  the  JRAS.  for  1906,  pp.  800-
806.  See  also  Ibn  Khallikan,  No.  511  (De  Slane's  translation,  vol.  n,  p.  388
foil.).

in]  The  Odes  of  Ibnu  9l-Fdrid  165

Holy  City,  scenes  endeared  by  the  visions  and  ecstasies  which
they  recalled  to  his  mind.  After  fifteen  years'  absence  from
Egypt  he  heard  the  voice  of  the  saint,  who  was  then  on  his
deathbed,  bidding  him  return  to  Cairo,  in  order  to  pray  over
him  and  bury  him.  Ibnu  '1-Farid  obeyed,  and  having  per-
formed this  pious  duty  settled  in  Cairo  for  the  rest  of  his  life,
lodging  (it  is  said)  in  the  mosque  al-Azhar,  as  his  father  had
done.  The  biographer  'Ali,  whose  mother  was  a  daughter  of
Ibnu  1-Farid,  mentions  two  sons  of  the  poet,  Kamalu'ddin
Muhammad  and  'Abdu  '1-Rahman,  who  were  invested  with
the  khirqa1  by  the  famous  Sufi,  Shihabu'ddin  Abu  Hafs  'Umar
al-Suhrawardi  on  the  occasion  of  his  meeting  with  Ibnu
'1-Farid  at  Mecca  in  A.D.  1231.

The  Diwdn,  first  edited  by  the  aforesaid  'Ali  from  a
manuscript  in  the  author's  handwriting,  is  a  thin  volume
comprising  about  twenty  qasidas  and  qit'as  together  with
some  quatrains  (rubd'iyydt)  and  enigmas  (alghdz) .  The  longest
ode,  fheNazmu  'l-suluk  or  "the  Mystic's  Progress,"  generally
known  as  the  Td'iyyatu  'l-kubrd2,  has  been  omitted  from  the
Marseilles  edition,  which  is  otherwise  complete.  Owing  to  its
expository  and  descriptive  character  this  poem  stands  apart
from  the  purely  lyrical  odes,  and  I  have  treated  it  as  an
independent  work.  The  Wine  Ode  (Khamriyya)  and  several
other  pieces  have  been  published  with  a  French  prose  trans-
lation in  the  Anihologie  arabe  of  Grangeret  de  Lagrange
(Paris,  1828),  and  a  few  more  will  be  found  in  De  Sacy's
Chrestomathie  arabe.  Italy  possesses  a  prose  rendering  of  the
minor  poems  by  P.  Valerga  (Firenze,  1874).  There  is  nothing
in  English  except  some  fragments  which  hardly  amount  to
a  hundred  lines  in  all3.  I  hope  to  persuade  my  readers  that
the  Diwdn  of  Ibnu  '1-Farid,  though  it  will  not  please  every

1  See  p.  22  supra.

2  I.e.  the  Greater  Ode  rhyming  in  t. It  is  so  named  in  order  to  distin-
guish it  from  the  Td'iyyatu  'l-sughrd,  i.e.  the  Lesser  Ode  rhyming  in  t
(Diwdn,  p.  142  foil.).

3  See  Professor  Browne's  Literary  History  of  Persia,  vol.  II,  p.  504;  my
Literary  History  of  the  Arabs,  p.  397  *ol.,  and  The  Don  and  the  Dervish,
pp.  105-9. A  Latin  version  of  one  entire  ode  (Diwdn,  p.  306  foil.)  is  given
by  Sir  William  Jones  in  his  Poeseos  Asiaticae  commentarii  (Works,  ed.  by
Lord  Teignmouth,  vol.  vi,  p.  74).

1 66  Studies  in  Islamic  Mysticism  [CH.

taste,  is  too  curious  and  exquisite  to  be  left  on  one  side  by
those  who  take  an  interest  in  Oriental  poetry.

Concerning  the  subtle  quality  of  his  thought  no  less  than
of  his  style,  it  would  be  hard  to  better  what  a  French  critic
wrote  ninety  years  ago :

L'intelligence  parfaite  de  ses  productions  ne  peut  6tre  que  le
fruit  d'une  etude  longue  et  approfondie  de  la  po6sie  arabe.  Deux
causes  principales  les  rendent  d'un  difficile  acces.  La  premiere,
c'est  qu'il  arrive  souvent  k  ce  poete  de  quintessencier  le  sentiment ;
et  alors  ses  idees  sont  si  subtiles,  si  deliees,  et,  pour  ainsi  dire,  si
impalpables,  qu'elles  echappent  presque  aux  poursuites  du  lecteur
le  plus  attentif:  souvent  meme  elles  disparoissent  des  qu'on  les
touche  pour  les  transporter  dans  une  autre  langue.  On  voit  qu'il
a  pris  plaisir,  par  un  choix  de  pensdes  extraordinaires,  et  par  la
singularity  des  tours,  &  mettre  £  1'epreuve  la  sagacit6  de  ceux  qui
etudient  ses  ouvrages.  Au  reste,  les  lettr£s  de  1'Orient  pensent
qu'un  poete  est  sans  genie  et  sans  invention,  ou  bien  qu'il  compte
peu  sur  leur  intelligence,  quand  il  n'a  pas  soin  de  leur  menager  des
occasions  frequentes  de  faire  briller  cette  penetration  qui  salt
decouvrir  les  sens  les  plus  caches.  II  faut  done  que  le  poete  arabe,
si'l  veut  obtenir  les  suffrages  et  1'admiration  des  connoisseurs,
n'oublie  pas  de  porter  quelquefois  k  1'exces  le  raffinement  et  la
subtilit6  dans  ses  compositions,  d'aiguiser  ses  pensees,  et  de  les
envelopper  de  telle  sorte  dans  les  expressions,  qu'elles  se  presentent
au  lecteur  comme  des  enigmes,  qu'elles  reveillent  son  attention,
piquent  sa  curiosite,  et  mettent  en  jeu  toutes  les  facultcs  de  son
esprit.  Or,  il  faut  convenir  qu'  Omar  ben-Faredh  n'a  point
manquS  k  ce  devoir  prescrit  aux  poetes  arabes,  et  qu'il  n'a  point
voulu  que  ses  lecteurs  lui  reprochassent  de  leur  avoir  enlev£  les
occasions  de  montrer  leur  sagacitS1.

This  describes  very  well  a  general  and  obvious  feature  of
Ibnu  'l-Fari<J's  style,  a  feature  which  is  entirely  absent  both
from  pre-Islamic  and  early  Islamic  poetry,  although  since  the
time  of  Mutanabbf,  who  first  brought  it  into  prominence,  it
has  maintained  itself,  not  merely  as  a  local  or  temporary
fashion  but  with  all  the  force  of  a  fixed  and  almost  universally
accepted  tradition.  While  Ibnu  '1-Farid  has  nothing  in  common

1  Grangeret  de  Lagrange,  Anlhologie  arabe,  p.  118.

ill]  The  Odes  of  Ibnu  'l-Fdrid  167

with  the  imitatorum  seruum  pecus,  he  neither  attempted  nor
desired  to  swim  against  the  stream;  and  it  is  probable  that
only  his  mysticism  saved  him  from  the  worst  excesses  of
metaphysical  wit.  In  him,  as  in  Meleager  and  Petrarch,  "the
religion  of  love  is  reduced  to  a  theology;  no  subtlety,  no
fluctuation  of  fancy  or  passion  is  left  unregistered1."  If  his
verse  abounds  in  fantastic  conceits,  if  much  of  it  is  enigmatic
to  the  last  degree,  the  conceits  and  enigmas  are  not,  as  a  rule,
rhetorical  ornaments  or  intellectual  conjuring  tricks,  but  like
tendrils  springing  from  a  hidden  root  are  vitally  connected
with  the  moods  of  feeling  which  they  delineate.  It  may  be
difficult  to  believe,  what  is  related  on  the  testimony  of  his
most  intimate  friends,  that  he  used  to  dictate  his  poems  at  the
moment  when  he  came  out  of  a  deep  ecstatic  trance,  during
which  "he  would  now  stand,  now  sit,  now  repose  on  his  side,
now  lie  on  his  back,  wrapped  like  a  dead  man;  and  thus
would  he  pass  ten  consecutive  days,  more  or  less,  neither
eating  nor  drinking  nor  speaking  nor  stirring."  His  style  and
diction  jresemble  the  choicest  and  finest  jewel-work  of  a
fastidious  artist  rather  than  the  first-fruits  of  divine  in-
spiration. Yet  I  am  not  inclined  to  doubt  the  statement  that
his  poetry  was  composed  in  an  abnormal  manner2.  The  history
of  mysticism  records  numerous  instances  of  the  kind.  Blake
said  that  he  was  drunk  with  intellectual  vision  whenever  he
took  a  pencil  or  graver  in  his  hand.  "  St  Catherine  of  Siena,"
we  are  told,  "dictated  her  great  Dialogue  to  her  secretaries
whilst  in  the  state  of  ecstasy3."  "When  Jalalu'ddin  Rumi
was  drowned  in  the  ocean  of  Love  he  used  to  take  hold  of  a
pillar  in  his  house  and  set  himself  turning  round  it.  Meanwhile
he  versified  and  dictated,  and  people  wrote  down  the  verses4."
Since  the  form  of  such  automatic  composition  will  largely
depend  on  materials  stored  within  the  mystic's  brain,  and  on
the  literary  models  with  which  he  is  familiar,  we  need  not  be
surprised  if  his  visions  and  revelations  sometimes  find
spontaneous  utterance  in  an  elaborately  artificial  style.  The

1  J.  W.  Mackail,  Select  Epigrams  from  the  Greek  Anthology,  p.  34.

2  Preface  to  the  Diwdn,  p.  u,  1.  20.

3  Evelyn  Underbill,  Mysticism,  p.  352.

4  Introd.  to  Selected  Poems  from  the  Dwdni  Shamsi  Tabriz,  p.  XL.

1 68  Studies  in  Islamic  Mysticism  [CH.

intense  passion  and  glowing  rapture  of  Ibnu  'l-FaricJ's  poetry
are  in  keeping  with  this  account  of  the  way  in  which  it  was
produced1.  That  he  may  have  written  it  while  not  under  the
influence  of  ecstasy,  I  can  conceive2;  but  that  he  wrote  it  in
cold  blood,  for  the  sake  of  those  who  might  enjoy  sharpening
their  wits  upon  it,  seems  to  me  incredible.

The  double  character  of  Islamic  mystical  poetry  makes  it
attractive  to  many  who  are  out  of  touch  with  pure  mysticism.
Ibnu  'l-Fari4  would  not  be  so  popular  in  the  East  if  he  were
understood  entirely  in  a  spiritual  sense.  The  fact  that  parts
of  the  Diwdn  cannot  be  reasonably  understood  in  any  other
sense  would  not,  perhaps,  compel  us  to  regard  the  whole  as
spiritual,  unless  that  view  of  its  meaning  were  supported  by
the  poet's  life,  the  verdict  of  his  biographers  and  commen-
tators, and  the  agreement  of  Moslem  critical  opinion ;  but  as
things  are,  we  can  declare,  with  Nabulusi,  that  "in  every
erotic  description,  whether  the  subject  thereof  be  male  or
female,  and  in  all  imagery  of  gardens,  flowers,  rivers,  birds
and  the  like  he  refers  to  the  Divine  Reality  manifested  in
phenomena,  and  not  to  those  phenomena  themselves3."  This
Reality,  i.e.  God  (or,  in  some  places,  Mohammed  conceived
as  the  Logos)  is  the  Beloved  whom  the  poet  addresses  and
celebrates  under  many  names — now  as  one  of  the  heroines  of
Arabian  Minnesong,  now  as  a  gazelle  or  a  driver  of  camels  or
an  archer  shooting  deadly  glances  from  his  eye;  most
frequently  as  plain  He  or  She.  Th£_Qde&  retain  the  forau
conventions,  topics,  and  images  of  ordinary  love-poetry :  llieir

1  Of  course  these  remarks  do  not  apply  to  many  passages  in  the  Td'iyyatu
'l-kubrd,  which  in  respect  of  its  didactic  purpose  bears  the  same  relation  to
the  minor  odes  as  the  Masnavi  of  Jalalu'ddin  Rumi  to  his  Diwdn.

•  Prof.  Nallino  (op.  cit  p.  17)  points  out  that  at  a  later  period  the  Odes
were  often  chanted  in  the  musical  concerts  of  the  Sufis  and  suggests  that
they  were  composed  for  this  purpose.

•  Diwdn,  p.  52,  1.  8  foil. Biirinl  (ibid.  p.  202,  12  foil.)  asserts  that  Ibnu
'1-Farid's  poetry  is  not  invariably  mystical.  The  two  verses  which  he  cites
might  bear  an  allegorical  sense  as  easily  as  many  of  a  similar  kind  in  the
Song  of  Solomon;  and,  in  any  case,  they  are  extracted  from  rubd'is.  The  fact
that  Ibnu  '1-Farid  is  known  to  have  written  one  amatorious  epigram  (Diwdn,
P-  549,  9  fol.  Ibn  Khallikan,  De  Slane's  translation,  vol.  n,  p.  389),  and  that
he  may  have  written  others,  proves  nothing  against  those  who  find  mysticism
in  every  line  of  the  Odes.

in]  The  Odes  of  Ibnu  'l-Fdrid  169

inner  meaning  hardly  ever  obtrudes  itself,  although  its
presence  is  everywhere  suggested  by  a  strange  exaltation  of
feeling,  fine-drawn  phantasies  in  which  (as  the  same  French
critic  remarks)  the  poet  is  rapt  "au-dela  des  bornes  de  la
droite  raison,"  mysterious  obscurities  of  diction  and  subtle
harmonies  of  sound.  If  Ibnu  '1-Farid  had  followed  the  example
of  Ibnu  '!-'  Arabi  and  written  a  commentary  on  his  own  poems,
it  might  have  added  considerably  to  our  knowledge  of  his
mystical  beliefs,  but  I  am  not  sure  that  it  would  have  had
much  greater  interpretative  value  than  the  work  of  his
commentators,  who  profess  to  explain  the  esoteric  meaning  of
every  verse  in  the  Odes.  While  such  analysis  may  be  useful
within  certain  limits,  we  should  recognise  how  little  it  is
capable  of  revealing.  An  eminent  scholar  came  to  Ibnu
'1-Farid  and  asked  permission  to  write  a  commentary  on  his  »
masterpiece,  the  Nazmu  'l-Suluk.  "In  how  many  volumes?  '64L.
"Two."  The  poet  smiled.  "Had  I  wished,"  said  he,  "I  coula  )
have  written  two  volumes  of  commentary  on  every  verse  of
it1."  The  more  interpreters,  the  more  interpretations,  as  those
who  have  given  time  and  labour  to  the  study  of  mysticism
well  know.  Poetry  of  this  kind  suggests  more  than  it  says,
and  means  all  that  it  may  suggest.

We  cannot  do  without  the  commentators,  however,  and
they  will  help  us  a  good  deal  if  we  learn  to  use  them  dis-
creetly. When  they  handle  their  text  like  philologists  and  try
to  fasten  precise  mystical  significations  upon  individual  words
and  phrases,  the  process  is  as  fatal  to  poetry  as  the  result  is
likely  to  be  far  from  truth.  Against  this,  they  have  the
immense  advantage  of  being  Sufis,  that  is  to  say,  of  knowing
through  tradition  and  their  own  experience  what  Europeans
can  only  acquire  by  study  and  perceive  by  sympathy.  They
are  the  poet's  fellow-citizens  in  the  ideal  world  from  which
he  drew  his  inspiration;  they  have  dreamed  his  dreams  and
travelled  on  his  path  towards  his  goal;  they  do  not  miss  the
main  drift  of  his  allegory  even  though  they  err  in  some  of  the
details.

Any  one  who  has  read  the  Diwdn  of  Ibnu  '1-Farid  in

1  Preface  to  the  Diwdn,  p.  n,  1.  I  foil.

I  jo  Studies  in  Islamic  Mysticism  [CH.

Arabic  will  admit  that  while  a  complete  rendering  into
English  verse  would  be  a  quixotic  enterprise,  some  entire  odes
and  not  a  few  passages  in  others  are  suitable  for  that  form  of
translation.  Therefore,  instead  of  confining  myself  to  prose,  I
have  sought  here  and  there  to  capture  the  shadows  at  least  of
things  that  no  prose  version  can  reproduce.

Md  bayna  ddli  'l-munhand  wa-zildlihi
datta  'l-mutayyamu  wa-'htadd  bi-daldlihil.

Where  lote-trees  o'er  the  valley  cast  their  shade

The  frenzied  lover  strayed.

Alone  with  thoughts  confusing

Which  love  put  in  his  brain,

He  lost  and  in  his  losing

Found  the  way  again :

Lo,  on  yon  gorge's  southern  slope

The  vision  long-desired,  that  far  seemed  from  his  hope.

This  is  'Aqiq2,  my  friend!

Halt !  here  to  pass  were  strange.

Feign  rapture,  if  thou  be

Not  rapt  indeed,  and  let  thine  eye  range  free :

Mine,  with  tears  overflowing,  cannot  range.

Ask  the  Gazelle  that  couches  in  this  valley,

Knows  he  my  heart,  its  passion  and  distress?

Delighting  with  his  beauty's  pride  to  dally,

He  recks  not  of  my  love's  abasedness.

My  dead  self  be  his  ransom ! Tis  no  giving:

I  am  all  his,  dead  or  living !

Think  you  he  knows  that  I  his  absence  love

Even  as  I  loved  his  presence?  that  I  move

Nightly  his  image  to  my  waking  eye?—

A  phantasy  within  a  phantasy3.

So  let  me  ne'er  have  savour

Of  peace  from  counsellors,  as  I  never  bent

A  listening  ear  towards  their  argument !

By  his  sweet  grace  and  favour,

1  Diwdn,  p.  263  foil. Prof.  Browne  has  given  a  translation  of  this  ode  in
his  Literary  History  of  Persia,  vol.  n,  p.  504.

*  A  valley  with  fountains  and  date-palms  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Medina.

*  The  dream-form  (khaydl)  of  the  Beloved  in  the  poet's  fancy  (khaydl).

in]  The  Odes  of  Ibnu  yl-Fdrid  171

I  vow  my  heart  tired  not,  when  he  did  tire,

Of  love-desire.

Woe's  me,  'Udhayb's  fair  water  might  I  win

And  with  its  coldness  quench  the  flames  within !

But  since  my  longing  durst

Not  soil  that  noble  stream,

Ah !  how  I  thirst

For  its  mirage  agleam !

The following ode, though characteristically subtle,
presents  no  special  difficulties :

Tih  daldl™  fa-anta  ahlun  li-dhdkd
wa-tahakkam  fa-'l-husnii  qad  a'tdkd1.
Feign  coy  disdain,  for  well  art  thou  entitled;
And  domineer,  for  Beauty  hath  given  thee  power.
Thine  is  the  word :  then  will  whatso  thou  wiliest,
Since  over  me  Beauty  hath  made  thee  ruler.
If  in  death  I  shall  be  with  thee  united,
Hasten  it  on,  so  may  I  be  thy  ransom !
And  try,  in  all  ways  thou  deem'st  good,  my  passion,
For  where  thy  pleasure  is,  my  choice  attends  it.
Whate'er  betide,  thou  to  myself  art  nearer
Than  I,  since  but  for  thee  I  had  not  existed.
Not  of  thy  peers  am  I :  enough  of  glory,
That  loving  thee  I  bow  in  lowly  worship.
And  though  I  claim  not — 'twere  too  high  relation —
Favour  with  thee,  and  thou  in  truth  my  Master,
Yet  me  sufficeth  to  be  thought  to  love  thee
And  counted  by  my  folk  amongst  thy  slain  ones.
Yea,  in  this  tribe  thou  own'st  a  dead  man,  living
Through  thee,  who  found  it  sweet  to  die  for  love's  sake;
A  slave  and  chattel  who  never  pined  for  freedom
Nor,  hadst  thou  left,  would  let  thee  leave  him  lonely;
Whom  beauty  veiled  by  awe  doth  so  enravish,
He  feels  delicious  even  that  veil  of  torment,
When  thou,  brought  nigh  to  him  by  hope's  assurance,
Art  borne  afar  by  fear  of  sundering  darkness.
Now,  by  his  ready  advance  when  thee  he  visits,

1  Diwdn,  p.  230  foil.

1  72  Studies  in  Islamic  Mysticism  [CH.

By  his  alarmed  retreat  when  thou  affright'st  him,

I  swear  mine  heart  is  melted  :  oh,  allow  it

To  crave  thee  whilst  it  hath  of  hope  a  remnant  ;

Or  bid  sleep  (yet,  methinks,  'twill  disobey  thee,

Obedient  else)  pass  o'er  mine  eyelids  lightly  ;

For  in  a  dream,  perchance,  will  rise  before  me

Thy  phantom  and  reveal  to  me  a  mystery.

But  if  thou  wilt  not  stir  my  life's  last  embers

With  the  hand  of  hope,  and  thy  All  needs  must  naught  me1,

And  if  Love's  law  not  even  a  fitful  slumber

Lets  trespass  on  my  lids,  and  bans  our  meeting,

Spare  me  an  eye,  that  some  day,  ere  I  perish,

Haply  I  may  behold  those  who  beheld  thee2!

Alas,  how  far  is  that  desire  ! Nay,  never

Mine  eyelashes  durst  kiss  the  earth  thou  tread'st  on,

For  had  my  messenger  brought  a  word  of  kindness

From  thee,  and  life  were  mine,  I  would  cry,  "Take  it  !  "

Enough  of  blood  hath  welled  from  these  chapped  eyelids  :

Ah,  have  I  not  yet  shown  what  shall  content  thee?

Guard  safe  against  thine  hate  a  man  afflicted,

Who  loved  thee  fondly  ere  he  knew  what  love  was  !

Grant  that  uncivil  flyting  tongues  forbade  him

To  go  near  thee:  by  whom  wast  thou  forbidden?

Grant  that  thy  beauty  moved  him  to  such  passion,

Yet  who  moved  thee  to  part  from  him? Who,  think'st  thou?

Who,  think'st  thou,  gave  the  sentence  thou  should'st  scorn  him?

Who  gave  the  sentence  thou  should'st  love  another?

By  my  heart-brokenness  and  humiliation,

By  my  most  bitter  need,  by  thine  abundance,

Leave  me  not  to  the  forces  that  betrayed  me

Of  mine  own  strength  :  to  thee  I  turn  in  weakness.

Thou  didst  ill  use  me  when  I  had  some  patience  :

Now  for  its  loss  God  help  thee  to  console  me  !

Scorn  upon  scorn  ! It  may  be  thou  wilt  pity

My  plaint,  if  but  to  hear  me  say,  "It  may  be."

The  mischief-makers  shamed  thee  with  my  parting

Literally,  "if  thy  everlastingness  (baqd)  demands  my  passing-away

According  to  N.  the  words  "those  who  beheld  thee"  refer  to  the  Light
of  Mohammed,  which  emanated  from  the  Light  of  God.

Ill]  The  Odes  of  Ibnu  yl-Fdrid  173

And  gave  out  that  thy  love  I  had  forgotten.
I  loved  not  with  their  hearts,  that  I  should  ever
Forget  thee — God  forfend ! — so  let  them  babble !
Thee  how  should  I  forget? At  every  lightning
That  flashes,  lo,  mine  eye  starts  up  to  meet  thee.
If  'neath  the  light  of  thy  lithdm1  thou  smilest
Or  breathest  soft — and  on  the  wind  thy  news  comes —
Glad  is  my  soul  when  clear  dawn  of  thy  side-teeth
Breaks  on  my  sight,  and  keenly  blows  thy  fragrance.
Within  thy  borders  all  do  love  thee,  natheless
My  single  worth  buys  all  within  thy  borders2.
There  dwells  in  thee  a  notion  that  endeared  thee
To  mind's  eye,  fixed  my  gaze  on  thy  perfections.
The  lords  of  beauty  thou  in  grace  and  goodness
Excellest  so,  they  hunger  for  thy  notion.
Beneath  my  flag  the  lovers  shall  be  gathered
To  Judgment,  as  beneath  thine  all  the  fair  ones.
From  thee  dire  sickness  never  turned  me :  wherefore
Turn'st  thou  from  me,  then,  O  disdainful  charmer?
Thou  art  present  with  me  in  thine  absence  from  me,
And  in  thy  cruelty  I  feel  a  kindness.
Taught  by  Desire  to  wake  through  night's  long  hours,
Mine  eye  hath  won  to  see  thee  while  it  sleeps  not.

0  happy,  happy  night  in  which  thy  vision

1  hunted  after  with  my  net  of  waking !
The  full  moon,  being  thy  copy,  represented
To  my  unslumbering  eye  thy  face's  image3;
And  in  such  alien  form  thine  apparition
Cooled  mine  eye's  fever :  I  saw  thee,  none  other.
Thus  Abraham  of  old,  the  Friend  of  Allah,
Upturned  his  eye,  what  time  he  scanned  the  heavens4.

1  A  veil  covering  the  lower  part  of  the  face.

a  "Within  thy  borders":  literally  "within  thy  preserve  (fyima)."  The
Divine  Essence  is  preserved  (made  inaccessible)  by  the  spiritual  and  sensible
forms  in  which  it  veils  itself.  As  the  Bedouin  poet  brags  about  himself  in  order
to  assert  the  dignity  of  his  tribe,  so  when  the  Mohammedan  saints  boast  of  the
unique  endowments  which  God  has  bestowed  upon  them,  it  is  not  self-
glorification,  but  thanksgiving  to  Him  "from  whom  all  blessings  flow."

8  Real  Being  is  manifested  in  phenomena,  just  as  the  light  of  the  sun  is
reflected  by  the  moon.

4  See  Kor.  6,  76  foil. "And  when  the  night  overshadowed  him,  he  saw  a

174  Studies  in  Islamic  Mysticism  [CH.

Now  is  the  pitchy  gloom  for  us  made  dazzling,
Since  thou  thy  splendour  gav'st  me  for  my  guidance;
And  when  thou  from  mine  eye  in  outward  seeming
Art  gone,  I  cast  it  inward,  there  to  find  thee.
Of  Badr  are  they  with  whom  by  night  thou  faredst —
Nay,  not  of  Badr:  they  journeyed  in  thy  daylight1.
That  men  do  borrow  radiance  from  mine  outward,
Tis  not  strange,  when  mine  inward  is  thy  dwelling.
Ever  since  thou  to  kiss  thy  mouth  didst  call  me,
Musk  lingers  wheresoe'er  my  name  is  spoken,
And  the  rich  air  teems  in  every  place  of  meeting
With  spice — a  metaphor  of  thine  aroma.
The  beauty  of  all  things  seen  tempted  me,  saying,
"Enjoy  me,"  but  I  said,  "I  aim  beyond  thee.
Beguile  not  me,  thyself  by  my  Beloved
Distraught,  in  whom  thou  seem'st  but  an  idea2.
Averted,  over  men's  souls  he  is  mighty3;
Unveiled,  he  makes  the  ascetics  be  his  vowed  slaves.
For  his  sake  I  exchanged  my  truth  for  error,
My  right  for  wrong,  my  modesty  for  ill-fame4.
My  heart  confessed  his  love  One:  then  my  turning
To  thee  were  dualism,  a  creed  I  like  not."

star,  and  he  said,  This  is  my  Lord;  but  when  it  set,  he  said,  I  like  not  gods
which  set.  And  when  he  saw  the  moon  rising,  he  said,  This  is  my  Lord;  but
when  he  saw  it  set,  he  said,  Verily,  if  my  Lord  direct  me  not,  I  shall  become
one  of  the  people  who  go  astray"  (Sale's  translation).

1  In  this  verse  there  is  an  untranslatable  play  on  the  double  meaning  of
Badr,  which  signifies  (i)  a  place  between  Mecca  and  Medina  where  the
Prophet  won  his  memorable  victory  over  the  Meccan  idolaters  in  A.D.  624;
(2)  a  full  moon.  Thus  the  ahlu  Badr  are  to  Moslems  more  than  what
oi  napaewvondx*"  were  to  the  Greeks  of  Plato's  time,  while  the  phrase
also  suggests  the  perfect  illumination  reserved  for  adepts  in  mysticism
politics  of  forty  years  ago  would  provide  an  exact  parallel,  if  the
Moonlighters  were  regarded  as  national  heroes  and  saints.  The  poet  says
that  the  men  of  Badr,  i.e.,  the  noble  company  of  mystics,  journey  not  so
much  in  the  light  which  phenomena  derive  from  Reality  as  in  the  light  of
ity  itself.

"  Material  beauty  is  not  worthy  to  be  loved  except  in  so  far  as  it  is  one
of  the  ideas  (attributes  and  manifestations)  of  Absolute  Beauty.

*  When  God  withdraws  Himself  (from  the  inward  eye  of  the  mystic),  He
still  lays  His  commands  on  the  soul,  so  that  it  performs  its  predestined  good
and  evil  works.

4  Divine  Love  sweeps  away  the  conventional  standards  of  truth  and  right
and  honour.

ill]  The  Odes  of  Ibnu  'l-Fdrid  175

Beauty  itself  is  mad  with  passion  for  him —

0  friend  that  chid'st  me,  may  I  lack  thy  friendship !
Hadst  thou  his  beauty  seen — ne'er  shalt  thou  see  it —
That  me  enthralled,  it  surely  had  enthralled  thee.

At  a  glimpse  of  him  my  wakefulness  I  pardon,
And  "This  for  that"  I  say  to  my  aching  eyeballs.

After  reading  a  little  of  Ibnu  '1-Farid's  poetry,  one  can
take  a  general  view  of  the  whole.  All  his  odes  are  variations
on  a  single  theme,  and  the  variations  themselves  have  a
certain  interior  uniformity.  Not  only  do  the  same  "leitmotifs"
recur  again  and  again,  but  the  same  metaphors,  conceits  and
paradoxes  are  continually  reappearing  in  new  dress.  Although
translators  must  regret  this  monotony,  which  they  cannot
make  other  than  tedious,  I  think  most  of  them  would  agree
that  the  poet  has  triumphed  over  it  by  means  of  the  delicacy
of  his  art,  the  beauty  of  his  diction,  and  the  "linked  sweet-
ness" of  his  versification — powerful  spells  to  enchant  those
who  read  him  in  his  own  language.  The  Diwdn  is  a  miracle  of
literary  accomplishment,  yet  the  form  would  be  cold  and
empty  without  the  spirit  which  it  enshrines.  Like  Sidney,
Ibnu  '1-Farid  looked  into  his  heart  before  he  wrote.  His  verse
is  charged  with  the  fire  and  energy  of  his  inmost  feelings.

Where  eyes  encounter  souls  in  battle-fray,

1  am  the  murdered  man  whom  'twas  no  crime  to  slay.
At  the  first  look,  ere  love  in  me  arose,

To  that  all-glorious  beauty  I  was  vowed.

God  bless  a  racked  h,eart  crying,

And  lids  that  passion  will  not  let  me  close,

And  ribs  worn  thin,

Their  crookedness  wellnigh  to  straightness  shaped

By  the  glow  within,

And  seas  of  tears  whence  I  had  never  'scaped

But  for  the  fire  of  sighing !

How  sweet  are  maladies  which  hide

Me  from  myself,  my  loyal  proofs  to  Love !

Though  after  woeful  eve  came  woeful  dawn,

It  could  not  move

Once  to  despair  my  spirit :  I  never  cried

ij6  Studies  in  Islamic  Mysticism  [CH.

To  Agony,  "  Begone ! "
I  yearn  to  every  heart  that  passion  shook,
And  every  tongue  that  love  made  voluble,
And  every  deaf  ear  stopped  against  rebuke,
And  every  lid  not  dropped  in  slumbers  dull.
Out  on  a  love  that  hath  no  melting  eyes !
Out  on  a  flame  from  which  no  rapture  flies1 !

In  exquisite  contrast  with  this  high-wrought  prelude  is
another  passage  of  the  same  ode,  describing  the  mystic's
vision  of  the  Divine  beauty  revealing  itself  in  all  things
beautiful.

Though  he  be  gone,  mine  every  limb  beholds  him
In  every  charm  and  grace  and  loveliness :
In  music  of  the  lute  and  flowing  reed
Mingled  in  consort  with  melodious  airs ;
And  in  green  hollows  where  in  cool  of  eve
Gazelles  roam  browsing,  or  at  break  of  morn;
And  where  the  gathered  clouds  let  fall  their  rain
Upon  a  flowery  carpet  woven  of  blooms;
And  where  at  dawn  with  softly-trailing  skirts
The  zephyr  brings  to  me  his  balm  most  sweet ;
And  when  in  kisses  from  the  flagon's  mouth
I  suck  wine-dew  beneath  a  pleasant  shade2.

Here  the  Moslem  commentator,  startled  for  a  moment  out
of  his  lucubrations  on  syntax  and  rhetoric,  pauses  to  pay  a
tribute  of  admiration  to  the  poet,  a  tribute  which  is  the  more
noteworthy  because  in  these  six  verses  Ibnu  '1-Farid  comes  as
near  as  he  ever  does  to  the  modern  European  conception  of
what  poetry  should  be.  Unadorned  simplicity  is  the  antithesis
of  his  style.  For  our  taste,  he  has  far  too  much  of  the  gift  of

1  Dlwdn,  p.  331  foil.

1  Ibid.  p.  347,  1.  6  foil.  Cf .  Shelley,  Epipsychidion :

In  solitudes

Her  voice  came  to  me  through  the  whispering  woods.

And  from  the  fountains,  and  the  odours  deep

Of  flowers...

And  from  the  breezes  whether  low  or  loud,

And  from  the  rain  of  every  passing  cloud,

And  from  the  singing  of  the  summer  birds,

And  from  all  sounds,  all  silence.

Ill]  The  Odes  of  Ibnu  yl-Fdrid  177

Holofernes:  he  plays  with  sound  and  sense  alike,  though  in
the  daintiest  and  subtlest  fashion  imaginable.  Concerning
his  verbal  euphuism  a  treatise  might  be  written.  One  verse —
an  extreme  instance,  no  doubt — will  serve  as  a  sample  of
many:

Amd  laki  'an  saddin  amdlaki  'an  sadin
li-zalmiki  zulman  minki  maylun  li-atfati

Hast  thou  no  desire  to  withdraw  from  a  resistance  that  has  caused
thee  to  turn  away,  with  wrong  on  thy  part,  from  one  who
thirsts  for  the  water  of  thy  teeth1?

His  extravagant  flights  of  fancy  are  generally  accom-
panied by  an  equal  exaltation  of  feeling  and  sustained  by
the  fiery  element  in  which  they  move ;  at  times,  however,  they
sink  into  something  very  like  the  "sweet  smoke  of  rhetoric,"
*£.,
I  sowed  roses  on  his  cheek  by  looking  (at  him) :  mine  eye  has  the

right  to  gather  that  which  it  planted.
But  if  he  refuses,  then  his  (teeth  white  as)  camomile  will  be  my

amends :  'tis  no  bad  bargain  when  one  is  given  pearls  instead

of  flowers2.

They  said,  "Thy  tears  flowed  red."  I  answered,  "They  flowed
from  causes  which  are  small  in  comparison  with  the  greatness
of  my  desire:

I  slaughtered  sleep  on  my  eyelids  to  entertain  my  phantom-guest>
and  therefore  my  tears  flowed  bloody  over  my  cheek3."

The  following  examples  are  more  typical:

Thou  stol'st  away  mine  heart  when  it  was  whole:
Now  at  my  last  gasp  give  it  back  in  shreds4 !

O  thou  who  didst  treacherously  take  my  heart  away,  how  didst
not  thou  let  follow  it  the  rest  of  me  that  thou  sparedst?

Part  of  me  is  made  jealous  of  thee  by  part  of  me,  and  my  outward
envies  my  inward  because  thou  art  there5.

1  Ibid.  p.  173.  It  is  true,  as  Prof.  Nallino  has  observed  (op.  cit.  p.  16),
[that  some  odes  are  less  artificial  in  style  than  others.
a  Ibid.  p.  467.  3  Ibid.  p.  165.

«  Ibid.  p.  108.  5  Ibid.  p.  278.

N.  S.  II  12

1 78  Studies  in  Islamic  Mysticism  [CH.

I  am  so  wasted  by  lovesickness  that  those  who  come  to  visit  me
have  lost  their  way,  for  how  can  the  visitors  see  one  who  hath
no  shadow1?

To  affirm  that  lovers  and  mystics  delight  in  paradox  is
only  to  acknowledge  that  in  states  of  spiritual  enthusiasm  we
enter  a  region  where  the  logic  of  common  experience  is  per-
ceived to  be  false.  This  alta  fantasia  moulds  the  language  of
the  Odes,  imposing  its  own  laws  and  revelling  in  its  power  to
transcend  contradictions  which,  for  the  intellect,  are  final.

When  I  died  of  his  love,  I  lived  by  him,  through  the  wealth  of  my
self-denial  and  the  abundance  of  my  poverty2.

Tis  Love !  Keep  thy  heart  safe.  Passion  is  no  light  thing,  and  he
that  is  wasted  thereby  chose  it  not  when  he  was  sane.

And  live  fancy-free,  for  love's  joy  is  sorrow:  its  beginning  a
sickness  and  its  end  a  slaying;

Yet,  methinks,  death  owing  to  love-desire  is  a  life  that  my  loved
one  bestows  upon  me  as  a  boon3.

If  separation  be  my  guerdon  from  you,  and  if  there  be  no  (real)

distance  between  us,  I  regard  that  separation  as  union.
Repulse  is  nothing  but  love,  so  long  as  it  is  not  hate;  and  the

hardest  thing,  excepting  only  your  aversion,  is  easy  to  bear.
Delicious  to  me  is  the  torment  which  ye  inflict;  and  the  injustic

which  Love  ordains  that  ye  do  unto  me  is  justice.
And  my  patience,  a  patience  both  without  you  and  with  you4 —

its  bitterness  seems  to  me  everlastingly  sweet5.

Besides  the  two  protagonists,  Arabian  love-poetry  intro
duces  several  minor  figures,  who  play  a  helping  or  hindering
part  in  the  idyll.  Ibnu  '1-Farid,  of  course,  uses  them  alle
gorically.  One  of  them  is  the  "watcher"  (raqib),  who  prevents
the  lover  from  approaching.  The  "slanderer"  (wdshi)  repre
sents  the  logical  and  intellectual  faculty,  which  cannot  pierce
beyond  the  outward  forms  of  things.  More  important  than
either  of  these  (to  judge  by  the  frequent  passages  of  descrip

1  Dlwdn.  p.  410.  «  Ibid.  p.  384.  »  Ibid.  p.  391  foil.

'  "Patience  without  you,"  i.e.  in  bearing  your  separation  from  me
"  patience  with  you,"  i.e.  in  bearing  the  pain  which  you,  as  the  object  of  m)
love,  cause  me  to  suffer.  *  Diwdn,  p.  402.

ill]  The  Odes  of  Ibnu  'l-Fdrid  179

tion  and  dialogue  in  which  he  appears),  and  more  dangerous,
because  of  his  greater  plausibility,  is  the  "blamer"  (Id'im)
or  "railer"  (Idhi),  a  type  of  the  Devil,  suggesting  evil  and
inspiring  doubt,  of  sensual  passion,  and  of  all  that  lures  the
soul  away  from  Divine  contemplation.

And  in  my  silencing  him  who  blamed  me  on  thy  account,  when  it

was  no  time  to  dispute  concerning  thee1,  my  argument  was

thy  face;
Whereby, after  having  been  my  rebuker,  he  was  made  my

excuser;  nay,  he  became  one  of  my  helpers.
And,  as  I  live,  my  vanquishing  in  argument  a  guide  whose

reproaches  would  have  led  me  astray  is  like  my  greater  and

lesser  pilgrimages2.
He  perceived  that  my  scornful  ear  was  Rajab  (deaf)  to  baseness

and  false  counsel,  and  that  blame  of  me  was  al-Muharram

(forbidden)3.
Full  oft  had  he  desired  me  to  forget  thy  love  and  seek  another

than  thee,  but  how  should  he  change  my  fixed  purpose?
He  said,  "Mend  what  remains  in  thee  (of  life)." I  answered,

"Methinks,  my  mind  turns  no  whither  but  towards  death."
My  refusal  refused  everything  except  thwarting  a  counsellor  who

would  beguile  me  to  show  a  quality  that  was  never  mine4,
One  to  whom  chiding  me  on  thy  account  is  sweet,  as  though  he

deemed  my  separation  (from  thee)  his  manna  and  my  forget-

fulness  (of  thee)  his  quails5.

It  is  a  favomite  paradox  of  Ibnu  '1-Farid  that  reproof
bears  a  message  of  love,  and  that  the  "railer"  deserves  to  be
thanked  and  praised.

1  The  poet  was  rapt  in  contemplation  of  the  Beloved  and  could  not  bandy
words  with  his  critic.

8  I.e.  by  convincing  my  "blamer"  of  the  error  of  his  ways  I  acquired  as
much  religious  merit  as  by  making  the  pilgrimage  to  Mecca.  It  is  merit-
orious to  combine  the  greater  pilgrimage  (bajj)  with  the  lesser  pilgrimage
('umra).

3  Rajab  is  the  seventh  and  al-Muharram  the  first  month  of  the  Moham-
medan year.  *  !•*•  inconstancy.

5  Diwdn,  p.  179  foil.  The  last  verse  alludes  to  the  manna  and  quails  which
dropped  from  heaven  upon  the  Israelites  (Kor.  2,  54).  In  the  original  there
is  a  double  word-play:  mann  (separation),  mann  (manna),  salwat  (forget-
fulness),  salwd  (quails).

12—2

i8o  Studies  in  Islamic  Mysticism  [CH.

Pass  round  the  name  of  my  Dearest,  if  only  in  blaming  me — for

talk  of  the  Beloved  is  my  wine —
That  she  may  be  present  to  mine  ear,  though  she  be  far  away,  as

a  phantom  called  up  by  blame,  not  by  sleep.
For  sweet  to  me  is  her  name  in  every  mould,  even  if  my  chiders

mingle  it  with  disputation.
Methinks,  he  that  blames  me  brings  to  me  the  glad  news  of  her

favour,  though  I  was  not  hoping  to  have  my  greeting  returned1.

But  I  found  thee  in  one  way  my  benefactor,  albeit  thou  wouldst

have  hurt  me  by  the  scorch  of  thy  rebuke,  had  I  obeyed  thee.
Thou  didst  me  a  kindness  unawares,  and  if  thou  wroughtest  ill,

yet  art  thou  the  most  righteous  of  wrong-doers.
The  phantom  that  visits  me  in  the  hour  of  blame2  brings  the

Beloved,  though  he  dwell  afar,  close  to  the  eye  of  my  waking

ear.
And  thy  reproof  is,  as  it  were,  my  Loved  One's  camels  which  came

to  me  when  my  hearing  was  my  sight3.
Thou  tiredst  thyself  and  I  was  refreshed  by  thy  mention  of  him,

so  that  I  regarded  thee  as  excusing  me  for  my  passion.
Marvel,  then,  at  a  satirist  lauding  with  the  tongue  of  a  thankful

complainant  those  who  blame  him  for  his  love4 !

The  hyperfaiitastic  strain  in  Ibnu  '1-Farid's  poetry  is
surprisingly  relieved  by  a  poignant  realism,  of  which  there  is
no  trace  in  the  work  of  his  Persian  rivals.  They  have,  what  he
reserves  for  his  great  Td'iyya,  the  power  of  lifting  themselves
and  their  readers  with  them  into  the  sphere  of  the  infinite  and
eternal,

All  breathing  human  passion  far  above.

The  Arabic  odes,  on  the  contrary,  are  full  of  local  colour
and  redolent  of  the  desert;  and  the  whole  treatment  of  the
subject  is  intimately  personal.  Jalalu'ddfn  Rumf  writes  as

1  Diwdn,  p.  443  foil.

8  I.e.  the  image  or  vision  of  the  Beloved  which  appears  when  his  name  isi
pronounced  by  the  "blamer."

•  As  camels  bring  the  beloved  to  the  lover's  eye,  so  reproof  brings  him  to
the  lover's  ear.

*  Diwdn,  p.  275  foil.  Cf.  p.  346, 1.  5,  and  p.  419, 1.  17 — p.  420, 1.  6.

in]  The  Odes  of  Ibnu  9l-Fdrid  181

a  God-intoxicated  soul,  Ibnu  '1-Farid  as  a  lover  absorbed  in
his  own  feelings.  While  the  Persian  sees  a  pantheistic  vision  1
of  one  reality  in  which  the  individual  disappears,  the  Arar/"|
dwells  on  particular  aspects  of  the  relation  of  that  reality  to  '
himself.

Some  of  the  finest  passages  are  inspired  by  the  author's
recollection  of  the  years  which  he  spent  in  the  Hijaz,  where
(he  says)  he  left  his  heart  behind  when  his  body  returned  to
Egypt1.

Give  aid,  my  brother  dear,  and  sing  me  the  tale  of  them  that

alighted  in  the  water-courses — if  thou  wilt  keep  a  brother's

faith  with  me —
And  recall  it  to  mine  ears ;  for  the  spirit  yearns  for  tidings,  if  the

loved  ones  be  afar.
When  the  anguish  of  pain  settles  on  my  soul,  the  aroma  of  the

fresh  herbs  of  the  Hijaz  is  my  balm.
Shall  I  be  debarred  from  the  sweetness  of  going  down  to  the  waters

in  its  land,  and  turned  aside  from  it,  when  my  very  life  is  in

its  sandhills,
And  its  dwellings  are  my  desire,  yea,  and  its  springtide  is  my  joy

and  averts  from  me  the  most  bitter  distress,
And  its  mountains  are  to  me  a  vernal  abode,  and  its  sands  a

pasture,  and  its  daytime  shadows  are  my  (cool)  shades  of  eve,
And  its  earth  is  my  fragrant  spice,  and  its  water  a  full  well  for

my  thirst,  and  in  its  soil  are  my  riches,
And  its  ravines  are  to  me  a  garden,  and  its  tents  a  shield,  and  on

its  rocks  my  heart  is  untroubled2?
May  the  rain  bless  those  haunts  and  hills,  and  may  showers

following  each  other  moisten  those  homes  of  bounty,
And  shed  abundance  on  the  shrines  of  pilgrimage  and  the  pebbles

at  al-Mina,  and  plenteously  bedew  the  halting-places  of  the

jaded  camels!
And  may  God  preserve  my  dear  companions  there  with  whom  I

whiled  away  the  night  with  tales  of  lovers'  meetings !
And  may  He  preserve  the  nights  at  al-Khayf  that  were  but  as  a

dream  that  passed  in  the  wakef ulness  of  a  light  sleep !

1  Ibid.  p.  370,  1.  ii.

2  The  Arabic  word  for  rocks  (safd)  is  also  the  name  of  a  peak  near  Mecca,
and  this  may  be  its  meaning  here.

1 82  Studies  in  Islamic  Mysticism  [CH.

Ah  me  for  that  time  and  all  that  was  in  that  goodly  place,  when

the  spies  were  off  their  guard ! —
Days  when  I  blithely  pastured  in  the  fields  of  Desire  and  tripped

in  flowing  skirts  of  Ease1.
How  wonderful  is  Time,  which  lays  benefits  on  a  man  and  proves

him  by  taking  the  gift  as  spoil !
O  would  that  our  bygone  pleasure  might  return  once  more !  Then

would  I  freely  give  my  life.
Alas,  vain  is  the  endeavour,  and  cut  are  the  strands  of  the  cord  of

desire,  and  loosed  is  the  knot  of  my  hope.
'Tis  torture  enough  that  I  pass  the  night  in  frenzy,  with  my

longing  before  me  and  Fate  behind  me2.
From  many  such  passages  I  select  one  that  is  charac-
teristic, because  it  illustrates  Ibnu  '1-Farid's  habit  of  seeking
his  imagery  in  Nature,  as  seen  by  Bedouins3,  and  also  his  sense
of  the  poetic  value  of  proper  names.
O  that  I  knew  whether  Sulayma  is  dwelling  in  the  valley  of  the

demesne,  where  the  bondsman  of  love  is  crazed !
Hath  thunder  crashed  with  bursting  showers  at  La'la',  and  hath

rain  gushing  from  the  clouds  flooded  it?
And  shall  I  come  down  to  the  waters  of  al-'Udhayb  and  Hajir

openly,  when  the  mystery  of  night  is  declared  by  dawn?
And  are  there  green  dunes  in  the  camping-place  at  al-Wa'sa?  and

will  the  joy  that  passed  there  ever  return?
And,  O  ye  dear  folk  at  al-Naqa,  is  there  in  the  hills  of  Najd  any

one  that  relates  from  me,  to  show  forth  what  my  ribs  enclose4?
And  on  the  sand-slope  of  Sal'  do  they  ask  news  of  a  rapt  lover  at

Kazima  and  say,  "How  is  Passion  dealing  with  him?  "
And  are  the  blossoms  being  culled  from  the  myrtle-boughs,  and

in  the  Hijaz  are  there  mimosas  with  ripe  berries?
And  the  tamarisks  at  the  bend  of  the  vale,  are  they  fruitful,  and

are  the  eyes  of  despiteful  Time  asleep  to  them?
And  are  there  fair  women  at  'Alij  looking  shyly  with  large  eyes,

as  I  knew  them  once,  or  is  it  a  vain  thing?

1  Reading  with  the  commentator  frayd  instead  of  fribd.

•  Dlwdn,  p.  297  foil.

•  This  is  quite  different,  of  course,  from  the  pictorial  treatment  of
desert  life  and  scenery  which  we  find  in  the  pre-Islamic  odes.

4  Reading

in]  The  Odes  of  Ibnu  'l-Fdrid  183

And  did  the  gazelles  of  the  Two  Meadows  remain  there  a  little

while  after  us,  or  did  something  not  let  them  stay?
And  will  girls  at  al-Ghuwayr  show  me  where  dwells  my  Nu'm  in

spring? — how  pleasant  are  those  dwelling-places!
And  is  the  shade  of  yon  willow  east  of  Darij  still  spread  wide? —

for  my  tears  have  watered  it.
And  is  Shi'b  'Amir  prospering  since  we  departed,  and  will  it  one

day  bring  the  lovers  together?

Perchance  when  my  dear  comrades  at  Mecca  think  of  Sulayma,

they  will  feel  the  flame  cooled  of  that  which  their  bosoms  hide,
And  perchance  the  sweet  nights  that  are  vanished  will  come  again

to  us,  that  a  hoping  man  may  win  his  desire,
And  a  sorrowing  one  rejoice  and  a  lovelorn  one  revive  and  a

longing  one  be  made  happy  and  a  listening  one  thrill  with

delight1.

It  needs  but  a  slight  acquaintance  with  Ibnu  '1-Farid  to
discover  that  he  fully  possesses  a  gift  which  the  Arabs  have
always  prized  in  their  rulers  no  less  than  in  their  poets  and
orators — the  power  of  terse,  striking,  and  energetic  expression.
He  depicts  the  lover  wasted  by  suffering,

Hidden  from  his  visitors,  appearing  only

As  a  crease  in  garments  after  their  unfolding2.

An  exceeding  great  love  hath  hewn  my  bones,  and  my  body  is
vanished,  all  but  the  two  least  parts  of  me3.

I  felt  such  passion  for  you  that  if  the  strengths  of  all  who  love
had  borne  half  the  burden  thereof,  they  would  have  tired.

My  bones  were  hewn  by  a  desire  twice  as  great  as  that  of  my
eyelids  for  my  sleep  or  of  my  weakness  for  my  strength4.

Any  one  of  the  Odes  will  furnish  examples  of  this  Arabian
eloquence  which  has  its  roots  deep  in  the  structure  of  the
language  and  defies  all  attempts  to  transplant  it.

In  his  famous  Wine  Ode  (Khamriyya)  Ibnu  '1-Farid
develops  a  symbolism  which  elsewhere  he  only  uses  inci-
dentally. His  sparing  use  of  it  may  perhaps  be  attributed  to

1  Diwdn,  pp.  429-441.  2  Ibid.  p.  6.

3  Ibid.  p.  70. "The  two  least  parts"  are  the  heart  and  the  tongue.

4  Ibid.  p.  1 60,  1.  24  foil.

184  Studies  in  Islamic  Mysticism  [CH.

his  respect  for  the  Mohammedan  religious  law,  just  as  the
antinomian  bias  of  some  Persian  mystics  seems  to  express  itself
in  the  freedom  of  their  bacchanalian  imagery.  According  to
Ibnu  'l-Fari<J's  custom,  the  symbolism  is  precise  and  circum-
stantial, so  that  its  interpretation  is  far  more  baffling  than  in
Persian  odes  of  the  same  kind,  where  large  and  simple  ideas
carry  the  reader  easily  along.  I  hope  that  the  literal  transla-
tion given  below,  together  with  the  notes  accompanying  it,
will  make  the  meaning  tolerably  clear,  though  we  may  doubt
whether  the  poet  would  always  have  accepted  the  interpreta-
tion given  by  his  commentator,  'Abdu  '1-Ghani  al-Nabulusi,
who  not  only  explains  too  much  but  brings  in  philosophical
theories  that  belong  to  Ibnu  'l-'Arabi  rather  than  to  Ibnu  '1-
Farid.  Into  this  question,  however,  I  need  not  enter  now.

Sharibnd  'aid  dhikhri  'l-habibi  muddmatan
sakirnd  bihd  min  qabli  an  yukhlaqa  'l-karmul.

(1)  In  memory  of  the  Beloved  we  quaffed  a  vintage  that  made
us  drunk  before  the  creation  of  the  vine2.

(2)  Its  cup  the  full-moon;  itself  a  sun  which  a  new  moon
causes  to  circle.  When  it  is  mingled  (with  water),  how  many  stars
appear3 !

(3)  But  for  its  perfume,  I  should  not  have  found  the  way  to
its  taverns;  and  but  for  its  resplendence,  the  imagination  would
not  have  pictured  it4.

1  Dlwdn,  p.  472  foil.

1  The  soul  was  intoxicated  with  the  wine  of  Divine  Love  (i.e.  was  rapt
in  contemplation  of  God)  during  its  pre-existence  in  the  eternal  knowledge
of  God  before  the  body  was  created.

»  The  full-moon  is  the  Perfect  Man,  i.e.  the  gnostic  or  saint  in  whom  God
reveals  Himself  completely  and  who  is,  as  it  were,  filled  with  Divine  Love.
The  new  moon  is  the  gnostic  veiled  by  his  individuality,  so  that  he  manifests
only  a  part  of  the  Divine  Light,  not  the  whole;  he  causes  the  wine  of  Love
to  circle,  i.e.  he  displays  and  makes  known  to  others  the  Names  and  Attri-
butes of  God.  When  the  wine  is  watered,  i.e.  when  pure  contemplation  is
blended  with  the  element  of  religion,  the  seeker  of  God  obtains  spiritual
direction  and  is  like  a  traveller  guided  by  the  stars  in  his  night-journey.

4  N.'s  commentary  on  this  verse  is  characteristically  recondite.  He
interprets  "its  perfume"  as  the  sphere  of  the  Primal  Intelligence,  whence
emanate  all  created  things;  "its  taverns"  as  the  Divine  Names  and
Attributes;  "its  resplendence"  as  the  human  intellect,  which  is  a  flash  of
the  Primal  Intelligence.  Divine  Love,  being  of  the  essence  of  God,  has  no
form  except  in  the  imagination.

ill]  The  Odes  of  Ibnu  'l-Fdrid  185

(4)  Time  hath  preserved  of  it  but  a  breath :  it  is  unseen  as  a
thing  hidden  in  the  bosom  of  the  mind1.

(5)  If  it  be  mentioned  amongst  the  tribe,  the  tribesmen  become
intoxicated  without  incurring  disgrace  or  committing  sin2.

(6)  It  oozed  up  from  the  inmost  depths  of  the  jars  (and
vanished),  and  in  reality  nothing  was  left  of  it  but  a  name3.

(7)  If  it  ever  come  into  the  mind  of  a  man,  joy  will  abide  with
him  and  grief  will  journey  away.

(8)  And  had  the  boon-companions  beheld  the  sealing  of  its
vessel,  that  sealing  would  have  inebriated  them  without  (their
having  tasted)  the  wine4;

(9)  And  had  they  sprinkled  with  it  the  earth  of  a  dead  man's
grave,  his  spirit  would  have  returned  to  him,  and  his  body  would
have  risen ;

(10)  And  had  they  laid  down  in  the  shadow  of  the  wall  where
its  vine  grows  a  man  sick  unto  death,  his  malady  would  have
departed  from  him ;

(n)  And  had  they  brought  to  its  taverns  one  palsied,  he
would  have  walked;  and  at  the  mention  of  its  flavour  the  dumb
would  speak;

(12)  And  had  the  breath  of  its  aroma  floated  through  the  East,
and  were  there  in  the  West  one  that  had  lost  the  sense  of  smell,  he
would  have  regained  it ;

(13)  And  had  the  palm  of  one  touching  its  cup  been  stained
red  thereby,  he  would  not  have  gone  astray  at  night,  the  lodestar
being  in  his  hand ;

(14)  And  had  it  been  unveiled  in  secret  (as  a  bride)  to  one
blind  from  birth,  he  would  have  become  seeing ;  and  at  the  sound
of  its  (decanting  into  the)  strainer  the  deaf  would  hear;

(15)  And  had  a  party  of  camel-riders  set  out  for  the  soil  that
bore  it,  and  were  there  amongst  them  one  bitten  by  a  snake,  the
venom  would  not  have  harmed  him ;

1  "Time,"  i.e.  the  world  of  change.  The  second  hemistich  may  be  ren-
X  dered  literally:  "'tis  as  though  its  occultation  were  a  concealment  in  the

breasts  of  (human)  minds."

2  "The  tribesmen,"  i.e.  mystics  capable  of  receiving  illumination.

3  This  verse  describes  the  gradual  fading  of  ecstasy  from  the  heart  of  the
mystic.

4  I  need  not  trouble  my  readers  with  the  detailed  allegorical  analysis  to
which  the  commentator  subjects  this  and  the  next  nine  verses.  They  explain
themselves,  if  taken  as  a  fanciful  description  of  the  miracles  wrought  by
Divine  Love.

i86  Studies  in  Islamic  Mysticism  [CH.

(16)  And  had  the  sorcerer  inscribed  the  letters  of  its  name  on
the  brow  of  one  smitten  with  madness,  the  writing  would  have
cured  him  ;

(17)  And  had  its  name  been  blazoned  on  the  banner  of  the
host,  that  blazon  would  have  intoxicated  those  beneath  the
banner.

(18)  It  corrects  the  natures  of  the  boon-companions,  so  that
those  who  lack  resolution  are  led  by  it  to  the  path  of  resolution,

(19)  And  he  whose  hand  was  a  stranger  to  munificence  shows
himself  generous,  and  he  who  had  no  forbearance  forbears  in  the
hour  of  wrath.

(20)  Had  the  dullest-witted  man  in  the  tribe  kissed  itsfiddm,
his  kissing  it  would  have  endued  him  with  the  real  inwardness  of
the  wine's  qualities1.

(21)  They  say  to  me,  "Describe  it,  for  thou  art  acquainted
with  its  description."  Ay,  well  do  I  know  its  attributes:

(22)  Pure,  but  not  as  water;  subtle,  but  not  as  air;  luminous,
but  not  as  fire;  spirit,  but  not  (joined  to)  body.

(23)  The  (Divine)  discourse  concerning  it  was  eternally  prior
to  all  existing  things  (in  the  knowledge  of  God),  where  is  no  form
nor  any  external  trace2;

(24)  And  there  through  it  all  things  came  into  being  because
of  a  (Divine)  providence  whereby  it  was  veiled  from  every  one  that
lacketh  understanding.

(25)  And  my  spirit  was  enamoured  of  it  in  such  wise  that
they  (my  spirit  and  the  wine)  were  mingled  together  and  made  one,
not  as  a  body  pervades  a  body3.

(26)  There  is  a  wine  without  a  vine,  when  Adam  is  a  father  to
me;  there  is  a  vine  without  a  wine,  when  its  mother  is  a  mother  to
me4.

1  Thefiddm  is  a  strainer  placed  over  the  mouth  of  the  bottle,  so  that  the
wine  may  run  clear.

1  Vv.  23-30  are  wanting  in  the  commentary  of  Burfnf  and  may  have
been  inserted  in  the  poem  by  a  copyist.  See  Nallino,  op.  cit.  p.  31,  note  i.
Divine  Love,  as  the  eternal  source  of  all  created  things,  is  logically  prior  to
them,  although  it  does  not  precede  them  in  time,  which  itself  is  created.

*  Inasmuch  as  real  being  belongs  to  God  alone,  mystical  union  cannot
be  likened  to  the  permeation  of  one  body  by  another,  as  when  water  is
absorbed  by  a  sponge.

4  This  enigmatic  verse  refers  to  Being  under  its  two  aspects.  Wine
signifies  pure  being,  vine  phenomenal  being.  .In  so  far  as  man  is  related  to
the  Divine  Spirit  (here  identified  with  Adam,  whom  God  "created  in  His  own

in]  The  Odes  of  Ibnu  9l-Fdrid  187

(27)  The  (essential)  subtlety  of  the  vessels  (forms)  depends  in
truth  on  the  subtlety  of  the  realities;  and  by  means  of  the  vessels
the  realities  increase1

(28)  After  division  has  occurred,  so  that,  while  the  whole  is
one,  our  spirits  are  a  wine  and  our  bodies  a  vine.

(29)  Before  it  is  no  "before"  and  after  it  is  no  "after";  it  is
the  "before"  of  every  "after"  by  the  necessity  of  its  nature2.

(30)  Its  grapes  were  pressed  in  the  winepress  ere  Time  began,
and  it  was  an  orphan  although  the  epoch  of  our  father  (Adam)
came  after  it3.

(31)  Such  are  the  beauties  that  lead  its  praisers  to  laud  it,
and  beautiful  is  their  prose  and  verse  in  its  honour.

(32)  And  he  that  knows  it  not  thrills  at  the  mention  of  it,  like
the  lover  of  Nu'm  when  her  name  is  spoken.

(33)  They  said,  "Thou  hast  drunk  the  draught  of  sin."  Nay,
I  have  only  drunk  what,  in  my  judgment,  'twere  the  greatest  sin
to  renounce.

(34)  Health  to  the  people  of  the  Christian  monastery ! How
often  were  they  intoxicated  by  it  without  having  drunk  thereof !
Still,  they  aspired4.

image"),  he  is  pure  reality;  but  in  so  far  as  he  belongs  to  Nature,  he  is
unreal.  "  Its  mother  "  is  the  mother  of  wine,  i.e.  the  vine,  which  is  a  symbol
for  the  material  world.

1  The  "vessels"  are  the  phenomenal  forms  by  which  real  being  is
manifested.  They  are  "subtle,"  i.e.  spiritual,  because  every  such  form  is  the
veil  of  a  reality.  These  realities  "  increase,"  i.e.  appear  as  the  Many,  by  means
of  the  forms  which  our  senses  perceive.

2  Absolute  Being  or  God  or  Divine  Love — all  these  terms  are  the  same
in  essence — is  not  conditioned  by  time.

3  I.e.  it  was  an  orphan  before  the  beginning  of  fatherhood.  This,  I  think,
is  merely  a  paradox  indicating  the  timeless  nature  of  reality.  The  word
"orphanhood"  (yutm)  may  allude  to  Mohammed  (cf.  note  on  the  Td'iyya,
vv.  288-9). In  this  case  the  meaning  will  be  that  Mohammed  (as  the  Logos)
existed  before  the  creation  of  Adam. According  to  N.,  Absolute  Being  is
made  an  "  orphan  "  by  the  passing-away  (fand)  of  the  spirit  in  man.  Universal
Spirit  or  Reason,  the  first  emanation,  may  be  said  to  "die"  when  its  essence
(the  human  spirit)  is  mystically  re-united  with  the  Absolute;  and  its  "  death  "
leaves  the  Absolute,  i.e.  the  phenomenal  world  regarded  as  the  other  self
of  the  Absolute,  "an  orphan  in  the  bosom  of  its  mother  Nature."

4  Moslems  associate  with  Christianity  the  beverage  forbidden  by  their
own  religion.  When  their  poets  describe  a  wine-party,  the  scene  is  often  laid
in  the  neighbourhood  of  a  Christian  monastery  (dayr). Ibnu  'l-Fari4  says
that  the  Christians  became  intoxicated  without  having  drunk,  i.e.  their
doctrine  that  God  reveals  Himself  in  Christ  is  only  a  glimpse  of  the  truth,

1 88  Studies  in  Islamic  Mysticism  [CH.

(35)  In  me,  ere  I  was  born,  it  stirred  a  transport  that  abides
with  me  for  ever,  though  my  bones  decay.

(36)  Take  it  pure !  but  if  thou  wish  to  temper  it,  the  worst
wrong  is  thy  turning  aside  from  the  water  of  the  Beloved's  teeth1.

(37)  Seek  it  in  the  tavern,  and  there  to  the  accompaniment  of
tuneful  notes  bid  it  display  itself,  for  by  means  of  music  it  is  made
a  prize2.

(38)  Wine  never  dwelt  with  Care  in  any  place,  even  as  Sorrow
never  dwelt  with  Song;

(39)  And,  though  thy  intoxication  with  it  have  but  the  life  of
a  moment,  thou  wilt  regard  Time  as  a  slave  obedient  to  thy
command.

(40)  Joyless  in  this  world  is  he  that  lives  sober,  and  he  that
dies  not  drunk  will  miss  the  path  of  wisdom.

(41)  Let  him  weep  for  himself — he  whose  life  is  wasted  without
part  or  lot  in  wine !

The  Khamriyya  forms  a  link  between  the  love-lyrics  and
the  great  Ode  in  which  Ibnu  '1-Farid  describes  his  own
mystical  experience  and  puts  it  forth  (excepting,  however,
the  highest  stage  of  all)  as  a  doctrine  for  others.  This  Ode,  the
author's  masterpiece,  bears  a  plain  and  appropriate  title,
Nazmu  'l-suluk,  "The  Poem  of  the  Mystic's  Progress";  the
meaning  of  the  name  al-Td'iyyatu  'l-kubrd,  by  which  it  is
commonly  known,  has  been  explained  above3.  The  Td'iyya,
with  its  760  verses,  is  nearly  as  long  as  all  the  minor  poems
together,  if  we  leave  the  quatrains  and  enigmas  out  of
reckoning.  It  was  edited  in  1854  by  Joseph  von  Hammer  and
may  be  studied  in  the  fully  vocalised  text  which  he  copied
from  an  excellent  manuscript  in  his  possession.  To  transcribe

which  is  fully  realised  by  Moslem  saints,  that  God  reveals  Himself  in  every
atom  of  existence. Cf.  the  Td'iyya,  v.  730  foil,  and  p.  140  supra.

1  I.e.  seek  to  contemplate  the  Divine  Essence  alone,  or  if  you  must  seek
anything  besides,  let  it  be  the  first  and  highest  manifestation  of  that  Essence,
namely,  the  Spirit  or  Light  of  Mohammed,  which  is  figuratively  called  "the
water  of  the  Beloved's  teeth."

*  The  Sufis  have  always  known  the  value  of  music  as  a  means  of  inducing
ecstasy. Cf.  The  Mystics  of  Islam,  p.  63  foil.;  D.  B.  Macdonald,  Emotional
Religion  in  Islam  as  affected  by  Music  and  Singing  in  the  Journal  of  the  Royal
Asiatic  Society,  1901,  pp.  195  foil,  and  748  foil.,  and  1902,  p.  i  foil.

•  P.  165,  note  2.

in]  The  Odes  of  Ibnu  9l-Fdrid  189

is  one  thing,  to  translate  is  another;  and  as  "translation"  of
a  literary  work  usually  implies  that  some  attempt  has  been
made  to  understand  it,  I  prefer  to  say  that  Von  Hammer
rendered  the  poem  into  German  rhymed  verse  by  a  method
peculiar  to  himself,  which  appears  to  have  consisted  in  picking
out  two  or  three  words  in  each  couplet  and  filling  the  void
with  any  ideas  that  might  strike  his  fancy.  Perhaps,  in  a
sense,  the  Td'iyya  is  untranslatable,  and  certainly  it  offers
very  slight  encouragement  to  the  translator  whose  aim  may
be  defined  as  "artistic  reproduction."  On  the  other  hand,  it
seemed  to  me  that  a  literal  prose  version  with  explanatory
notes  would  at  least  enable  the  reader  to  follow  the  course  of
the  poem  and  become  acquainted  with  its  meaning,  while  any
one  who  ventured  on  the  Arabic  text  would  profit  by  the
labours  of  a  fellow -student  and  would  not  be  so  likely  to  lose
heart,

Voyaging  through  strange  seas  of  thought,  alone.

Though  formally  an  ode  (qasida) ,  the  Td'iyya  is  addressed  to
a  disciple,  so  that  its  prevailing  tone  is  didactic  and  de-
scriptive, the  exposition  being  only  now  and  then  interrupted
by  strains  of  pure  lyric  enthusiasm.  Not  that  the  poem  is
deficient  either  in  beauty  or  in  power;  much,  if  not  most  of  it,
combines  these  qualities,  and  in  the  following  version  I  have
tried  to  preserve  some  traces  of  them.  Ibnu  '1-Farid  is  here
illustrating  the  doctrine  that  phenomena  are  merely  the
illusory  medium  through  which  the  soul  acts  in  the  world.
For  this  purpose  he  compares  the  soul  to  the  showman  of  the
shadow-lantern  who  throws  his  puppets  on  a  screen,  keeping
himself  out  of  sight  while  he  manipulates  them1.  The  passage
beginning

And  so  it  comes  that  now  thou  laugh'st  in  glee

describes  the  various  scenes  and  incidents  of  the  shadow-play
and  the  emotions  aroused  in  the  spectators.

Lo,  from  behind  the  veil  mysterious

The  forms  of  things  are  shown  in  every  guise

1  See  v.  679  of  the  prose  translation  infra.

190  Studies  in  Islamic  Mysticism  [CH.

Of  manifold  appearance ;  and  in  them

An  all- wise  providence  hath  joined  what  stands

Opposed  in  nature :  mute  they  utter  speech,

Inert  they  move  and  void  of  splendour  shine1.

And  so  it  comes  that  now  thou  laugh'st  in  glee,

Then  weep'st  anon,  like  mother  o'er  dead  child,

And  mournest,  if  they  sigh,  for  pleasure  lost,

And  tremblest,  if  they  sing,  with  music's  joy.

Birds  warbling  on  the  boughs  delight  thine  ear,

The  while  their  sweet  notes  sadden  thee  within ;

Thou  wonderest  at  their  voices  and  their  words —

Expressive  unintelligible  tongues !

On  land  the  camels  cross  the  wilderness,

At  sea  the  ships  run  swiftly  through  the  deep;

And  thou  behold'st  two  armies — one  on  land,

On  sea  another — multitudes  of  men,

Clad,  for  their  bravery,  in  iron  mail

And  fenced  about  with  points  of  sword  and  spear.

The  land-troops  march  on  horseback  or  on  foot,

Bold  cavaliers  and  stubborn  infantry;

The  warriors  of  the  sea  some  mount  on  deck,

Some  climb  the  masts  like  lances  straight  and  tall.

Here  in  assault  they  smite  with  gleaming  swords,

There  thrust  with  tough  brown  shafts  of  quivering  spears;

Part  drowned  with  fire  of  arrows  shot  in  showers,

Part  burned  with  floods  of  steel  that  pierce  like  flames2;

These  rushing  onward,  offering  their  lives,

Those  reeling  broken  'neath  the  shame  of  rout ;

And  catapults  thou  seest  hurling  stones

Against  strong  fortresses  and  citadels,

To  ruin  them. And  apparitions  strange

Of  naked  viewless  spirits  thou  mayst  espy3,

1  "The  forms  of  things,"  i.e.  the  puppets,  typify  phenomena,  which  in
themselves  are  lifeless  and  passive :  all  their  life  and  activity  is  the  effect  of
the  manifestation  in  them  of  the  actions  and  attributes  of  Reality.

*  The  Greek  fire  to  which  Von  Hammer  finds  an  allusion  here  is,  I  think,
an  ignis  feUuus.

•  The  genies  (Jinn)  are  described  as  ethereal  creatures,  endowed  with
speech,  transparent  (so  that  they  are  normally  invisible),  and  capable  of
assuming  various  shapes.

Ill]  The  Odes  of  Ibnu  'l-Fdrid  191

That  wear  no  friendly  shape  of  humankind,
For  genies  love  not  men.

And  in  the  stream

The  fisher  casts  his  net  and  draws  forth  fish ;
And  craftily  the  fowler  sets  a  snare
That  hungry  birds  may  fall  in  it  for  corn.
And  ravening  monsters  wreck  the  ships  at  sea,
And  lions  in  the  jungle  rend  their  prey,
And  in  the  air  some  birds,  and  in  the  wilds
Some  animals,  hunt  others. And  thou  seest
Many  a  form  besides,  whose  names  I  pass,
Putting  my  trust  in  samples  choice,  tho'  few.

Regard  now  what  is  this  that  lingers  not

Before  thine  eye  and  in  a  moment  fades.

All  thou  beholdest  is  the  act  of  one

In  solitude,  but  closely  veiled  is  he.

Let  him  but  lift  the  screen,  no  doubt  remains:

The  forms  are  vanished,  he  alone  is  all;

And  thou,  illumined,  knowest  that  by  his  light

Thou  find'st  his  actions  in  the  senses'  night1.

Ibnu  '1-Farid  more  often  reminds  us  of  Dante  than  of
Lucretius,  but  these  verses  may  be  compared  with  a  passage
in  the  De  rerum  natura  (z,  323  foil.)  where  the  author
illustrates  "the  perpetual  motion  of  the  atoms  going  on
beneath  an  appearance  of  absolute  rest"  by  a  picture  "taken
from  the  pomp  of  human  affairs  and  the  gay  pageantry  of
armies  " :

Praeterea  magnae  legiones  cum  loca  cursu
camporum  complent  belli  simulacra  cientes,
fulgor  ibi  ad  caelum  se  tollit  totaque  circum
acre  renidescit  tellus  supterque  uirum  ut
excitur  pedibus  sonitus  clamoreque  montes
icti  reiectant  uoces  ad  sidera  mundi
et  circumuolitant  equites  mediosque  repente
tramittunt  ualido  quatientes  impete  campos.

1  Td'iyya,  vv.  680-706.

192  Studies  in  Islamic  Mysticism  [CH.

"The  truth  and  fulness  of  life  in  this  passage  are  immediately
perceived,  but  the  element  of  sublimity  is  added  by  the  thought
in  the  two  lines  with  which  the  passage  concludes,  which  reduces
the  whole  of  this  moving  and  sounding  pageant  to  stillness  and
silence  —

et  tamen  est  quidam  locus  altis  montibus  unde
stare  uidentur  et  in  campis  consistere  fulgor1."

A  similar  and  perhaps  even  more  striking  effect  is  pro-
duced when  Ibnu  'l-Fari<J,  after  having  brought  before  his
readers  the  spectacle  of  restless  life  and  strife  which  fills  the
world,  at  once  transforms  it  into  a  vision  of  eternal  order  and
harmony  —

jo if  ** it

All  thou  beholdest  is  the  act  of  One.

In  reading  the  Td'iyya  it  is  a  rare  pleasure  to  meet  with
even  ten  or  twenty  consecutive  lines  like  these,  which  require
no  commentary  to  interpret  them.  Yet  the  poem,  as  a  whole,
is  not  unduly  cryptic  in  expression.  Those  who  blame  a
writer  for  obscurity  ought  to  ask  themselves  whether  his
meaning  could  have  been  given  more  clearly;  and  if  so,
whether  he  can  allege  good  and  sufficient  reasons  for  his
default.  On  these  counts  I  think  Ibnu  '1-Farid  will  secure  an
acquittal,  if  we  remember  that  he  was  bound  by  the  poetic
forms  and  fashions  of  his  day.  The  obscurity  does  not  lie  in
his  style  so  much  as  in  the  nature  of  his  subject.

How  little  may  a  heart  communicate  in  the  form  of  thought,  or  a
tongue  utter  in  the  mould  of  speech2  !

1  W.  Y.  Sellar,  The  Roman  poets  of  the  Republic,  p.  403.  I  give  Munro's
translation  :  "  Again  when  mighty  legions  fill  with  their  movements  all  parts
of  the  plains,  waging  the  mimicry  of  war,  the  glitter  then  lifts  itself  up  to
the  sky,  and  the  whole  earth  round  gleams  with  brass,  and  beneath  a  noise
is  raised  by  the  mighty  trampling  of  men,  and  the  mountains  stricken
by  the  shouting  re-echo  the  voices  to  the  stars  of  heaven,  and  horsemen  fly
about  and  suddenly  wheeling  scour  across  the  middle  of  the  plains,  shaking
them  with  the  vehemence  of  their  charge.  And  yet  there  is  some  place  on
the  high  hills,  seen  from  which  they  appear  to  stand  still  and  to  rest  on  the
•is  a  bright  spot."

•  Td'iyya,  v.  489.

in]  The  Odes  of  Ibnu  'l-Fdrid  193

While  his  symbolism  may  have  served  him  at  times  as  a
mask  when  plain  speaking  would  have  been  dangerous1,  he
generally  uses  it  as  the  only  possible  means  of  imparting
mystical  truth;  and  in  his  own  circle,  no  doubt,  it  was  under-
stood readily  enough.  We,  on  the  other  hand,  must  begin  by
learning  it  and  end  with  recognising  that  no  intellectual'effort
will  bring  us  to  the  stage  whence  an  initiated  Mohammedan
sets  out.

What  makes  the  interpretation  of  the  poem  especially
uncertain  is  that  the  author's  account  of  his  religious  and
mystical  experience  is  psychological  in  character  and  throws
but  a  faint  light  on  his  theological  position.  Was  he  really
a  pantheist,  or  was  he  an  orthodox  mystic  whose  feeling  of
oneness  with  God  expressed  itself  in  the  language  of  pantheism?
Does  the  Td'iyya  reflect  the  doctrines  of  Ibnu  'l-'Arabi,  as  its
commentators  believe?  Although  such  questions  cannot  be
ignored  by  any  one  who  attempts  to  translate  or  explain  the
poem,  they  are  not  easy  to  answer  definitely.  I  have  followed
Kashani  in  the  main ;  nevertheless  I  regard  his  interpretation
as  representing  a  point  of  view  which  is  alien  to  Ibnu  'l-Farid.
Logically,  the  mystical  doctrine  of  ittihdd  (Einswerdcn)  leads
to  the  pantheistic  monism  of  Ibnu  'l-'Arabi;  but  those  who
find  in  the  Td'iyya  a  poetical  version  of  that  system  are
confusing  mysticism  with  philosophy.  In  some  passages,
however,  we  meet  with  philosophical  ideas2  and  may  draw
inferences  from  them.  While  they  do  not  appear  to  me  to
support  the  view  that  Ibnu  'l-Farid  was  a  follower  of  Ibnu
'l-'Arabi,  they  imply  pantheism  and  monism  on  the  plane  of
speculative  thought,  where  commentators  and  theologians

1  Td'iyya,  vv,  395-6.

2  E.g.  emanation  (fay d)  in  vv.  403-5. The  spiritual  and  sensible  worlds
derive  their  life  from  Universal  Spirit  and  Universal  Soul  (v.  405;  cf.  v.  492).
In  v.  455  the  Hallajian  terms,  IdMt  (divinity)  and  ndsut  (humanity)  are
used  in  the  same  way  as  by  Ibnu  'l-'Arabi,  to  denote  the  inward  and
outward  aspects  of  the  Being  with  whom  the  "unified"  mystic  is  one  (cf.
Massignon,  Kitdb  al-Tawdsin,  p.  139).  Allusions  to  the  pre-existence  of  the
soul  occur  in  vv.  41,  157-8,  428,  670  and  759. Unlike  Jili,  Ibnu  'l-Farid
shows  no  sign  of  acquaintance  with  Ibnu  'l-'Arabi's  philosophical  termino-
logy or,  so  far  as  I  have  observed,  of  being  directly  influenced  by  him  in
any  considerable  degree.

N.  s.  ii  13

194  Studies  in  Islamic  Mysticism  [CH.

(not  poets  and  mystics)  are  accustomed  to  dwell.  I  consider,
therefore,  that  K.'s  interpretation,  false  as  it  is  to  the  spirit
of  the  poem,  places  it  in  a  medium  intelligible  to  us  and
conveys  its  meaning  in  a  relatively  adequate  form.  And  my
readers  will  see  at  once  how  the  mystical  content  of  the
Td'iyya  as  well  as  its  philosophical  implications  are  illus-
trated by  the  foregoing  essay  on  the  Insdnu  '1-KdmiL

Was  Ibnu  '1-Farid  consciously  a  pantheist?  I  do  not  think
so.  But  in  the  permanent  unitive  state  which  he  describes
himself  as  having  attained,  he  cannot  speak  otherwise  than
pantheistically :  he  is  so  merged  in  the  Oneness  that  he
identifies  himself  now  with  Mohammed  (the  Islamic  Logos),
now  with  God,  whose  attributes  he  assumes  and  makes  his
own.

Many  of  these  passages  are  such  as  no  medieval  religion
but  Islam  would  have  tolerated,  and  we  cannot  wonder  that
he  was  charged  with  heresy.  His  opponents  accused  him  of
holding  the  doctrine  of  incarnation  (hulid)  and  of  pretending
to  be  the  Qutb.  He  disavows  hulul  and  shows  how  it  differs
from  his  own  doctrine  (vv.  277  foil.).  As  regards  the  Qutb,  the
most  explicit  reference  occurs  in  vv.  500-1 :

Therefore  'tis  upon  me  the  heavens  turn,  and  marvel  thou  at  their
Qutb  (Pole)  which  encompasses  them,  howbeit  the  Pole  is  a
central  point.

And  there  was  no  Qutb  before  me,  whom  I  should  succeed  after
having  passed  three  grades  (of  sanctity),  although  the  Awtdd
rise  to  the  rank  of  Qutb  from  the  rank  of  BadaL

Here  is  another  suspected  verse  (313):

And  my  spirit  is  a  spirit  to  all  the  spirits  (of  created  beings) ;  and
whatsoever  thou  seest  of  beauty  in  the  universe  flows  from  the
bounty  of  my  nature.

Evidently  the  poet  declares  himself  to  be  one  with  the
spiritual  Qutb  (the  Logos),  whom  in  v.  501  he  distinguishes
from  the  terrestrial  Qutb  (the  head  of  the  $iifi  hierarchy).  The
latter  presides  over  the  visible  world.  On  his  death  he  is
succeeded  by  one  of  the  three  saints  known  as  Awtdd,  who
are  next  to  him  in  dignity  and  have  themselves  risen  from  the

in]  The  Odes  of  Ibnu  'l-Fdrid  195

ranks  of  the  forty  Abddl  or  Budald1.  The  dominion  of  the
spiritual  Qutb,  the  real  Pole  (al-Qutbu  'l-haqiqi),  extends  over
the  created  things  of  both  the  visible  and  invisible  worlds.  He
has  neither  predecessor  nor  successor,  for  he  is  the  Spirit  of
Mohammed,  i.e.,  the  essence  of  Man  and  the  final  cause  of
creation2.  Ibnu  '1-Farid,  then,  does  not  profess  this  heretical
doctrine  (qutbiyya,  qutbdniyya)  in  the  sense  which  Sufis
ordinarily  assign  to  it.  His  "Poleship"  is  not  the  temporal
vicegerency  delegated  by  Mohammed  to  the  supreme  saint
of  every  age,  but  a  pure  consciousness  of  being  one  with  the
Spirit,  who  as  the  perfect  image  of  God  encompasses  all  things
with  his  knowledge,  power  and  glory.

My  translation  covers  three-fourths  of  the  poem3.  The
omitted  passages  are  generally  unimportant,  but  I  have  given
a  summary  whenever  I  thought  it  would  be  of  use.

ARGUMENT

The  poem,  addressed  to  a  real  or  imaginary  disciple,  sets
forth  in  due  order  the  phases  of  mystical  experience  through
which  the  writer  passed  before  attaining  to  oneness  with  God,
and  describes  the  nature  of  that  abiding  oneness  so  far  as  it
can  be  indicated  by  words.

In  the  opening  verses  (1-7)  Ibnu  '1-Farid  recalls  a  time
when  his  love  of  God  was  still  imperfect  and  unfixed,  so  that
the  "intoxication"  of  ecstasy  would  be  followed  by  the
"sobriety"  of  a  relapse  into  selfhood.

He  tells  (8-83)  how  he  sought  the  favour  of  the  Beloved
and  related  to  her  his  sufferings,  not  by  way  of  complaint —

1  K.  onw.  501.  Cf.Kashfal-Mahjub.tTa.nsL,  p.  214.  Concerning  the  Qutb
and  the  subordinate  members  of  the  Sufi  hierarchy  see  Blochet,  Etudes  sur
I'teoUvisme  musulman  in  the  Journal  asiatique,  vol.  20  (1902),  p.  49  foil.;
Haneberg,  Ali  Abulhasan  Schadeli  in  ZDMG.,  vol.  7,  p.  21  foil.;  Flugel,
Scha'vdnt  und  sein  Werk  uber  die  muhammadanische  Glaubenslehre,  ibid.  vol.
20,  p.  37  foil.

2  Cf.  pp.  87  and  103  foil.

3  574  verses  out  of  a  total  of  761.  The  following  verses  have  not  been
translated:  111-114,  H7-«9,  122-125,  141-143,  164-167,  I75-I93,  *95-
196,  265-276,  334-393,  503-505,  515-520,  549-574,  580-588,  602-613,  622-
626,  632-636,  750-758.

13—2

196  Studies  in  Islamic  Mysticism  [CH.

for  suffering  is  the  law  of  love — but  in  the  hope  of  relieving
them ;  how  he  said  that  he  was  enraptured  by  her  beauty,  that
he  would  never  change,  that  he  cared  for  nothing  but  her  and
for  her  sake  had  abandoned  all.

The  Beloved  answers  (84-102),  accusing  him  of  in-
sincerity and  presumption.  He  is  not  really  in  love  with  her,
but  only  with  himself.  If  he  would  love  her  in  truth,  he  must
die  to  self.

In  reply  he  protests  that  this  death  is  his  dearest  wish  and
prays  the  Beloved  to  grant  it,  whatever  pain  it  may  cost
(103-116).  Then,  addressing  the  disciple,  he  describes  his
dying  to  self  and  its  effects:  how  it  has  brought  him  great
glory,  though  he  is  despised  by  his  neighbours  and  regarded
as  a  madman;  and  how  it  has  caused  his  love  to  be  hidden
even  from  himself,  his  faculties  to  be  jealous  of  one  another,
and  his  identity  to  be  lost,  so  that  in  worshipping  he  feels
that  he  is  the  object  of  worship  (117-154).  He  proceeds  to
explain  the  mystery  of  his  love,  saying  that  he  loved  before
the  creation  but  was  separated  from  his  Beloved  in  this  world,
and  that  by  casting-off  his  self-existence  he  has  found  her  to
be  his  own  real  self.  There  was  no  thought  of  merit  in  his
sacrifice,  so  she  accepted  it  (155-174).  He  exhorts  the  disciple
to  follow  the  via  purgativa,  by  which  mystics  are  prepared  for
the  highest  things,  and  describes  how  he  himself  disciplined
his  soul  (175-203).

The  poet  now  begins  to  explain  the  origin  and  nature  of
his  ittihdd  or  oneness  with  the  Beloved.  As  it  is  hard  for  the
mind  to  conceive  that  two  may  be  one,  he  points  to  the
analogous  case  of  a  woman  possessed  by  a  spirit.  He  urges
the  disciple  to  get  rid  of  the  illusion  of  dualism,  and  the  mystery
will  then  become  clear  to  him.  He  says  that  this  was  the  way
by  which  he  himself  attained  to  his  present  state  (204-238).

He  bids  the  disciple  mark  that  all  beauty  is  absolute.  Every
fair  earthly  form  is  in  reality  a  manifestation  of  the  Beloved
(239-264).

He  then  explains  why,  notwithstanding  his  exalted  degree,
he  strictly  fulfils  the  duties  of  the  religious  law  and  occupies
himself  with  voluntary  works  of  devotion.  Antinomianism

in]  The  Odes  of  Ibnu  'l-Fdrid  197

would  be  consistent  with  belief  in  incarnation  (hulul) ;  but
he  does  not  hold  that  doctrine.  His  own  doctrine  is  supported
by  the  Koran  and  the  Apostolic  Traditions  (265-285).

He  calls  on  the  disciple  to  follow  him  in  the  path  of  love,
but  warns  him  that  he  must  not  aspire  to  the  supreme  grade
of  ittihdd,  which  is  now  described  as  being  beyond  love  (286-
333).

After  a  hymn  of  praise  to  the  Beloved  (336-387),  he
resumes  the  description  of  his  oneness.  His  spirit  and  soul,
which  formerly  drew  him  up  and  down  between  them,  are  in
reality  one  with  the  Beloved,  i.e.,  they  are  identified  with
Universal  Spirit  and  Universal  Soul,  whence  all.  forms  of
spiritual  and  sensible  life  are  fed.  The  image  of  the  Beloved
that  he  receives  through  sensation  agrees  with  the  image  of
her  in  his  spiritual  consciousness;  and  this  is  a  proof  that  he
is  one  with  her.  He  says  that  she  is  presented  to  him  by  all
that  he  sees,  hears,  tastes  and  touches.  He  describes  par-
ticularly his  listening  to  music:  at  that  time  he  beholds  her
with  his  whole  being  and  is  riven  asunder  by  the  struggle  of
his  spirit  to  escape  from  the  body;  then  dancing  soothes  him,
and,  as  it  were,  rocks  him  to  sleep  (388-440).

Continuing,  he  declares  that  the  state  which  he  has  now
reached  is  higher  than  "union "  (wisdl).  He  gained  it  through
casting  aside  every  vestige  of  self-regard.  It  was  he  who
imposed  the  laws  of  religion  on  himself  and  was  sent  as  an
apostle  to  himself  before  any  prophet  appeared  in  the  world.
His  overruling  influence  is  everted  throughout  heaven  and
earth.  He  is  beyond  alL-relations :  place,  time,  and  number
are  gone;  he  has  no  rival  or  opposite;  he  is  the  object  of  his
own  worship.  No  change  of  state  can  now  befall  him :  the
alternation  of  "intoxication"  and  "sobriety"  has  been  super-
seded by  a  permanent  consciousness  in  which  past  and  future
are  the  same.  He  is  the  Pole  (Qtitb)  on  which  the  universe
revolves  (441-501).

He  mentions,  as  a  strange  effect  of  his  love,  that  he  sought
his  Beloved  in  himself  until  he  found  that  he  was  seeking
himself,  so  that  in  being  united  with  himself  he  embraced  his
own  essence  (502-532).  Speaking  in  the  person  of  God,  he

198  Studies  in  Islamic  Mysticism  [CH.

says  that  his  attributes,  names,  and  actions  cannot  be  known
except  through  himself,  and  that  he  cannot  be  known  through
them.  As  the  names  of  his  external  attributes,  e.g.,  sight  and
hearing,  which  are  really  faculties  of  the  soul,  are  derived
from  his  organs  of  sensation,  so  the  names  of  his  inward
attributes  are  ultimately  derived  from  his  (the  Divine)
essence.  By  means  of  the  names  God  manifests  Himself  in
creation.  Their  qualities  and  the  benefits  which  they  confer
on  the  body  and  the  soul  are  described  at  some  length  (533-

574)-

He  is  so  entirely  one,  he  says,  that  all  his  faculties  are
interfused  and  each  part  has  become  absorbed  in  the  whole.
Hence  he  acts  universally  and  infinitely.  This  is  the  explana-
tion of  the  miracles  wrought  by  the  prophets.  Mohammed,
the  last  of  the  prophets,  not  only  summed  up  in  himself  all  the
marvellous  powers  of  his  predecessors  but  is  the  source  from
which  these  powers  were  bestowed  on  the  prophets  before  him
and  the  Moslem  saints  after  him.  Ibnu  '1-Farid,  making
himself  one  with  the  spirit  of  Mohammed,  claims  to  be  the
father  of  Adam,  the  final  cause  of  creation,  and  the  origin  of
life:  all  creatures  obey  his  will,  speak  his  word,  see  with  his
sight;  he  is  hidden  in  everything  sensible,  intellectual,  and
spiritual  (575-650).

He  forbids  the  disciple  to  believe  in  metempsychosis,
pointing  out  that  what  appears  in  different  forms  is  really  the
same,  e.g.,  Abu  Zayd  (the  hero  of  Hariri's  fiction)  in  all  his
disguises,  the  image  in  a  mirror,  the  echo,  the  phantom  seen
in  dream,  and  the  figures  shown  by  a  shadow-lantern.  He
describes  the  various  scenes  of  the  shadow-play — all  of  them
the  work  of  a  single  person  behind  a  screen — and  likens  the
soul  to  the  showman,  the  body  to  the  screen,  and  the  figures
to  the  objects  perceived  in  sensation.  When  the  bodily  screen
is  removed,  the  soul  becomes  unified  (651-730).

He  says  that  faith  and  infidelity  are  not  essentially
different.  The  One  God  is  adored  in  every  form  of  worship —
by  Moslems,  Christians,  Jews,  Zoroastrians,  even  by  idolaters ;
those  who  go  asti  ay  from  Him  are  none  the  less  seeking  Him :
it  is  He  that  guides  and  misguides  them,  according  as  they  are

Hi]  The  Odes  of  Ibnu  U-Fdrid  199

destined  for  salvation  or  perdition.  All  is  determined  by  the
Divine  will  and  is  the  effect  of  the  Divine  nature.  This  the  soul
knows  from  itself  (731-749).

He  declares  that  he  is  not  to  be  blamed  for  having  revealed
the  mysteries  imparted  to  him,  and  concludes  with  the
assertion  that  none  living  or  dead  has  attained  to  such  a
height  as  he  (750-761).

Saqatni  humayya  'l-hubbi  rdhatu  muqlati
wa-ka'si  muhayyd  man  'ani  'l-husni  jallati

(1)  The  hand  of  mine  eye  gave  me  love's  strong  wine  to  drink,
when  my  cup  was  the  face  of  Her  that  transcendeth  beauty,

(2)  And  in  my  drunkenness,  by  means  of  a  glance  I  caused  my
comrades  to  fancy  that  it  was  the  quaffing  of  their  wine  that
gladdened  my  inmost  soul,

(3)  Although  mine  eyes  made  me  independent  of  my  cup,  and
my  inebriation  was  derived  from  her  qualities,  not  from  my  wine ;

(4)  Therefore  in  the  tavern  of  my  intoxication  was  the  hour  of
my  thanksgiving  to  youths  through  whom  my  love  was  com-
pletely hidden  notwithstanding  my  celebrity  (as  a  lover).

(5)  And  when  my  sobriety  was  ended,  I  sought  union  with  her,
and  no  restraint  of  fear  affected  me  in  my  boldness  towards  her,

(1)  I.e.  "my  love  arose  from  contemplation  of  Divine  Beauty,  which
transcends  phenomenal  beauty"  (husn). Cf.  p.  90,  note  i.

(2)  "In  order  to  disgujse  my  love  and  to  guard  myself  against  reproach,
I  let  my  comrades,  i.e.  the  worshippers  of  material  beauty,  suppose  that  my
love  was  of  the  same  kind  as  theirs."

(3)  "But  in  fact  my  vision  of  Divine  Beauty  took  away  all  desire  to
behold  the  form  in  which  material  beauty  is  contained,  like  wine  in  a  cup."
So  K.  rightly  explains  the  verse,  regarding  al-hadaq  (properly,  "the  blacks
of  the  eyes")  as  equivalent  to  kadaqi,  "my  eyes." N.,  however,  under-
stands by  al-hadaq  "  the  darkness  of  phenomenal  being  "  and  by  qadahi  ("my
cup")  the  Divine  Essence  (cf.  verse  i).  According  to  his  interpretation,  the
poet  means  to  say  that  whereas  he  formerly  saw  only  the  Divine  Reality,
and  not  phenomena,  he  had  now  reached  the  higher  stage  of  seeing  pheno-
mena in  their  true  relation  to  that  Reality — a  relation  symbolised  by  his
description  of  them  as  the  black  of  the  all-encompassing  Divine  eye.

(4)  "I  render  thanks  to  the  votaries  of  vulgar  love " — the  " youths "  are
the  "comrades "  of  verse  2 — "because  my  being  confused  with  them  enables
me  to  hide  my  love  from  the  ignorant,  though  its  real  nature  is  well-known
to  mystics." N.  gives  an  unsuitable  explanation,  viz.  "In  my  ecstasy  I
praised  the  illustrious  theosophists  who  taught  me  the  mysteries  of  Divine
Love,  which  are  hidden  from  the  vulgar."

(5)  The  intoxication  of  ecstasy  is  associated  with  unreserve  (bast);
restraint  (qabd)  is  characteristic  of  the  return  to  consciousness  (sobriety).

2OO  Studies  in  Islamic  Mysticism  [CH.

(6)  And  in  the  privacy  of  bridal  unveiling,  when  no  continuance
of  self-regard  was  beside  me  as  a  watcher,  I  declared  to  her  that
which  I  felt,

(7)  And  I  said — my  state  bearing  witness  to  my  ardent  love,
and  my  finding  her  (in  my  heart)  effacing  me,  whilst  my  losing  her
brings  me  back  to  myself —

(8)  "  Bestow  on  me  the  glance  of  one  who  turns  for  a  moment,
ere  Love  makes  pass  away  what  remains  in  me  (of  self-existence)
to  see  thee  by.

(9)  And  if  thou  forbid  that  I  see  thee,  favour  mine  hearing
with,  'Thou  shalt  not  (see  me)':  this  word  was  sweet  to  another
before  me;

(10)  For,  because  of  my  drunkenness, I  have  need  of  a
recovery  (from  drunkenness)  which,  but  for  passion,  would  not
break  my  heart.

(n)  Had  the  mountains  felt  what  I  suffer,  and  were  Sinai
amongst  them,  they  would  have  been  razed  to  the  earth  ere  the
revelation —

(6)  Prof.  Nallino  (op.  cit.  p.  68)  proposes  to  take  baqd  as  an  accusative
of  duration,  but  this  seems  to  me  unnecessary.  The  poet  likens  the  con-
tinuance of  self-regard — b<*??  =  b<*??u  'l-nafs  (see  Glossary  to  the  Kitdb
al-Luma') — to  the  watcher  (raqib)  who  prevents  the  lover  from  gaining
access  to  the  beloved.

(7)  The  illuminated  mystic  suffers  an  effacement  (majiw)  of  his  human
attributes.  The  restoration  (ithbdt)  of  these  attributes  coincides  with  the
occultation  of  the  Divine  light  in  his  heart.

(8)  "  Let  me  behold  thee,  ere  my  rapture  makes  me  one  with  thee,  so  that
I  can  no  more  behold  thee."

(9)  "  If  thou  wilt  not  grant  me  vision,  at  least  let  me  hear  thee  deny  it
to  me,  as  thou  didst  once  deny  it  to  Moses  (Kor.  7,  139)."

(10)  "  Inasmuch  as  I  desire  vision,  which  cannot  be  attained  in  the  state
of  drunkenness  (entire  loss  of  self-consciousness),  I  have  need  of  a  return  to
sobriety; yet  sobriety  brings  with  it  repentance  (tawba) — as  Moses,  on
coming  out  of  his  swoon,  cried, '  Glory  to  thee !  I  turn  to  thee  with  repentance '
(Kor.  7,  140) — and  a  renewal  of  the  anguish  of  love"  (described  in  the
following  verses). The  "recovery"  which  the  poet  desires  is  not  the  heart-
breaking relapse  into  normal  consciousness  after  ecstasy,  but  the  state  of
abnormal  consciousness  and  clairvoyance  (technically  known  as  "the  second
sobriety  "  or  "the  second  separation ")  which  is  characteristic  of  the  unitive
life  at  its  highest  level. Cf.  notes  on  w.  213-4,  233-5,  479.

(11)  This  verse  alludes  to  the  same  passage  of  the  Koran:  "And  when
Motes  came  at  our  appointed  time  and  his  Lord  spake  unto  him,  Moses  said,
'O  Lord!  let  me  see,  that  I  may  behold  thee.' God  answered,  'Thou  shalt
not  see  me.  but  look  towards  the  mountain :  if  it  stand  firm  in  its  place,  then
shalt  thou  see  me.'  But  when  his  Lord  revealed  himself  to  the  mountain,  he
razed  it  to  the  earth,  and  Moses  fell  in  a  swoon."

in]  The  Odes  of  Ibnu  'l-Fdrid  201

(12)  A  passion  that  only  tears  betrayed, and  an  inward
ardency  that  increased  the  burning  heats  whose  maladies  brought
me  to  ruin.

(13)  The  Flood  of  Noah  is  like  my  tears,  when  I  lament,  and
the  blazing  of  Abraham's  fire  is  like  my  bosom's  glow.

(14)  But  for  my  sighs,  I  should  be  drowned  by  my  tears;  and
but  for  my  tears,  I  should  be  burned  by  my  sighs.

(15)  That  (grief)  which  Jacob  uttered  is  the  least  of  my  sorrow,
and  all  the  woe  of  Job  is  but  a  part  of  my  affliction;

(16)  And  the  last  sufferings  of  those  who  loved  unto  death  are
but  a  part  of  what  I  suffered  in  the  beginning  of  my  tribulation.

(17)  Had  the  ear  of  my  guide  heard  my  moaning  caused  by
pains  of  love-sickness  which  wasted  my  body,

(18)  My  grief  would  have  called  to  his  memory  the  bitter
distress  of  travellers  left  behind,  when  the  camels  are  reined  (and
ready  for  the  journey).

(19)  Anguish  hath  sorely  oppressed  and  naughted  me,  and
emaciation  hath  laid  bare  the  secret  of  my  true  being;

(20)  And  in  complaining  of  my  leanness  I  made  him  who  spied
upon  me  my  confidant,  acquainting  him  with  the  sum  of  my
inmost  feelings  and  with  the  particulars  of  my  way  (in  love).

(21)  I  appeared  to  him  as  an  idea,  while  my  body  was  in  such
case  that  he  saw  it  not,  because  of  the  woeful  burning  of  love  that
consumed  it ;

(22)  And  though  my  tongue  spake  not,  the  hidden  conceptions
of  my  soul  revealed  to  his  ear  the  mystery  of  that  which  my  soul
had  concealed  from  him,

(13)  Abraham,  having  broken  his  people's  idols,  was  cast  into  a  burning
fire,  which  by  the  command  of  God  became  cold  and  did  him  no  harm  (Kor.
21,  52  foil.).

(17)  K.  explains  that  the  "guide"  is  the  person  who  reproaches  the
lover  and  tries  to  induce  him  to  forget  his  beloved.  According  to  N.,  the
"guide"  is  "the  perfect  spiritual  director."

(20)  The spy (murdqib) apparently  signifies  here the  judgment  or
estimative  faculty  (wakm). Cf.  verse  137. "My  way  of  love"  is  K.'s  ren-
dering of  sirati. N.  defines  it  more  explicitly  as  "my  outward  state,"  i.e.,
acts  of  worship  and  devotion,  asceticism,  piety  and  thanksgiving.

(21)  Or,  reading  wasfan  for  ma'nan,  "I  appeared  to  him  only  in  virtue
of  my  external  attributes,  such  as  my  acts  of  devotion"  (N.).

(22)  N.  says:  "This  is  the  practice  of  the  Naqshbandis  at  the  present
day. Whilst  engaged  in  silent  meditation,  they  converse  spiritually  and
understand  each  other  though  no  word  is  uttered."

202  Studies  in  Islamic  Mysticism  [CH.

(23)  And  his  ear  became  for  my  thought  a  mind,  so  that  my
thought  was  moving  in  his  ear,  which  thereby  stood  him  in  stead
of  ocular  vision ;

(24)  And  he  gave  news  of  me  to  those  in  the  tribe,  setting  forth
my  inward  state,  for  he  knew  me  well.

(25)  Twas  as  though  the  Recording  Angels  had  come  down  to
his  heart  to  inspire  him  with  knowledge  of  what  was  written  in  my
book  (the  book  of  my  experience).

(26)  He  would  not  have  known  what  I  was  covering  and  what
was  the  guarded  secret  that  my  bosom  hid,

(27)  But  the  drawing  aside  of  the  bodily  veil  disclosed  the
secret,  which  it  had  screened  from  him,  of  my  inmost  soul.

(28)  And  I  should  have  been  invisible  to  him  in  respect  of  my
secret  unless  my  groans  arising  from  the  weakness  of  emaciation
had  divulged  it,

(29)  So  that  I  was  made  visible  by  a  malady  that  hid  me  from
him :  there  is  no  strange  thing  but  Love  brings  it  to  pass.

(30)  A  sore  anguish  o'erwhelmed  me,  at  whose  stroke  the
suggestions  of  my  soul — suggestions  that  betrayed  me,  like  tears —
vanished  into  nothingness.

(31)  If  hateful  death  had  sought  me,  it  would  not  have  known
where  I  was,  since  I  was  concealed  by  concealing  my  love  for
thee  (or  'by  thy  love's  concealing  me').

(32)  Betwixt  yearning  and  longing  I  passed  away,  whilst  thou
didst  either  avert  thyself  in  repulse  or  display  thyself  in  presence.

(33)  And  were  my  heart  sent  back  to  me  from  thy  court,  to
redeem  my  passing-away,  it  would  not  desire  the  abode  of  my  exile.

(24) "The  tribe,"  i.e.  my  §uff  brethren.
(29) "A  malady  that  hid  me  from  him":  cf.  verse  21.
(3°-33) In  these  verses  the  poet  describes  the  passing-away  (/and)  of
the  phenomenal  self  in  the  rapture  of  love. "  Like  tears  " :  cf.  verse  12.

(32)  His  ecstasy  was  the  result  of  successive  states  of  Divine  manifesta-
tion (tajalli)  and  occultation  (tawalli). Instead  of  "presence"  (hcufra)  N.
reads  "favour"  (hu?wa).

(33)  According  to  K.,  "the  abode  of  my  exile"  means  this  phenomenal
existence  by  which  the  heart  is  separated  from  God. N.,  taking  li-fand'i
in  the  sense  of  ildfand'i,  paraphrases  the  verse  as  follows :  "  If  my  heart  were
sent  back  from  the  sphere  of  thy  most  beautiful  Names  (the  Divine  Attri-
butes) to  the  original state  of non-existence  in  which  I was  before  I
manifested  the  light  of  thy  real  Being,  which  is  the  sphere  of  the  most
beautiful  Names,  it  would  not  desire  the  home  of  my  exile  (i.e.  my  original
non-existence)." The  poet  (he  says)  describes  this  original  state  as  "exile/'

Ill]  The  Odes  of  Ibnu  yl-Fdrid  203

(34)  That  whereof  I  declare  unto  thee  a  part  is  (only)  the
frontispiece  of  my  state :  'tis  beyond  my  power  to  express  what  lies
underneath;

(35)  And,  being  unable,  I  refrain  from  (speaking  of)  many
matters;  they  shall  not  be  recounted  by  my  speech,  and  even  if  I
told  them,  they  would  be  few.

(36)  My  cure  drew  nigh  unto  death ;  nay,  passion  decreed  that
it  should  die,  since  the  cooling  of  my  thirst  finds  the  heat  of  my
burning  drought  (still  remaining).

(37)  And  my  heart  is  more  threadbare  than  the  garments  of
my  endurance;  nay,  my  selfhood  is  linked  with  my  pleasure  in
respect  of  its  being  reduced  to  naught.

(38)  Had  God  revealed  me  to  my  visitors  (as  I  really  am),  and
had  they  ascertained  from  the  Tablet  how  much  of  me  Love  had
allowed  to  survive,

(39)  Their  eyes  would  not  have  beheld  anything  of  me  except
a  spirit  pervading  the  garments  of  a  dead  man.

(40)  And  ever  since  my  tracks  were  obliterated  and  I  wan-
dered distraught,  I  had  vain  imaginings  about  my  existence,  but
my  thought  could  not  lay  hold  upon  it.

(41)  And  after  this,  my  feelings  (of  love)  for  thee  became  self-

because,  if  he  returned  to  it,  it  would  seem  strange  to  him  after  his  long
absence — a  very  forced  interpretation,  I  think.

(35)  "Few,"  i.e.  in  comparison  with  the  whole. Another  rendering  is
"they  would  be  little,"  i.e.  less  than  they  are  in  reality,  but  this  does  not
preserve  the  natural  antithesis  of  kathiratin  and  qallat.

(36)  "My  cure  was  on  the  point  of  death"  (K.)  or  "became  incurable"
(N.),  i.e.  I  could  not  possibly  be  cured,  because  the  presence  of  the  beloved,
which  relieves  pain,  also  kindles  in  me  a  fiercer  flame  of  love.

(37)  "Myfand  is  so  complete  that  not  only  do  I  feel  no  pleasure  but
my  very  selfhood  (dhdt)  has  vanished."

(38)  The  "visitors"  are  the  sick  man's  friends  who  come  to  see  how  he
is. On  the  Guarded  Tablet  (al-Lawhu  'l-mahfuz)  are  inscribed  the  arche-
types of  all  things  past,  present  and  future.

(39)  "Eyes,"  oculi  cordis. "The  garments  of  a  dead  man":  K.  says,
"i.e.  the  members  of  my  body,  which  are  the  vesture  of  my  dead  soul
(nafs}."  The  word  for  "garments"  (athwdb  or  thiydb)  sometimes  has  this
meaning  in  non-mystical  Arabic  poetry.  Ibnu  '1-Farid  indicates  that  Love
has  left  in  him  nothing  except  what  is  immortal  and  incorruptible,  namely,
his  spirit  (ruh),  which  belongs  to  the  Unseen  World.

(40)  "  Since  my  passing-away  (fund)  my  thought  searches  in  vain  after
my  lost  self."

(41)  "  My  love  of  God  is  not  a  property  of  my  perishable  self  (nafs),  but
of  my  spirit  (nU);  otherwise  the  rtih  would  be  dependent  on  the  nafs,  which

204  Studies  in  Islamic  Mysticism  [CH.

subsistent  (independent  of  my  phenomenal  being) :  my  proof  is  the
fact  that  my  spirit  existed  before  my  mortal  frame.

(42)  I  told  how  I  fared  in  my  love  of  thee,  not  because
impatience  made  me  weary  of  my  sufferings,  but  in  order  to
assuage  my  grief.

(43)  Tis  good  to  show  fortitude  towards  enemies,  but  in  the
presence  of  loved  ones  aught  save  weakness  is  unseemly.

(44)  The  excellence  of  my  patience  keeps  me  from  complaining,
though  if  I  complained  to  my  enemies  of  what  I  feel,  they  would
do  away  with  my  complaint.

(45)  And  the  issue  of  my  patience  in  loving  thee  is  praise-
worthy if  I  endure  the  sorrows  thou  layest  on  me;  but  if  I  endure
to  be  separated  from  thee,  it  is  not  praiseworthy.

(46)  Whatever  woe  befalls  me  is  a  favour,  inasmuch  as  my
purpose  holds  firm  against  breaking  my  vows;

(47)  So  for  every  pain  in  love,  when  it  arises  from  thee,  I  give
thanks  instead  of  complaining.

(48)  Ay,  and  if  the  agonies  of  passion  do  me  despite,  yet  are
they  reckoned  in  love  as  a  kindness;

(49)  And  my  unhappiness,  nay,  my  tribulation  is  a  bounty
when  wrought  by  thee,  and  my  raiment  of  hardship  worn  for  thy
sake  is  the  most  ample  of  felicities.

(50)  My  ancient  fealty  to  thee  caused  me  to  regard  the  worst
of  slaves,  who  were  bestowed  on  me  (by  thee),  as  the  best  of
treasures.

(51)  One  of  them  a  railer  and  one  a  slanderer :  the  former  leads

is  not  the  case,  for  it  existed  before  the  creation  of  the  body."  Cf.  the
Tradition,  "God  created  the  spirits  two  thousand  years  before  the  bodies."
According  to  N.,  the  poet  associates  his  love  with  his  original  state  of  non-
existence,  i.e.  when  he  existed  only  in  the  eternal  knowledge  of  God.  This
verse  explains  why  love  continues  after  the  passing-away  (fand)  of  the  lover.
(46)  The  clause,  "inasmuch  as,  etc."  conveys  an  intimation  that  it  is
only  to  the  constant  lover  that  afflictions  are  favours  in  disguise.

(49)  K.  says:  "He  rejects  the  word  'unhappiness'  (s>haqd)  and  sub-
stitutes 'tribulation'  (bald), because  the  sufferings  of  love  are  not  an
unhappiness,  but  a  trial  and  probation,  which  is  a  mark  of  regard  (iltifdt)  on
the  part  of  the  Beloved  towards  the  lover  and  is  therefore  the  very  essence
of  happiness."

(50)  "My  ancient  fealty  ":  see  note  on  verse  69.  "The  best  of  treasures,"
because  they  were  the  predestined  means  by  which  my  love  was  tried.

(51)  This  verse  is  variously  read. I  translate  li-'izzat'*  in the  first
hemistich  and  li-ghayrati  in  the  second. According  to  K.,  the  "railer"  is

ill]  The  Odes  of  Ibnu  'l-Fdrid  205

me  astray  because  of  vainglory,  while  the  latter  talks  foolishness
about  me  because  of  jealousy.

(52)  I  oppose  that  one  in  his  blame,  from  fear  (of  God),  and  I
ally  myself  with  this  one  in  his  meanness,  from  caution.

(53)  And  my  face  was  not  turned  from  thy  path  by  dread
of  that  which  I  encountered,  nor  by  any  harm  that  smote  me
therein,

(54)  Although  in  bearing  what  hath  befallen  me  on  account  of
thee  I  have  no  patience  that  tends  to  praise  of  me  or  to  the  lauding
of  my  love ;

(55)  But  thy  beauty, which calls  to  thee (every  heart),
ordained  that  I  should  endure  all  that  I  have  told  and  all  the
sequel  of  my  tale  to  its  farthest  length.

(56)  It  was  only  because  thou  appearedst  to  mine  eye  with  the
most  perfect  qualities,  surpassing  (mortal)  loveliness ;

(57)  And  thou  madest  my  tribulation  an  ornament  to  me  and
gavest  it  a  free  hand  over  me,  and  coming  from  thee  it  was  the
most  glorious  of  distinctions;

(58)  For  when  one  is  snared  by  Beauty,  methinks  his  soul
(even)  from  the  most  delicious  life  is  (gladly)  rendered  up  to  death.

(59)  A  soul  that  thinks  to  meet  with  no  suffering  in  love,  when
it  addresses  itself  to  love,  is  spurned.

the  Devil,  who  in  the  guise  of  a  candid  friend  seeks  to  draw  the  pilgrim  into
the  path  of  sensuality,  while  the  "slanderer"  is  the  Angel,  who  exhorts  him
to  piety  and  other-worldliness,  thereby  diverting  him  from  his  love  of  the
Divine  Essence.  Cf .  the  passage  in  the  Koran  (2,  28),  where  the  angels,  being
jealous  of  Adam,  maligned  him  and  said  to  God,  "Wilt  Thou  place  on  the
earth  (as  Thy  vicegerent)  one  who  will  do  evil  there  ? "  See  also  note  on
verse  400.

(52)  "I  resist  the  Devil  because  I  should  be  separated  from  God,  if  I
were  to  succumb  to  his  wiles;  but  not  the  Angel,  because  I  am  afraid  of
letting  him  know  my  real  aspiration."  The  Angel  is  described  as  "mean,"
for  he  attributes  the  love  and  wrath  of  God  to  secondary  causes,  such  as
obedience  and  disobedience — he  thinks,  e.g.,  that  Adam's  sin  was  the  cause
of  his  incurring  the  Divine  anger — whereas  in  truth  God's  love  and  wrath
are  eternal  and  uncaused.  The  poet,  though  professing  to  agree  with  the
Angel,  keeps  to  himself  the  higher  knowledge  to  which  none  but  mystics  can
attain,  who  love  God  not  as  the  Lord  of  Paradise,  but  as  the  Essence  of  all
that  exists.

(55-57)  ''Thy  beauty  called  me  to  union  with  thee,  and  since  union
with  thee  requires  complete  detachment  from  the  phenomenal  self — a  result
which  cannot  be  secured  without  much  suffering — thou  didst  cause  my
suffering  to  appear  to  me  in  the  form  of  thy  beauty."

(58) "  Death,"  i.e.  fand.

206  Studies  in  Islamic  Mysticism  [CH.

(60)  No  spirit  that  was  given  repose  ever  gained  love,  nor  did
any  soul  that  desired  a  tranquil  life  ever  win  devotion.

(61)  Tranquillity !  how  far  is  it  from  the  life  of  a  lover ! The
garden  of  Eden  is  compassed  about  with  terrors.

(62)  Mine  is  a  noble  soul — a  soul  that  would  not  forget  thee
even  though  thou  shouldst  offer  it,  on  condition  of  forgetting  thee,
what  is  beyond  its  wishes  ;

(63)  A  soul  that  would  not  let  go  the  true  love  I  bear,  even
though  it  were  removed  far  (from  thee)  by  scorn  and  absence  and
hatred  and  the  cutting  off  of  hope.

(64)  I  have  no  way  of  departing  from  my  Way  in  love,  and  if
ever  I  shall  turn  aside  from  it,  I  shall  abandon  my  religion ;

(65)  And  had  a  thought  of  fondness  towards  any  one  save  thee
come  into  my  mind  unawares,  I  should  have  pronounced  myself
a  heretic.

(66)  Tis  for  thee  to  give  judgment  in  my  case.  Do  as  thou  wilt,
for  my  feeling  towards  thee  was  ever  desire,  not  aversion.

(67)  I  swear  by  the  firm  pact  of  love  between  us,  which  was  not
alloyed  with  any  imagination  of  annulment — and  'tis  the  best  of
oaths —

(68)  And  by  thy  taking  the  covenant  of  troth  in  a  place  where
I  did  not  appear  in  such  a  form  that  my  soul  was  clothed  in  the
shadow  of  my  clay,

(69)  And  by  the  primal  pledge  that  never  was  changed  since  I

(61)  "The  garden  of  Eden,  etc.":  this  sentence  is  borrowed  from  a
Tradition  of  the  Prophet — "Paradise  is  encompassed  with  things  disliked,
and  Hell  with  things  desired,"  i.e.  Paradise  is  reached  only  by  passing
through  painful  experiences.

(62)  "A  noble  soul":  literally,  "the  soul  of  a  free  man." Freedom
(hurriyya),  as  a  mystical  term,  denotes  emancipation  from  the  bondage  of
creatureliness.

(69)  K.  identifies  "the  primal  pledge"  with  "the  covenant  of  troth"
mentioned  in  the  preceding  verse.  This  refers  to  a  passage  of  the  Koran
(7,  171)  where  it  is  written  that  God,  having  drawn  forth  from  the  loins  of
Adam  all  the  future  generations  of  mankind,  said  to  them,  "Am  not  I  your
Lord?"  and  received  the  answer,  "Yea,"  which  (according  to  the  §uff
interpretation)  sealed  the  covenant  of  mutual  love  between  God  and  His
creatures.  " The  succeeding  bond,"  into  which  they  entered  after  their  souls
had  been  joined  to  their  bodies,  is  the  bond  of  Islam  contracted  through  the
mediation  of  the  prophets.  N.  most  unreasonably  explains  "the  primal
pledge"  as  the  pledge  given  by  Mohammed's  vicegerents  and  companions
to  accept  his  religion,  and  "the  succeeding  bond  "  as  the  solemn  vow  made
by  Ibnu  '1-Farid  to  his  spiritual  directors  that  he  would  be  steadfast  in  the
Mohammedan  faith.

ill]  The  Odes  of  Ibnu  'l-Fdrid  207

plighted  it,  and  by  the  succeeding  bond  that  was  too  solemn  for
any  frailty  to  loose,

(70)  And  by  the  rising  of  thy  radiant  countenance,  whose
splendour  caused  all  the  full  moons  to  become  invisible,

(71)  And  by  the  attribute  of  perfection  in  thee,  from  which  the
fairest  and  shapeliest  form  in  creation  drew  support,

(72)  And  by  the  quality  of  thy  maj  esty  with  which  my  torment
is  pleasant  to  me  and  my  being  slain  is  sweet;

(73)  And  by  the  mystery  of  thy  beauty,  whereby  all  loveliness
in  the  world  is  manifested  and  fulfilled;

(74)  And  by  thy  comeliness  which  captivates  the  mind  and
which  guided  me  to  a  love  wherein  my  abasement  for  thy  glory's
sake  was  comely;

(75)  And  by  an  idea  in  thee  beyond  comeliness — an  idea
which  I  beheld  through  itself,  too  subtle  to  be  apprehended  by  the
eye  of  perception :

(76)  Verily,  thou  art  the  desire  of  my  heart,  and  the  end  of
my  search,  and  the  goal  of  my  aim,  and  my  choice  and  my
chosen.

(77)  I  disrobed  myself  of  modesty  and  deprecation,  clothing
myself  in  shamelessness,  rejoicing  in  my  disrobing  and  in  my  robe;

(78)  And  'tis  my  duty  to  cast  off  modesty  for  thy  sake,  even
though  my  folk  shrink  from  approaching  me ;  and  shamelessness  is
my  law.

(79)  And  no  folk  of  mine  are  they,  so  long  as  they  find  fault
with  my  recklessness  and  show  hatred  and  deem  it  right  to  abuse
me  for  thy  sake.

(70)  As  the  moon  is  hidden  by  its  nearness  to  the  sun  on  the  last  night
of  the  lunar  month,  so  the  Divine  attributes  are  eclipsed  by  the  splendour  of
the  Essence  which  reveals  them.

(71-73)  In  these  verses  the  poet  describes  the  three  main  aspects,  in  one
or  other  of  which  all  the  Divine  attributes,  except  those  that  are  purely
essential,  may  be  regarded:  viz.  perfection  (kamdl),  majesty  (jaldl),  and
beauty  (jamdl).  "The  fairest  and  shapeliest  form"  is  the  Perfect  Man
(al-insdnu  'l-kdmil),  who  was  created  in  God's  image.  "Fulfilled,"  i.e.
through  the  love  that  Divine  beauty  inspires.

(75)  "An  idea  in  thee  beyond  comeliness"  (husn):  i.e.  Absolute  Beauty
(jamdl).

(77)  K.  omits  this  verse,  which  is  certainly  spurious  (see  Nallino,  op.  cit.
p.  56).  Having  translated  it,  I  let  it  stand,  as  its  removal  would  alter  the
numeration  of  the  verses  from  this  point  to  the  end  of  the  poem.

(79)  "They  who  find  fault,  etc."  i.e.  the  exoteric  Sufis,  who  devote
themselves  to  asceticism  and  religious  works  and  dislike  mystical  enthusiasm.

208  Studies  in  Islamic  Mysticism  [CH.

(80)  My  fellows  in  the  religion  of  love  are  those  who  love ;  and
they  have  approved  my  ignominy  and  thought  well  of  my  disgrace.

(81)  Let  who  will  be  wroth,  save  only  thee:  there  is  no  harm
(in  their  anger),  when  the  noble  of  my  kin  are  pleased  with  me.

(82)  If  the  ascetics  are  fascinated  by  some  of  the  beauties
that  are  thine,  everything  in  thee  is  the  source  of  my  fascination.

(83)  And  I  never  was  bewildered  until  I  chose  love  of  thee  as
a  religion.  Woe  is  me  for  my  bewilderment,  had  it  not  been  on
account  of  thee ! "

(84)  She  said,  "Another's  love  thou  hast  sought  and  hast
taken  the  wrong  path,  forsaking  in  thy  blindness  the  highway
unto  me.

(85)  And  the  imposture  of  a  soul  that  cherished  vain  desires
beguiled  thee  so  that  thou  saidst  what  thou  saidst,  putting  on
thereby  the  shame  of  falsehood,

(86)  And  didst  covet  the  most  precious  of  boons  with  a  soul
that  crossed  its  bound  and  trespassed.

(87)  How  wilt  thou  win  my  love,  which  is  the  best  of  affections,
by  means  of  pretence,  which  is  the  worst  of  qualities?

(88)  Where  is  Suha  to  a  man  blind  from  birth  who  in  his

(80)  The  commentators  say  that  Ibnu  '1-Farid  alludes  here  to  the  school
of  Sufis  who  are  known  as  the  Malamatfs,  because  they  deliberately  acted
in  such  a  way  as  to  incur  blame  (maldmat). See  Kashf  al-Mahjtib  (transla-
tion), pp.  62-9.

(81)  According  to  K.,  the  words  "when  the  noble  of  my  kin,  etc."  arc
a  half-verse  composed  by  another  poet  and  inserted  by  Ibnu  '1-Farid  as  a
quotation  (iatfmin).

(82)  While  ascetics  love  God  for  His  mercy  and  for  the  blessings  which
He  bestows  on  them  now  and  hereafter,  true  mystics  love  Him  for  all  His
attributes,  since  they  behold  the  beauty  of  His  essence  in  all  His  mani-
festations— in  His  wrath  and  vengeance  no  less  than  in  His  mercy  and
forgiveness.

(83)  Bewilderment  (bayra)  when  caused  by  letting  the  eye  wander  in
different  directions,  is  pernicious;  but  praiseworthy,  when  it  is  the  result  of
gazing  concentratedly  on  the  beauty  of  the  Beloved.  The  latter  is  charac-
teristic of  one  who  has  lost  himself  in  Divine  contemplation. "O  Lord,
increase  my  bewilderment  I  "  was  a  famous  Stiff's  prayer.

(86)  "The  most  precious  of  boons,"  i.e.  Divine  Love.  "Crossed  its
bound,"  because  the  appetitive  soul  (nafs)  has  no  object  beyond  its  own
gratification.

(88)  To  win  Divine  Love  by  false  pretences  is  as  impossible  as  to  be  blind
and  see  the  star  Suha,  which  is  so  small  and  obscure  that  only  the  keenest
sight  can  descry  it.

in]  The  Odes  of  Ibnu  'l-Fdrid  209

confusion  has  forgotten  what  he  seeks?  Nay,  thy  vain  hopes  have
duped  thee,

(89)  So  that  thou  stoodest  in  a  position  to  which  thy  rank  was
inferior,  on  a  foot  that  overstepped  not  its  own  province,

(90)  And  soughtest  a  thing  towards  which  how  many  stretched
out  their  necks  and  were  beheaded !

(91)  Thou  didst  come  to  tents  which  are  not  entered  by  their
back  parts  and  whose  doors  are  closed  against  the  knocking  of  one
like  thee;

(92)  And  thou  didst  lay  (as  an  offering)  before  thy  converse
(with  me)  mere  tinsel,  aiming  thereby  at  a  glory  whose  ends  are
hard  to  reach ;

(93)  And  thou  earnest  to  woo  my  pure  love  with  a  shining
face,  not  letting  thine  honour  be  lost  in  this  world  or  in  the
next;

(94)  But  hadst  thou  been  with  me  as  the  kasra  below  the  dot
of  the  letter  b,  thou  wouldst  have  been  raised  to  a  rank  that  thine
own  effort  did  not  gain  for  thee,

(95)  Where  thou  wouldst  see  that  what  thou  didst  (formerly)
regard  is  not  worth  a  thought,  and  that  what  thou  didst  provide
is  no  (sufficient)  provision.

(96)  To  those  who  are  rightly  guided  the  straight  road  unto
me  is  plain,  but  all  men  are  made  blind  by  their  desires.

(89) "On  a  foot,  etc."  i.e.  relying  on  thy  lower  self  (nafs),  which  never
transcends  the  sphere  of  its  selfish  interests.

(91)  Cf.  Kor.  2,  185:  "It  is  not  righteousness  that  ye  should  come  into
houses  (tents)  by  the  back  parts  thereof."  The  back  parts  of  the  House  of
Love,  through  which  none  can  enter  it,  are  egoism  and  self-conceit;  the  door
that  lets  in  those  worthy  of  admission  is  self-abandonment  (fund).

(92)  "  Instead  of  being  ready  to  sacrifice  thy  existence  as  an  individual
in  the  hope  of  attaining  unto  me,  thou  broughtest  me  nothing  but  thine
own  acts  and  words  and  feelings."

(93)  The  true  lover  has  no  regard  for  his  name  and  fame. Cf.  the
Tradition,  "Spiritual  poverty  is  blackness  of  the  face  in  both  worlds."

(94)  "As  the  kasra,  etc."  i.e.  having  no  independent  existence,  but
subsisting  only  through  God. Kasra  is  the  vowel »,  which  is  always  written
under  the  consonant  that  it  belongs  to.  The  letter  b  (^)  denotes  the
form  of  phenomenal  being,  just  as  the  letter  a  (I)  denotes  the  form  of
Real  Being;  while  the  dot  of  the  b  symbolises  contingency  as  opposed  to
absoluteness. Hence  the  mystical  saying,  "Existence  was  manifested  by
means  of  b,  and  the  worshipper  was  distinguished  from  the  Worshipped  by
means  of  the  dot."

(96) "The  straight  road,"  i.e.  selflessness  (/ana).

N.  S.  II  *4

2io  Studies  in  Islamic  Mysticism  [CH.

(97)  It  is  time  that  I  reveal  (the  nature  of)  thy  love,  and  who
it  is  that  hath  wasted  thee,  by  a  denial  of  thy  claim  to  love  me.

(98)  Thou  art  sworn  to  love,  but  to  love  of  self :  amongst  my
proofs  (of  this)  is  the  fact  that  thou  sufferest  one  of  thy  attributes
to  remain  in  existence.

(99)  For  thou  lov'st  me  not,  so  long  as  thou  hast  not  passed
away  in  me ;  and  thou  hast  not  passed  away,  so  long  as  my  form
is  not  seen  within  thee.

(100)  Cease,  then,  pretending  to  love,  and  call  thy  heart  to
something  else,  and  drive  thy  error  from  thee  by  that  (state)  which
(is  the  best).

(101)  And  shun  the  quarter  of  union :  'tis  far  oft0,  and  was  never
reached  (in  life),  and  lo,  thou  art  living.  If  thou  art  sincere,  die !

(102)  Such  is  Love :  if  thou  diest  not,  thou  wilt  not  win  thy  will
of  the  Beloved  in  aught.  Then  choose  death  or  leave  my  love  alone! "

(103)  I  said  to  her,  "My  spirit  is  thine:  'tis  for  thee  to  take  it.
How  should  it  be  in  my  power?

(104)  I  am  not  one  that  loathes  to  die  in  love — I  am  always
true  (to  death) :  my  nature  refuses  aught  else.

(105)  What  should  I  hope  to  be  said  of  me  except  'Such  a  one
died  of  love'?  Who  will  ensure  me  of  that  (death)? — for  it  is  that
I  seek.

(106)  Ay,  it  pleaseth  me  well  that  my  life  be  ended  by  longing
ere  thou  art  gained,  if  my  claim  to  love  thee  shall  be  found  real;

(107)  And  if  I  shall  not  make  good  such  a  claim  in  regard  to
thee,  because  it  is  too  high,  I  am  content  with  my  pride  in  being
reputed  thy  lover;

(98)  "One  of  thy  attributes,"  because  an  attribute  implies  a  subject  in
which  it  inheres ;  and  that  subject  is  thy  "self"  (nafs),  one  of  whose  attributes
is  the  desire  to  enjoy  vision  and  contemplation  of  God.  N.  quotes  the  saying
of  Abu  '1  Hasan  al-Shadhili,  "The  desire  of  union  with  God  is  one  of  the
things  that  most  effectually  separate  from  God."

(99)  Real  love  is  nothing  less  than  fand,  which  is  here  denned  as  the
appearance  of  Divine  attributes  in  the  lover  (K.)  or  God's  unveiling  Himself
in  the  mystic's  heart  (N.).

(100)  "That  (state)  which  (is  the  best),"  i.e.  the  complete  passing-away
(fand)  of  the  self  (nafs).  So  N.,  but  K.  renders  "that  (quality)  which  (is  the
best),"  namely,  veracity.  In  this  case  the  meaning  will  be :  "  Do  not  pretend
to  love,  but  give  thy  passion  its  true  name,  and  let  veracity  purge  thee  of  thy
false  pretensions."

( 101 )  "  Shun  the  quarter  of  union  " :  cf .  note  on  v.  98. For  the  meaning
of  "union"  (wasl)  see  note  on  verse  441.

(107) Cf.  p.  171,  1.  25  foil.

in]  The  Odes  of  Ibnu  yl-Fdrid  211

(108)  And  if  I  die  of  anguish  without  the  reputation,  thou  wilt
have  done  no  wrong  to  a  soul  that  delights  in  martyrdom ;

(109)  And  if  thou  wilt  spill  my  blood  in  vain  and  I  shall  not
be  reckoned  a  martyr,  'tis  grace  enough  for  me  that  thou  shouldst
know  the  cause  of  my  death.

(no)  Methinks,  my  spirit  is  not  worth  so  much  that  it  should
be  offered  in  exchange  for  union  (wisdl)  with  thee,  for  it  is  too
threadbare  to  be  prized."

The  poet  then  refers  to  the  warning  that  he  must  show  his
sincerity  by  dying  to  self.  Does  the  Beloved  threaten  him
with  death?

(115)  "To  me  thy  menace  is  a  promise,  and  its  fulfilment  is  the
wish  of  an  affianced  lover  who  stands  firm  against  the  blows  of
all  calamity  except  absence  (from  thee).

(116)  I  have  come  to  hope  that  which  others  fear:  succour
therewith  a  dead  man's  spirit  that  is  prepared  for  (everlasting)
life!"

By  passing-away  (fand)  the  mystic  wins  immortal  life  in
God  (baqd).

(120)  If  she  lets  my  blood  be  shed  in  love  of  her,  yet  hath  she
established  my  rank  on  the  heights  of  glory  and  eminence.

(121)  By  my  life,  though  I  lose  my  life  in  exchange  for  her
love,  I  am  the  gainer;  and  if  she  wastes  away  my  heart,  she  will
make  it  whole  once  more.

But  this  is  an  inward  glory,  which  causes  him  to  be
scorned  by  his  fellow-men.

(126)  Tis  as  though  I  had  never  been  honoured  amongst  them
but  they  had  always  despised  me  both  in  easy  fortune  and  in  hard.

(127)  Had  they  asked  me  "  Whom  dost  thou  love? "  and  had  I
declared  her  name,  they  would  have  said,  "He  speaks  a  parable,"
or  "A  touch  of  madness  hath  smitten  him."

(128)  Yet,  had  abasement  for  her  sake  been  impossible,  my
passion  had  not  been  sweet  to  me ;  and  but  for  love,  my  glory  had
not  been  in  abasement.

(129)  Because  of  her,  I  am  endowed  with  the  understanding
of  one  crazed,  the  health  of  one  shattered  by  disease,  and  the  glory
of  ignominy.

14—2

212  Studies  in  Islamic  Mysticism  [CH.

The  following  lines,  curiously  subtle  in  their  psychology
and  phrasing,  represent  the  "self"  (nafs)  as  desiring  Divine
Love,  but  keeping  its  desire  beyond  the  reach  of  mental
perception.

(130)  My  soul  secretly  imparted  its  desire  for  her  love  to  my
heart  alone,  where  the  intellect  was  unable  to  spy  upon  it ;

(131)  For  I  feared  that  the  tale,  if  it  were  told,  would  transport
the  rest  of  me,  so  that  the  language  of  my  tears  would  declare  my
secret.

(132)  In  order  to  keep  safe  that  secret,  part  of  me  (my  soul)
was  misleading  part  of  me  (my  intellect),  but  my  falsehood  in
hiding  it  was  really  my  speaking  the  truth.

(133)  And  when  my  first  (intuitive)  thought  refused  to  divulge
it  to  my  ribs  (my  mental  faculties),  I  guarded  it  also  from  my
reflection,

(134)  And  I  did  my  utmost  to  conceal  it,  so  that  I  forgot  it
and  was  caused  to  forget  my  concealment  of  that  which  my  soul
confided  to  my  heart.

(135)  And  if  in  planting  those  desires  I  shall  pluck  the  fruit  of
suffering,  God  bless  a  soul  that  suffered  for  its  desires,

(136)  Since  of  all  love's  wishes  the  sweetest  to  the  soul  is  that
whereby  she  who  caused  it  to  remember  and  forget  them  willed  it
to  suffer.

(137)  She  set,  to  guard  her,  one  taken  from  myself  who
should  watch  against  me  the  amorous  approach  of  my  spiritual
thoughts ;

(138)  And  if  they,  unperceived  by  the  mind,  steal  into  my
heart  without  hindrance,  I  cast  down  mine  eyes  in  reverent  awe.

(130)  The  nafs  cannot  love  God  purely  and  disinterestedly:  therefore
the  poet  does  not  say  that  it  loves,  but  only  that  it  desires  to  love.  It
communicates  this  desire  to  the  sirr — the  organ  of  mystical  contemplation,
Eckhart's  "ground  of  the  soul" — but  withholds  it  from  the  intellect  ('aql).

(132)  "My  falsehood,  etc." — i.e.  concealment  is  one  of  the  signs  of  t  rm
love.

(134)  The  words  "I  was  caused  to  forget"  indicate  the  higher  stage  of
unconsciousness  that  is  produced  in  the  mystic  by  an  act  of  the  Divine  will,
when  his  own  will  has  entirely  ceased.

(138) Wahm,  here  rendered  by "mind," is  properly  the  faculty  of

judgment,  which  by  its  activity  prevents  the  thought  of  God  (khdfiru  'l-haqq),

ng  in  the  ground  of  the  soul  (sirr),  from  penetrating  into  the  heart

(qalb). For  this  reason  it  is  depicted  in  the  preceding  verse  as  a  "  watcher  "

(murdqib).

in]  The  Odes  of  Ibnu  9l-Fdrid  213

(139)  Mine  eye  is  turned  back  if  I  seek  but  one  glance,  and  if
my  hand  be  stretched  forth  to  take  freely  (its  will  of  her),  it  is
restrained.

(140)  Thus  in  every  limb  of  me  is  an  advance  prompted  by
hope,  and  in  consequence  of  the  awe  born  of  veneration  a  retreat
prompted  by  fear.

The  poet  now  attempts  to  describe  the  mystical  union  of
the  lover  with  the  Beloved.

(144)  Tis  my  being  crazed  with  love  of  her  that  makes  me
jealous  of  her;  but  when  I  recognise  my  worth  (to  be  naught),  I
disown  my  jealousy,

(145)  And  my  spirit  is  rapt  in  ecstatic  joy  (towards  her),
though  I  do  not  acquit  my  soul  of  conceiving  a  desire.

(146)  Mine  ear  sees  her,  far  though  she  be  from  the  eye,  in  the
form  of  blame  which  visits  me  in  my  hours  of  waking,

(147)  And  when  she  is  mentioned,  mine  eye  deems  mine  ear
lucky,  and  the  part  of  me  that  remains  (in  consciousness)  envies
the  part  that  she  has  caused  to  pass  away.

(148)  In  reality  I  led  my  Imam  (leader  in  prayer),  and  all
mankind  were  behind  me. Wheresoever  I  faced,  there  was  my
(true)  direction.

(149)  Whilst  I  prayed,  mine  eye  was  seeing  her  in  front  of  me,
but  my  heart  was  beholding  me  in  front  of  all  my  Imams.

(150)  And  no  wonder  that  in  conducting  the  prayer  the  Imam
faced  towards  me,  since  in  my  heart  dwelt  she  who  is  the  qibla  of
my  qibla,

(151)  And  that  towards  me  had  faced  all  the  six  directions
with  their  whole  contents  of  piety  and  greater  and  lesser  pil-
grimage.

(144-5)  Jealousy  involves  duality,  and  not  until  it  is  denied  can  the
spirit  (riih)  attain  to  oneness  with  God.  Complete  spiritual  oneness  is  in-
compatible with  the  desire  of  the  soul  (nafs)  for  vision.

(146) Cf.  p.  180.

(148)  The  following  lines  describe  a  unitive  state  in  which  the  mystic,
by  losing  his  apparent  individuality,  realises  his  essential  oneness  with  the
One  whom  he  loves  and  worships.

(150)  "My  qibla"  is  the  point  to  which  Moslems  face  when  they  pray,
i.e.  the  Ka'ba,  which  (like  every  other  created  thing)  turns  in  worship
towards  the  Being  who  endues  it  with  existence.

(151)  "The  six  directions"  are  above,  below,  before,  behind,  right  and
left.

214  Studies  in  Islamic  Mysticism  [CH.

(152)  To  her  I  address  my  prayers  at  the  Maqam,  and  behold
in  them  that  she  prayed  to  me.

(153)  Both  of  us  are  a  single  worshipper  who,  in  respect  of  the
united  state,  bows  himself  to  his  essence  in  every  act  of  bowing.

(154)  None  prayed  to  me  but  myself  nor  did  I  pray  to  any  one
but  myself  in  the  performance  of  every  genuflexion.

(1^5)  How  long  shall  I  keep  to  the  veil?  Lo,  I  have  rent  it !
Twas  in  my  bond  of  allegiance  that  I  should  loose  the  loops  of  the
curtains.

(156)  I  was  given  my  fealty  to  her  before  she  had  appeared
to  me  at  the  taking  of  the  covenant,  on  a  day  when  no  day  was,  in
my  primal  state.

(157)  I  gained  my  fealty  to  her  neither  by  hearing  nor  by
sight  nor  by  acquisition  nor  by  the  attraction  of  my  nature,

(158)  But  I  was  enamoured  of  her  in  the  world  of  command,
where  is  no  manifestation,  and  my  intoxication  was  prior  to  my
appearance  (in  the  created  world).

(159)  The  attributes  dividing  us  which  were  not  subsistent
there  (in  the  world  of  command)  Love  caused  to  pass  away  here
(in  the  created  world),  and  they  vanished;

(160)  And  I  found  that  which  I  cast  off  going  out  of  me  unto
me  and  again  coming  from  me  with  an  increase,

(152)  The  Maqam  Ibrahfm,  i.e.  the  standing-place  of  Abraham,  is  a  rock
situated  to  the  east  of  the  Ka'ba.

(153)  In  mystical  union  the  unity  of  Being  is  revealed:  worshipper  and
Worshipped  are  distinguished  only  as  aspects  of  one  reality.

(156)  Those  who  interpret  this  verse  according  to  the  doctrine  of  Ibnu
'l-'Arabi  take  the  meaning  to  be  "  I  was  pledged  to  love  God  before  the
creation  of  Time  when  all  things,  though  not  yet  objectified  in  material  forms,
existed  as  objects  of  knowledge  in  the  Divine  essence."  God  did  not  become
manifest  to  His  creatures  until  at  the  word  "Be !  "  they  issued  forth  from  the
Divine  essence  (which  from  this  point  of  view  is  named  "the  world  of  com-
mand ")  into  the  world  of  creation.  It  is  by  no  means  certain,  however,  that
Ibnu  '1-Farid  regarded  the  human  spirit  as  eternally  pre-existent.  Cf.  Nallino,
op.  cit.  p.  535  foil.  "  The  covenant "  refers  to  the  pledge  taken  by  every  soul,
before  its  earthly  existence,  to  love  God  for  evermore.  See  note  on  verse  69.

(158)  "The  world  of  command"  is  the  invisible  or  intelligible  world.

(159)  Divine  Love  enables  the  mystic  to  rid  himself  of  the  attributes  of
self  which  hinder  him  from  attaining  to  union  with  God.

(160)  The  complement  and  consummation  of  death  to  self  (fand)  is
everlasting  life  in  God  (baqd).  In  this  life  the  lost  attributes  are  restored,  but
"with  an  increase,"  i.e.  they  have  been  "deified"  and  display  themselves  in
the  eternal  process  of  Divine  manifestation,  "  going  out  of  me,"  i.e.  from  the
undiffcrentiated  Unity,  "unto  me,"  i.e.  to  Unity  in  plurality,  and  again  re-

ill]  The  Odes  of  Ibnu  'l-Fdrid  215

(161)  And  in  my  contemplation  (of  the  Divine  essence)  I
beheld  myself  endowed  with  the  attributes  by  which  I  was  veiled
from  myself  during  my  occultation,

(162)  And  I  saw  that  I  was  indubitably  she  whom  I  loved,  and
that  for  this  reason  my  self  had  referred  me  to  myself.

(163)  My  self  had  been  distraught  with  love  for  itself  un-
awares, though  in  my  contemplation  it  was  not  ignorant  of  the
truth  of  the  matter.

Continuing  Ibnu  '1-Farid  shows  that  the  railer  and  the  slan-
derer (who  symbolise  respectively  the  sensual  and  intellectual
attributes  of  the  self)  are  in  reality  one  with  the  Lover-
Beloved.  He  next  explains  more  fully  what  he  meant  when
he  spoke  of  the  passing-away  (fand)  of  these  attributes
(v.  159),  and  describes  the  successive  stages  by  which  his  self
(nafs)  was  gradually  stripped  bare  of  all  the  affections  that
stood  between  him  and  a  purely  disinterested  love.

( 168)  I  sought  to  approach  her  by  sacrificing  my  self,  reckoning
upon  her  as  my  recompense  and  not  hoping  for  any  (other)  reward
from  her;  and  she  drew  me  nigh.

(169)  I  offered  readily  what  was  mine  (of  promised  bliss)  in
the  world  to  come  and  what  she  might  peradventure  give  to  me
(of  her  grace),

(170)  And  with  entire  disinterestedness  I  put  behind  me  any
regard  for  that  (self-sacrifice),  for  I  was  not  willing  that  my  self
should  be  my  beast  of  burden.

(171)  I  sought  her  with  poverty,  but  since  the  attribute  of
poverty  enriched  me  I  threw  away  both  my  poverty  and  my  wealth.
turning  "from  me,"  i.e.  from  the  One  in  the  Many  to  the  One  who  remains
when  the  Many  have  passed  away.

(161)  "In  my  contemplation,"  i.e.  in  the  state  of  baqd  after  fand.
"During  my  occultation,"  i.e.  in  the  state  preceding  fand,  when  the  mystic
is  veiled  by  his  phenomenal  attributes  from  his  real  self.

(162)  Cf.  the  Tradition,  "He  who  knows  himself  knows  his  Lord/'

(163)  So  long  as  the  ' '  self ' '  is  attached  to  its  desires,  it  is  blind  to  its  real
nature,  which  is  only  revealed  to  it  when  God  is  the  sole  object  of  contem-
plation.

(170)  I.e.  "I  was  unwilling  to  attain  my  goal  by  means  of  anything
directly  or  indirectly  connected  with  self."  The  commentator  quotes  the
Tradition,  "Honour  the  animals  which  ye  offer  in  sacrifice,  for  they  will
carry  you  across  the  Bridge  of  Sirat  (into  Paradise)."

(171)  He  who  is  truly  poor  (in  the  mystical  sense)  does  not  regard  him-
self as  possessing  anything  whatever — not  even  poverty.

216  Studies  in  Islamic  Mysticism  [CH.

(172)  My  throwing  away  my  poverty  and  riches  assured  to
me  the  merit  of  my  quest :  therefore  I  discarded  my  merit,

(173)  And  in  my  discarding  it  my  own  welfare  appeared :  my
reward  was  she  who  rewarded  me,  nothing  else.

(174)  And  through  her,  not  through  myself,  I  began  to  guide
unto  her  those  who  by  themselves  had  lost  the  right  ways ;  and
'twas  she  that  (really)  guided  them.

The  following  verses  (175-196)  show  the  poet  as  a  director
of  souls,  preaching  unselfishness,  poverty,  humility,  and
repentance;  exhorting  his  disciple  to  lose  no  time  and  to
beware  of  saying  "To-morrow  I  will  work  " ;  bidding  him  shun
vainglory  and  ambition ;  pointing  out  that  the  true  gnostic  is
silent  inasmuch  as  the  mysteries  revealed  to  him  are  in-
communicable. All  self-activity,  all  self-consciousness,  must
be  renounced.

(194)  Be  sight  (not  a  seer)  and  look ;  be  hearing  (not  a  hearer)
and  retain  (what  is  heard) ;  be  a  tongue  (not  a  speaker)  and  speak,
for  the  way  of  union  (with  the  Beloved)  is  the  best.

The  detachment  or  isolation  (tafrid)  of  the  soul  from  all
desires  and  affections  costs  bitter  pain.

(197)  Formerly  my  soul  was  reproachful:  when  I  obeyed  her,
she  disobeyed  me,  or  if  I  disobeyed  her,  she  was  obedient  to  me.

(198)  Therefore  I  brought  her  to  that  of  which  (even)  a  part
was  harder  than  death  and  I  fatigued  her  that  she  might  give  me
rest,

(199)  So  that  she  came  to  endure  whatever  burden  I  laid  upon
her,  and  if  I  lightened  it  she  grieved.

(200)  And  I  loaded  her  with  tasks,  nay,  I  took  care  that  she
should  load  herself  with  them,  until  I  grew  fond  of  my  tribulation.

(172-3)  It  is  not  enough  to  regard  one's  self  as  possessing  nothing:  the
thought  that  such  a  state  of  mind  is  meritorious  must  be  eliminated.

(194)  In  the  unitive  state  (jam1)  it  is  God  that  sees,  hears,  and  speaks
through  the  mystic,  who  has  become  His  organ  of  sight,  hearing,  and
speech.

(197)  The  epithet  "  reproachful "  (lawwdma)  is  applied  to  the  soul  whilst
it  is  still  engaged  in  the  struggle  with  the  passions;  after  these  have  been
vanquished,  it  is  called  "calm  "  (mufma'inna).  During  the  former  condition
the  soul  is  disobedient  (sinful)  if  its  desires  are  complied  with,  and  obedient
(virtuous)  if  they  are  thwarted.

ill]  The  Odes  of  Ibnu  yl-Fdrid  217

(201)  And  in  correcting  her  I  deprived  her  of  every  pleasure  by
removing  her  from  her  habits,  and  she  became  calm.

(202)  No  terror  remained  before  her  but  I  confronted  it,  so
long  as  I  beheld  that  my  soul  therein  was  not  yet  purged,

(203)  And  every  stage  that  I  traversed  in  my  progress  was  an
'ubudiyya  which  I  fulfilled  through  'ubuda.

When  the  soul  is  completely  denuded  of  affections  it  is
made  one  with  God.  In  the  first  verse  of  the  following  passage
the  feminine  pronoun,  which  has  hitherto  referred  to  the  soul
either  as  reproaching  itself  for  its  actions  and  desires  or  as
being  in  passionless  calm,  undergoes  a  change  of  meaning,  so
that  "she,"  who  stood  for  an  individual,  now  denotes  the
Universal  Self.

(204)  Until  then  I  had  been  enamoured  of  her,  but  when  I
renounced  my  desire,  she  desired  me  for  herself  and  loved  me,

(205)  And  I  became  a  beloved,  nay,  one  loving  himself :  this  is
not  like  what  I  said  before,  that  my  soul  is  my  beloved.

(206)  Through  her  I  went  forth  from  myself  to  her  and  came
not  back  to  myself:  one  like  me  does  not  hold  the  doctrine  of
return.

(207)  And  in  generous  pride  I  detached  my  soul  from  my
going  forth,  and  consented  not  that  she  should  consort  with  me
again,

(208)  And  I  was  made  absent  from  (unconscious  of) the
detachment  of  my  soul,  so  that  in  my  presence  (union  with  God)
I  was  not  pushed  (disturbed)  by  showing  any  attribute  (of  indi-
viduality).

(203)  Both  'ubudiyya  and  'ubuda  (which  literally  signify  the  relation  of
a  slave  to  his  master)  are  phases  of  mystical  devotion.  In  'ubudiyya  the
mystic  is  concerned  with  the  means  of  drawing  nigh  to  God,  e.g.  with
asceticism,  quietism,  and  the  like;  in  'ubuda,  which  is  the  fulfilment  and
consummation  of  'ubudiyya,  he  rises  above  egoism  and  loses  himself  in  the
will  of  his  Lord.

(204-5)  In  ceasing  to  will  for  himself  the  mystic  becomes  an  object  of
the  Divine  will,  i.e.  a  beloved,  and  that  which  loves  him  is  no  other  than  his
real  self.  The  words  "  my  soul  (self)  is  my  beloved  "  refer  to  verse  98  (" Thou
art  sworn  to  love,  but  to  love  of  self"),  in  which  the  mystic  is  described  as
loving  himself,  because  he  still  clings  to  his  individuality.

(206-8)  Separation  from  the  self,  i.e.  union  with  God,  is  brought  about
by  Divine  grace,  not  by  any  act  of  the  self.

218  Studies  in  Islamic  Mysticism  [CH.

In  a  passage  of  high  eloquence  and  beauty  the  poet  endea-
vours to  analyse  his  experience  of  the  unitive  state  and  reveal
the  mystery,  so  far  as  it  can  be  expressed  in  a  symbolic  form.

(209)  Lo,  I  will  unfold  the  beginning  of  my  oneness  and  will
bring  it  to  its  end  in  a  lowly  descent  from  my  exaltation.

(210)  In  unveiling  herself  she  unveiled  Being  to  mine  eye,  and
I  saw  her  with  my  sight  in  every  seen  thing.

(211)  And  when  she  appeared,  I  was  brought  to  contemplate
that  in  me  that  is  hidden,  and  through  the  displaying  of  my
secret  place  I  found  there  that  I  was  she  ;

(212)  And  my  existence  vanished  in  my  contemplation  and  I
became  separated  from  the  existence  of  my  contemplation —
effacing  it,  not  maintaining  it.

(213)  And  in  the  sobriety  following  my  intoxication  I  retained
the  object  which,  during  the  effacement  of  my  self-existence,  I
contemplated  in  her  by  whom  it  was  revealed,

(214)  So  that  in  the  sobriety  after  self-effacement  I  was  none
other  than  she,  and  when  she  unveiled  herself  my  essence  became
endued  with  my  essence.

(215)  When  it  (my  essence)  is  not  called  "  two,"  my  attributes
are  hers,  and  since  we  are  one,  her  outward  aspect  is  mine.

(216)  If  she  be  called,  'tis  I  who  answer,  and  if  I  am  summoned,

(209)  Perfect  oneness  ultimately  involves  "a  descent  from  union  (jam')
to  separation  (lafriqa)  and  from  the  Essence  to  the  Attributes,  that  the  saint
may  repair  the  disorder  of  the  phenomenal  world  and  instruct  those  who
seek  the  Truth,  yet  without  losing  real  union  with  the  Divine  Essence;  nay,
he  must  unite  in  himself  both  union  and  separation,  both  Essence  and  Attri-
butes" (K.).  Cf.  my  Mystics  of  I^lam,  p.  163,  and  note  on  verse  218  infra.

(210)  The  beginning  of  oneness  with  God  is  God's  revelation  of  Himself
to  the  mystic,  which  causes  fand,  so  that  he  sees  the  unveiled  face  of  God
(i.e.  Real  Being)  in  the  mirror  of  phenomena.

(212)  "I  became  separated  from  the  existence  of  my  contemplation,"
».*.  "I  passed  away  from  (became  unconscious  of)  my  contemplation."

(213)  The  object  retained  and  unceasingly  contemplated  in  the  sobriety
(mystical  clairvoyance)  following  intoxication  (ecstasy)  is  the  inward  and
real  self — the  hidden  "  I "  which  in  the  preceding  moment  of  ecstasy  was
contemplated  in  God. Cf.  note  on  vv.  233-5.

(214)  Intoxication  or  self-effacement  is  only  the  beginning  of  oneness
(ittihdd). Perfect  oneness  is  attained  in  sobriety,  when  the  self,  having  been
restored  to  consciousness,  knows  itself  as  the  Divine  Essence  which  reveals
itself  to  itself.  This  is  the  state  of  "abiding  after  passing-away  "  (al-baqd
ba'd  al-fand).

(216) Cf.  p.  127  supra.

Ill]  The  Odes  of  Ibnu  9l-Fdrid  219

she  answers  the  one  who  calls  me,  and  cries  "Labbayk!"  ("At  thy
service!").

(217)  And  if  she  speak,  'tis  I  who  converse.  Likewise,  if  I  tell
a  story,  'tis  she  that  tells  it.

(218)  The  pronoun  of  the  second  person  has  gone  out  of  use
between  us,  and  by  its  removal  I  am  raised  above  the  sect  who
separate  (the  One  from  the  Many).

(219)  Now  if,  through  want  of  judgment,  thy  understanding
allow  not  the  possibility  of  regarding  two  as  one  and  decline  to
affirm  it,

(220)  I  will  cause  indications  of  it,  which  are  hidden  from  thee,
to  demonstrate  it  like  expressions  that  are  clear  to  thee;

(221)  And,  since  this  is  not  the  time  for  ambiguity,  I  will
explain  it  by  means  of  two  strange  illustrations,  one  derived  from
hearing  and  one  from  sight,

(222)  And  I  will  establish  what  I  say  by  evidence,  showing
forth  a  parable  as  one  who  speaks  the  truth — for  Truth  is  my  stay —

(223)  The  parable  of  a  woman  smitten  with  catalepsy,  by
whose  mouth,  whilst  she  is  possessed  by  a  spirit,  another — not  she
— gives  news  to  thee;

(224)  And  from  words  uttered  on  her  tongue  by  a  tongue  that
is  not  hers  the  evidences  of  the  signs  are  shown  to  be  true,

(225)  Since  it  is  known  as  a  fact  that  the  utterer  of  the  won-
drous sayings  which  thou  heardest  is  another  than  she,  though  in
the  (material)  sense  she  uttered  them.

(218)  Literally,  "the  ta  (of  the  and  person  singular  in  the  past  tense  of
the  Arabic  verb)  has  been  removed  (or  'has  become  tu,  the  sign  of  the  ist
person  singular')  between  us,"  i.e.  "each  of  us  is  the  'I'  of  the  other."
"The  sect  who  separate"  are  those  who  look  at  things  from  the  aspect  of
separation  (farq  or  tafriqa  as  opposed  to  union,  jam'),  so  that,  for  example,
they  view  their  acts  of  worship  as  proceeding  from  themselves,  not  as  being
done  by  God  in  them.

(221)  The  illustration  drawn  from  hearing  (oral  tradition)  is  the
Prophet's  vision  of  Gabriel  in  the  form  of  Dihya  (verse  280  foil.),  while  the
parallel  analogy  from  ocular  experience  is  the  case  of  "a  woman  smitten
with  catalepsy"  (verse  223  foil.).

(223—5)  ^  may  be  worth  while  to  summarise  the  commentator's  ex-
planation of  the  argument.  Itti^dd,  he  says,  means  that  Absolute  Being
overwhelms  the  being  of  the  individual  creature  so  as  entirely  to  deprive
him  of  the  exercise  of  his  faculties :  he  appears  to  will  and  act,  when  he  is
really  the  organ  through  which  God  wills  and  acts.  To  the  objection  that
such  a  thing  is  impossible  the  poet  replies  by  pointing  to  what  occurs  in
catalepsy;  and  he  makes  a  woman  the  subject  of  his  illustration  because  the

22O  Studies  in  Islamic  Mysticism  [CH.

(226)  Hadst  thou  been  one,  thou  wouldst  have  come  to  feel
intuitively  the  truth  of  what  I  said;

(227)  But,  didst  thou  but  know  it,  thou  wert  devoted  to  secret
polytheism  with  a  soul  that  strayed  from  the  guidance  of  the  Truth ;

(228)  And  he  in  whose  love  the  unification  of  his  beloved  is
not  accomplished  falls  by  his  polytheism  into  the  fire  of  separation
from  his  beloved.

(229)  Naught  save  otherness  marred  this  high  estate  of  thine,
and  if  thou  wilt  efface  thyself  thy  claim  to  have  achieved  it  will  be
established  indeed.

(230)  Thus  was  I  myself  for  a  time,  ere  the  covering  was  lifted.
Having  no  clairvoyance,  I  still  clave  to  dualism,

(231)  Now  losing  (myself)  and  being  united  (with  God)  through
contemplation, now  finding (God) and  being  sundered (from
myself)  through  ecstasy.

(232)  My  intellect,  through  being  attached  to  my  presence
(with  myself),  was  separating  me  (from  God),  while  my  depriva-

female  sex,  on  account  of  the  weakness  of  their  minds  and  their  general
passivity  (inft'dl),  are  especially  liable  to  seizures  of  that  kind.  Now,  the
body  of  a  woman  suffering  from  catalepsy  is  evidently  controlled  by  the
Jinn :  her  own  personality  (nafs)  is,  for  the  time,  defunct  (ma'zul) :  other-
wise, how  could  she  foretell  future  events  and  speak  in  a  language  that  she
never  knew,  e.g.  in  Arabic  though  she  be  a  foreigner,  and  in  a  foreign
language  though  she  be  an  Arab  ?  If  this  relation  can  exist  between  a  woman
and  a  Jinnf,  notwithstanding  the  difference  of  their  forms  and  qualities  and
notwithstanding  that  both  of  them  are  helpless  contingent  beings,  surely
none  will  deny  that  it  may  exist  between  the  omnipotent  Creator  and  the
creature  whom  He  has  created  in  His  own  image.

(226)  Although  the  possibility  of  ittihdd  can  be  proved  from  analogy,
knowledge  of  its  real  nature  depends  on  the  unity  (wa^da)  or  simplification
(ifrdd)  of  the  self  which  is  effected  by  stripping  it  of  attributes  and  relations.
Cf.  verse  197  foil. K.  renders  mundzalaP*  by  "intuition"  (contrasted  with
logical  demonstration),  but  the  word  may  be  used  here  in  its  ordinary  sense,
namely,  "a  permanent  state  of  mystical  feeling." See  the  Glossary  to  my
edition  of  the  Kitdb  al-Luma',  p.  151.

(227)  "Secret  polytheism"  (shirk),  i.e.  latent  self-regard  which  hinders
the  mystic  from  becoming  entirely  one  with  God.

(229)  "Otherness"  is  equivalent  to  "polytheism,"  i.e.  thinking  of  one's
self  as  something  other  than  God.

(231-2)  These  verses  can  hardly  be  translated.  The  language  of  Islamic
mysticism  abounds  in  pairs  of  correlative  terms,  e.g.  "losing"  and  "finding,"
"presence"  and  "absence,"  "intoxication"  and  "sobriety,"  which  are  not
merely  artificial  antitheses  but  express  the  fact  that,  as  has  been  well  said,
"the  inner  life  of  the  Sufi  is  in  large  measure  a  swinging  to  and  fro  between
opposite  poles"  (K.  Hartmann,  Al-Kuschairts  Darstellung  des  SAfttums,
p.  8).  Cf.  note  on  vv.  481-2.

ni]  The  Odes  of  Ibnu  'l-Fdrid  221

tion  (of  individuality),  through  the  enravishment  of  my  self-
existence  by  my  absence  (from  myself),  was  uniting  me  (with
God).

(233)  I  used  to  think  that  sobriety  was  my  nadir,  and  that
intoxication  was  my  way  of  ascent  to  her  (the  Beloved),  and  that
my  self-effacement  was  the  farthest  goal  I  could  reach;

(234)  But  when  I  cleared  the  film  from  me,  I  saw  myself
restored  to  consciousness,  and  mine  eye  was  refreshed  by  the
(Divine)  Essence;

(235)  And  at  the  time  of  my  second  separation  I  was  enriched
by  a  recovery  from  my  impoverishment  (self-loss)  in  drunkenness,
so  that  (now)  my  union  (jam')  is  like  my  unity  (wahda,  in-
dividuality =  tafriqa,  separation).

(236)  Therefore  mortify  thyself  that  thou  mayst  behold  in
thee  and  from  thee  a  peace  beyond  what  I  have  described — a
peace  born  of  a  feeling  of  calm.

(233-5)  For  the  expressions  used  in  i/.  233  cf.  Kor.  53,  9  and  note  on
v.  729.  Here  Ibnu  '1-Farid,  writing  as  an  adept,  declares  that  the  state  of
ecstatic  rapture,  which  Sufis  call  "intoxication "  and  " self-effacement,"  is  in-
ferior to  the  subsequent  state  of  conscious  clairvoyance,  which  they  describe
as  "sobriety."  Cf.  Kashfal-Mahjub,  transl.,  p.  184  foil.  I  cannot  agree  with
Prof.  Nallino,  who  thinks  (op.  cit.  p.  73)  that  "sobriety"  in  v.  233  refers  to
normal  and  non-mystical  consciousness.  The  meaning  of  the  words  "but
when  I  cleared  the  film  from  me,  etc."  is  explained  by  the  commentator  thus :
"Existence  (wujtid)  is  a  veil  (hijdb—ghayn,  film)  in  the  beginning  of  the
mystic  life,  and  also  in  its  middle  stage,  but  not  in  its  end.  The  mystic  is
veiled  in  the  beginning  by  the  outward  aspect  of  existence  (i.e.  created
things)  from  its  inward  aspect  (i.e.  God),  while  in  the  middle  stage  (i.e.  the
period  of '  intoxication '  during  which  he  has  no  consciousness  of  phenomena)
he  is  veiled  by  its  inward  aspect  (God)  from  its  outward  aspect  (created  things).
But  when  he  has  reached  his  goal  (i.e. '  sobriety '),  neither  do  created  things
veil  him  from  God  nor  does  God  veil  him  from  created  things,  but  God  reveals
Himself  to  the  mystic  in  both  His  aspects  at  once  (i.e.  both  as  the  Creator
and  as  the  universe  of  created  things),  so  that  he  sees  with  his  bodily  eye  the
beauty  of  the  Divine  Essence  manifested  under  the  attribute  of  externality."
The  meaning  of  "separation"  (farq  or  tafriqa)  has  been  explained  in  the
note  on  verse  218:  it  is  the  state  in  which  the  mystic  is  conscious  of  himself
as  an  individual.  Passing  away  from  himself  in  the  ecstasy  of  "intoxica-
tion," he  enters  into  the  state  of  "union"  (jam1)  in  which  he  is  conscious  of
nothing  but  God.  According  to  Ibnu  '1-Farid,  the  final  and  supreme  degree
of  "oneness"  (ittifrdd)  consists,  not  in  "intoxication,"  but  in  "sobriety,"
i.e.  the  return  to  consciousness,  "the  second  separation,"  when  the  mystic
(who  in  the  former  "  separation  "  knew  himself  as  "  other  than  God  ")  knows
himself  as  the  subject  and  object  of  all  action  (cf .  verses  237-8).  and  perceives
that  "union "  and  "separation "  are  the  same  thing  seen  from  different  points

222  Studies  in  Islamic  Mysticism  [CH.

(237)  After  my  self-mortification  I  saw  that  he  who  brought
me  to  behold  and  led  me  to  my  (real)  self  was  I ;  nay,  that  I  was
my  own  example,

(238)  And  that  my  standing  (at  'Arafat)  was  a  standing  before
myself;  nay,  that  my  turning  (towards  the  Ka'ba)  was  towards
myself. Even  so  my  prayer  was  to  myself  and  my  Ka'ba  from
myself.

(239)  Be  not,  then,  beguiled  by  thy  comeliness,  self-conceited,
given  over  to  the  confusion  of  folly;

(240)  And  forsake  the  error  of  separation,  for  union  will  result
in  thy  finding  the  right  way,  the  way  of  those  who  vied  with  each
other  in  seeking  oneness  (ittihdd) ;

(241)  And  declare  the  absoluteness  of  beauty  and  be  not
moved  to  deem  it  finite  by  thy  longing  for  a  tinselled  gaud ;

(242)  For  the  charm  of  every  fair  youth  or  lovely  woman  is
lent  to  them  from  Her  beauty.

(243)  Twas  She  that  crazed  Qays,  the  lover  of  Lubna ;  ay,  and
every  enamoured  man,  like  Layla's  Majmin  or  'Azza's  Kuthayyir.

(244)  Every  one  of  them  passionately  desired  Her  attribute
(Absolute  Beauty)  which  She  clothed  in  the  form  of  a  beauty  that
shone  forth  in  a  beauty  of  form.

(245)  And  this  was  only  because  She  appeared  in  phenomena.
They  supposed  that  these  (phenomena)  were  other  than  She,
whilst  it  was  She  that  displayed  Herself  therein.

(246)  She  showed  Herself  by  veiling  Herself  (in  them),  and
She  was  hidden  by  the  objects  in  which  She  was  manifested,
assuming  tints  of  diverse  hue  in  every  appearance.

of  view.  The  interpretation  of  the  concluding  words  in  v.  235  is  doubtful.
Taking  yam'  in  a  non- mystical  sense,  we  might  translate:  "My  plurality  is
like  my  unity."

(237)  Self -mortification  prepares  the  mystic  for  contemplation  of  God
but  does  not  precede  it  as  the  cause  precedes  the  effect. In  contemplation
there  is  no  duality,  but  only  God,  who  reveals  Himself  to  Himself.  The  poet
describes  this  state  of  "union"  (jam1)  symbolically  in  vv.  239-64.

(238)  The  "standing"  on  Mt  'Arafat  near  Mecca  is  one  of  the  cere-
monies observed  by  the  pilgrims.

(240)  "  Separation  "  and  "  union  "  (farq  and  jam')  are  used  in  the  technical
sense  which  has  been  noted  (cf.  verses  218  and  233-5).

(241)  The  "tinselled  gaud"  is  beauty  regarded  as  an  attribute  of
phenomena,  i.e.  beauty  of  form.

(246) The  commentator  illustrates this doctrine — that phenomena
reveal  or  conceal  Absolute  Being  according  to  the  measure  of  spiritual

ill]  The  Odes  of  Ibnu  yl-Fdrid  223

(247)  At  the  first  creation  She  became  visible  to  Adam  in  the
form  of  Eve  before  the  relation  of  motherhood,

(248)  And  he  loved  Her,  that  by  means  of  Her  he  might
become  a  father  and  that  the  relation  of  sonship  might  be  brought
into  existence  through  husband  and  wife.

(249)  This  was  the  beginning  of  the  love  of  the  manifestations
for  one  another,  when  as  yet  there  was  no  enemy  to  estrange  them
with  (mutual)  hate.

(250)  And  She  ceased  not  to  reveal  and  conceal  Herself  for
some  (divinely  ordained)  cause  in  every  age  according  to  the
appointed  times.

(251)  She  was  appearing  to  Her  lovers  in  every  form  of  dis-
guise in  shapes  of  wondrous  beauty,

(252)  Now  as  Lubna,  anon  as  Buthayna,  and  sometimes  She
was  called  'Azza,  who  was  so  dear  (to  Kuthayyir).

(253)  They  (fair  women)  are  not  other  than  She;  no,  and  they
never  were. She  hath  no  partner  in  Her  beauty.

(254)  Just  as  She  showed  to  me  Her  beauty  clad  in  the  forms
of  others,  even  so  in  virtue  of  oneness  (ittihdd)

(255)  Did  I  show  myself  to  Her  in  every  lover  enthralled  by
youth  or  woman  of  rare  beauty;

(256)  For,  although  they  preceded  me  (in  time),  they  were  not
other  than  I  in  their  passion,  inasmuch  as  I  was  prior  to  them  in
the  nights  of  eternity;

insight  with  which  they  are  regarded — by  the  following  parable  (cf.  Plato's
allegory  of  the  prisoners  in  the  cave  in  Book  vn  of  the  Republic).  Imagine
a  house  with  no  aperture  except  glass  windows  of  various  colours  and  shapes,
so  that  when  the  sun  falls  on  them,  beams  of  corresponding  shape  and  colour
are  reflected  within.  Imagine,  further,  that  in  the  house  are  a  number  of
persons  who  have  never  gone  outside  and  have  never  seen  the  sun  but  have
only  been  told  that  it  is  one  simple  universal  light  possessing  neither  colour
nor  form.  Some,  perceiving  that  the  reflected  beams  resemble  the  glass  in
form  and  colour,  will  not  recognise  them  as  sunbeams.  Others  will  divine
the  truth,  namely,  that  those  beams  are  the  light  of  the  sun  endued  with  form
and  colour  by  the  medium  through  which  it  is  seen  and  preserving  its  unity
unimpaired  amidst  all  variety  of  appearance.

(249)  The  "enemy"  is  Satan,  who  caused  Adam  and  Eve  to  eat  the
forbidden  fruit,  whereupon  God  said  to  them,  "  Get  ye  down  (from  Paradise),
the  one  of  you  a  foe  to  the  other"  (Kor.  2,  34).

(256)  The  commentator  quotes  the  saying  of  the  Prophet,  "We  are  the
last  and  the  first,"  i.e.  the  last  in  material  time,  the  first  in  spiritual  time.
Absolute  Being,  though  logically  prior  to  phenomena,  is  essentially  identical
with  them.

224  Studies  in  Islamic  Mysticism  [CH.

(257)  Nor  are  they  other  than  I  in  my  passion,  but  I  became
visible  in  them  for  the  sake  of  clothing  myself  in  every  guise,

(258)  Now  as  Qays,  anon  as  Kuthayyir,  and  sometimes  I
appeared  as  Jamil  who  loved  Buthayna.

(259)  In  them  I  displayed  myself  outwardly  and  veiled  myself
inwardly. Marvel,  then,  at  a  revelation  by  means  of  a  mask !

(260)  The  loved  women  and  their  lovers — 'tis  no  infirm  judg-
ment— were  manifestations  in  which  we  (my  Beloved  and  I)
displayed  our  (attributes  of)  love  and  beauty.

(261)  Every  lover,  I  am  he,  and  She  is  every  lover's  beloved,
and  all  (lovers  and  loved)  are  but  the  names  of  a  vesture,

(262)  Names  of  which  I  was  the  object  in  reality,  and  'twas  I
that  was  made  apparent  to  myself  by  means  of  an  invisible  soul.

(263)  I  was  ever  She,  and  She  was  ever  I,  with  no  difference;
nay,  my  essence  loved  my  essence.

(264)  There  was  nothing  in  the  world  except  myself  beside  me,
and  no  thought  of  beside-ness  occurred  to  my  mind.

Having  advanced  in  ittihdd  to  a  point  where  the  "I"  is
indistinguishable  from  God,  Ibnu  '1-Farid  begins  the  promised
sequel — "a  lowly  descent  from  my  exaltation"  (see  v.  209).
He  tells  how  he  returned  from  the  freedom  of  ecstasy  to  the
bondage  of  piety,  how  he  occupied  himself  with  works  of  de-
votion and  ascetic  practices.  He  then  makes  a  solemn  declara-
tion that  his  coming  back  to  the  normal  life  of  the  mystic  was
not  due  to  any  selfish  motive,  such  as  fear  of  disrepute  or  hope
of  honour,  but  was  dictated  solely  by  his  anxiety  to  protect
from  attack  the  friends  whom  he  revered.  These  friends
(awliyd)  were,  no  doubt,  his  spiritual  masters  or  other  Sufis
intimately  associated  with  him.  What  was  the  danger  which
he  foresaw  and  in  which  he  would  not  have  them  involved?
As  the  following  verses  show,  it  was  the  charge  of  heresy  in

(259)  Absolute  Being  manifests  its  attributes  through  the  phenomenal
forms  which  conceal  its  essence.

(260-4)  Love  and  beauty  are  aspects  of  the  self-manifestation  of  the
"  invisible  soul "  underlying  all  phenomena,  and  since  that  soul  is  the  One
Real  Being  there  can  be  no  essential  difference  between  the  lover  and  the
object  of  his  love.  The  mystic  who  has  attained  to  "the  intoxication  of
union"  (sukru  'l-jam')  has  no  thought  of  "beside-ness,"  i.e.  for  him  nothing
exists  beside  his  unconditioned  self,  which  is  God.

in]  The  Odes  of  Ibnu  'l-Fdrid  225

respect  of  a  doctrine  abominable  to  all  Moslems — the  doctrine
of  incarnation  (hulul).

(277)  If  I  recant  my  words,  "  I  am  She,"  or  if  I  say— and  far  be
it  from  one  like  me  to  say  it ! — that  She  became  incarnate  (hallat)
in  me,  (then  I  shall  deserve  to  die  the  death).

(278)  I  am  not  referring  thee  to  anything  unseen;  no,  nor  to
anything  absurd  which  deprives  me  of  my  power  (to  demonstrate
its  truth).

(279)  Since  I  am  stablished  on  the  Name  of  the  Real  (God)
how  should  the  false  tales  of  error  frighten  me?

(280)  Mark  now! Gabriel,  the  trusted  (messenger),  came  in
the  shape  of  Dihya  to  our  Prophet  in  the  beginning  of  his  prophetic
inspiration.

(281)  Tell  me,  was  Gabriel  Dihya  when  he  appeared  in  a
human  form  to  the  true  Guide,

(282)  Whose  knowledge  surpassed  that  of  those  beside  him
inasmuch  as  he  knew  unambiguously  what  it  was  that  he  saw?

(283)  He  saw  an  angel  sent  to  him  with  a  message,  while  the
others  saw  a  man  who  was  treated  with  respect  as  being  the
Prophet's  companion;

(284)  And  in  the  truer  of  the  two  visions  I  find  a  hint  that
removes  my  creed  far  from  the  doctrine  of  incarnation.

(285)  In  the  Koran  there  is  mention  of  "covering"  (labs),
and  it  cannot  be  denied,  for  I  have  not  gone  beyond  the  double:
authority  of  the  Book  and  the  Apostolic  Traditions.

(277)  "I  am  She,"  i.e.  the  doctrine  of  ittihdd.

(278)  Addressing  the  reader,  Ibnu  '1-Farid  says,  "The  God  to  whom  I
direct  you  is  neither  outside  of  the  world  and  yourself  nor  within  you  in  the
sense  of  'incarnate,'  which  is  an  absurdity."

(279)  "False  tales  of  error,"  i.e.  baseless  accusations  of  heresy.

(280)  Gabriel,  through  whom  the  Koran  was  revealed  to  Mohammed,  is
said  to  have  assumed  the  shape  of  Dihya  al-Kalbi,  described  as  a  very
handsome  man,  on  more  than  one  occasion.

(281-4)  As  Gabriel  was  not  incarnate  in  Dihya,  so  God  is  not  incarnate
in  the  mystic  "united"  with  Him.

(284-5)  Labs  (the  act  of  covering)  is  attributed  to  God  in  the  Koran  (cf .  6,
9;  50, 14)  and  is  implied  in  a  group  of  traditions  which  record  that  Mohammed
said,  "I  saw  my  Lord  in  such  and  such  a  form."  For  the  meaning  of  the
term,  see  A.  J.  Wensinck,  The  Etymology  of  the  Arabic  Djinn  (Spirits)  in
Verslagen  en  Mededeelingen  der  Koninklijke  Akademie  van  Wetenschappen,
Afd.  Letterkunde,  56  Reeks, Deel  iv  ( 1920),  p. 506  foil.,  who  says,  "The action
of  covering  is  conceived  in  this  way,  that  the  spirit  comes  upon  a  man,  takes.

N.  s.  ii  15

226  Studies  in  Islamic  Mysticism  [CH.

Ibnu  '1-FaricJ,  no  longer  speaking  in  his  own  person  but  as
the  Logos  (Mohammed)  or  as  one  merged  in  the  Absolute,  of
which  nothing — not  even  Love  and  Oneness — can  be  pre-
dicated, warns  his  disciple  that  he  must  not  aim  so  high:  let
him  fix  his  eyes  on  the  glory  of  Love,  and  he  will  far  excel
those  who  worship  God  in  hope  or  fear.

(286)  I  give  thee  knowledge. If  thou  desirest  its  unveiling,
come  into  my  way  and  begin  to  follow  my  law,

(287)  For  the  fountain  of  Sadda  springs  from  a  water  whose
abundant  well  is  with  me:  therefore  tell  me  not  of  a  mirage  in  a
wilderness !

(288)  And  take  (thy  knowledge)  from  a  sea  into  which  I
plunged,  while  those  of  old  stopped  on  its  shore,  observing
reverence  towards  me.

(289)  The  text,  "Meddle  not  with  the  substance  of  the  orphan"
(Kor.  6,  153),  alludes  symbolically  to  the  palm  of  a  hand  that  was
holden  when  it  essayed  (to  draw  water).

(290)  And  except  me  none  hath  gained  aught  thereof,  save
only  a  youth  who  in  constraint  or  ease  never  ceased  to  tread  in  my
footprints.

(291)  Stray  not  darkly,  then,  from  the  tracks  of  my  journeying,

its  abode  in  him  and  overpowers  him,  so  that  he  is  no  longer  himself  hut
the  spirit  that  is  upon  or  within  him."  The  monistic  interpretation  of  labs
adopted  by  Ibnu  '1-Farid  differs  essentially  from  hulul.  In  the  former  case,
God  creates  the  "disguise"  of  phenomenality  in  order  thereby  to  manifest
Himself  to  Himself,  and  nothing  exists  beside  Him;  whereas  hulul  (the
"infusion"  of  the  Divine  element  into  the  human)  denotes  a  relation  of
immanence  comparable  to  that  of  spirit  and  body.

(287)  §addcl  was  proverbial  for  the  sweetness  and  wholesomeness  of  its
water:  cf.  the  saying,  "Water,  but  not  like  Sadda."  The  poet  means  that  his
knowledge  flows  from  contemplation  of  the  Divine  Essence,  so  that  he  need
not  follow  the  mirage  of  intellectual  speculation.

(288-9)  The  "  sea  "  is  an  emblem  of  the  Beatific  Vision  which  was  denied
to  Moses  (Kor.  7,  139)  but  was  granted  to  Mohammed  (Kor.  53,  9).  Ibnu
'1-Farid  interprets  the  text, "  Meddle  not  with  the  substance  of  the  orphan,"  as  an
admonition  to  Moses  that  he  must  not  encroach  upon  Mohammed's  unique
prerogative.  When  God  revealed  Himself  in  glory  to  Mt  Sinai,  Moses  fell  in
a  swoon;  and  on  recovering  his  senses  he  heard  a  voice  saying,  "This  Vision
is  not  vouchsafed  to  thee,  but  to  an  orphan  who  shall  come  after  thee."  The
orphan  (yalim)  is  Mohammed  (Kor.  93,  6).  Cf.  Kashf  al-Mahjtib,  pp.  186
and  381.

(290)  The  commentator  identifies  the  "youth  "  with  '  Ali  b.  Abi  Talib,  the
Prophet's  cousin  and  son-in-law.  According  to  the  belief  of  the  Sufis,  'AH
received  from  the  Prophet  an  esoteric  doctrine  which  was  communicated
to  him  alone.

in]  The  Odes  of  Ibnu  yl-Fdrid  227

and  fear  the  blindness  of  preferring  another  to  me,  and  go  in  my
very  path;

(292)  For  the  valley  of  Her  friendship,  O  comrade  of  sober
heart,  is  in  the  province  of  my  command  and  falls  under  my
governance,

(293)  And  the  realm  of  the  high  degrees  of  Love  is  mine,  the
realities  (thereof)  are  my  army,  and  all  lovers  are  my  people.

(294)  Love  hath  passed  away ! Lo,  I  am  severed  from  it  as
one  who  deems  it  a  veil.  Desire  is  below  mine  high  estate,

(295)  And  I  have  crossed  Passion's  boundary,  for  Love  is  (to
me)  even  as  Hate,  and  the  goal  that  I  reached  in  my  ascension  to
Oneness  is  become  my  point  of  departure.

(296)  But  do  thou  be  happy  with  love,  for  (thereby)  thou
hast  been  made  a  chief  over  the  best  of  God's  creatures  who
serve  Him  (by  devotion  and  piety)  in  every  nation.

(297)  Win  those  heights  and  vaunt  thyself  above  an  ascetic
who  was  exalted  by  works  and  by  a  soul  that  purged  itself  (of
worldly  lusts) ;

(298)  And  pass  beyond  one  heavily  laden (with  exoteric
knowledge) — who,  if  his  burden  were  lightened,  would  be  of  little
weight — one  charged  with  traditional  authorities  and  intellectual
wisdom ;

(299)  And  take  to  thyself  through  kinship  (of  love)  the  heritage
of  the  most  sublime  gnostic,  who  made  it  his  care  to  prefer  (above
all  else)  that  his  aspiration  should  produce  an  effect  (upon  man-
kind) ;

(300)  And  haughtily  sweep  the  clouds  with  thy  skirts — the

(293)  "The  realities"  (al-ma'dni)  are  probably  the  real  content  of  all
expressions  that  belong  to  the  language  of  love.

(294-5)  To  retain  consciousness  of  an  attribute  is  to  be  limited  by  it;  to
pass  from  it  is  to  escape  from  limitation  and  break  through  to  the  Absolute,
where  all  contraries  are  reconciled.  In  verse  294  some  read  fata  'l-jiubbi,
"O  thrall  of  love,"  instead  of  fani  'l-hubbu.

(296-8)  The  lover  of  God  is  nearer  to  Him  than  the  ascetic,  theologian,
or  philosopher.

(299)  "The  most  sublime  gnostic,"  i.e.  Mohammed,  from  whom  the
Sufis  claim  to  have  inherited  not  only  their  knowledge  of  religion  ('Urn)  but
also  their  mystical  knowledge  (ma'rifa).  In  the  highest  degree  of  gnosis
union  (jam')  is  combined  with  separation  (tafriqa),  so  that  the  mystic  while
continuing  in  the  unitive  state  comes  down  once  more  to  the  world  of
plurality  and  uses  his  spiritual  powers  for  the  benefit  and  instruction  of  his
fellow-creatures.

15—2

228  Studies  in  Islamic  Mysticism  [CH.

skirts  of  an  impassioned  lover  which  in  his  union (with  the
Beloved)  trail  over  the  top  of  the  Milky  Way !

(301)  And  traverse  the  various  degrees  of  oneness  and  do  not
join  a  party  that  lost  their  lifetime  in  (attachment  to)  something
besides.

(302)  For  its  single  champion  is  a  host,  while  all  others  are  but
a  handful  who  were  vanquished  by  the  most  convincing  of  testi-
monies.

(303)  Therefore  make  that  which  it  (the  term  "oneness")
signifies  thy  means  of  access  (to  God)  and  live  in  it,  or  else  die  its
captive,  and  follow  a  community  which  attained  the  primacy
therein.

(304)  Thou  art  worthier  of  this  glory  than  one  who  strives  and
exerts  himself  in  hope  (of  reward)  and  in  fear  (of  punishment).

(305)  Tis  not  marvellous  that  thou  shouldst  shake  thy  sides
(boastfully)  before  him  in  the  sweetest  delight  and  the  completest

joy,

(306)  Since  the  attributes  related  to  it  (to  Oneness) — how
many  a  man  have  they  chosen  out  in  obscurity !  and  its  names —
how  many  a  one  have  they  raised  to  renown !

(307)  Yet  thou,  in  the  degree  (of  union)  to  which  thou  hast
attained,  art  remote  from  me:  the  Pleiades  have  no  connexion
with  the  earth.

(308)  Thou  hast  been  brought  to  thy  Sinai  and  hast  reached
a  plane  higher  than  thy  soul  had  ever  imagined  ;

(309)  But  this  is  thy  limit :  stop  here,  for  wert  thou  to  advance
a  step  beyond  it,  thou  wouldst  be  consumed  by  a  brand  of  fire.

Leaving  his  disciple  in  "the  intoxication  of  union"  (sukru
'l-jam'),  with  an  emphatic  warning  not  to  exceed  the  measure
of  his  spiritual  capacity,  Ibnu  '1-Farid  depicts  from  his  own
experience  the  unitive  life  in  its  perfect  and  final  development,
which  is  known  technically  as  "the  sobriety  of  union  "  ($ahwu
'l-jam').  Cf.  the  notes  on  w.  233-5,  260-4,  and  326-7.

(310)  My  degree  is  of  such  a  height  that  a  man  who  has  not

(302)  An  allusion  to  Kor.  2,  250:  "How  many  a  little  band  hath  over-
come a  great  army  by  the  permission  of  Allah ! "

(3°3)  "Of  else  die  its  captive,"  i.e  "even  though  you  fail  to  attain  to
oneness,  at  least  pursue  it  until  you  die."  Mu'anndhu  ("its  captive")  may
also  mean  "  pining  for  it  "  and  is  so  explained  by  K.

in]  The  Odes  of  Ibnu  9l-Fdrid  229

reached  it  may  still  be  deemed  happy;  but  the  state  for  which  I  am
deemed  happy  transcends  thy  degree.

(311)  All  men  are  the  sons  of  Adam,  (and  I  am  as  they)  save  that
I  alone  amongst  my  brethren  have  attained  to  the  sobriety  of  union.

(312)  My  hearing  is  like  that  of  Kalim  (Moses)  and  my  heart  is
informed  (about  God)  by  the  most  excellent  (ahmad)  vision  of  an
eye  like  that  of  him  who  is  most  excellent  (Ahmad  =  Mohammed).

(313)  And  my  spirit  is  a  spirit  to  all  the  spirits  (of  created
beings) ;  and  whatsoever  thou  seest  of  beauty  in  the  universe  flows
from  the  bounty  of  my  nature.

(314)  Leave,  then,  to  me  (and  do  not  ascribe  to  any  one  else)
the  knowledge  with  which  I alone  was  endowed  before  my
appearance  (in  the  phenomenal  world),  while  (after  my  appearance)
amongst  created  beings  my  friends  knew  me  not  (as  I  really  am).

(315)  Do  not  give  me  the  name  of  "lover"  (murid)  amongst
them  (my  friends),  for  even  he  who  is  rapt  by  Her  and  is  called
Her  "  beloved  "  (murdd)  hath  need  of  my  protection;

(316)  And  let  names  of  honour  fall  from  me  and  pronounce
them  not,  babbling  foolishly,  for  they  are  but  signs  fashioned  by
one  whom  I  made;

(317)  And  take  back  my  title  of  "gnostic,"  for  according  to
the  Koran,  if  thou  approvest  people's  calling  each  other  names,
thou  wilt  be  loathed.

(312)  I.e.  "I  hear  God  with  my  ear,  as  Moses  did  when  God  said  to  him
'  Thou  shalt  not  see  Me '  (Kor.  7,  139),  and  see  Him  with  my  eye,  as  Moham-
med saw  Him."  Moses  is  called  Kalim  or  KaHmu'llah  because  God  spoke  to
him  (kallamahu).  As  regards  Mohammed,  cf.  Kashfal-Mahjtib,  transl.,  p.  186.

(313  foil.)  Here  Ibnu  '1-Farid  speaks,  as  it  were,  out  of  the  depths  of  his
consciousness  of  God.  According  to  the  commentator,  he  hints  that  he  is  the
Qutb.  See  p.  194  supra.

(314)  God  created  the  world  in  order  that  He  might  be  known:  before
the  creation  He  alone  knew  Himself,  and  after  it  His  friends  (the  prophets
and  saints)  did  not  know  Him  with  His  own  eternal  knowledge  of  Himself.

(315)  See  note  on  vv.  204-5  for  the  distinction  between  murid  and
murdd.  Even  the  latter,  as  an  object  of  Divine  protection,  is  other  than  God
and  therefore  not  to  be  identified  with  the  mystic  who  is  wholly  one  with  Him.

(316)  A  "name  of  honour"  (kunya)  is  one  of  the  class  of  names  which
begin  with  the  word  Abu  (father)  and  are  used  as  a  mark  of  respect  to  the
person  addressed.  "  One  whom  I  made,"  i.e.  Man,  whose  language  is  meaning-
less as  applied  to  God.

(317)  Cf.  Kor.  49,  ii.  The  poet  includes  the  name  "  gnostic  "  among  alqdb
(which  is  here  equivalent  to  "  nicknames  "  or  "  ill  names  ")  because  the  Abso-
lute suffers  a  limitation  when  it  is  described  by  any  title,  however  exalted.

230  Studies  in  Islamic  Mysticism  [CH.

(318)  The  least  of  my  followers — the  virgin  brides  of  gnosis
were  led  home  to  the  eye  of  his  heart.

(319)  He  plucked  the  fruit  of  gnosis  from  a  branch  of  per-
ception that  grew  by  his  following  me  and  springs  from  the  root
of  my  nature;

(320)  So  that,  if  he  is  questioned  about  any  (spiritual)  matter,
he  brings  forth  wondrous  sayings  which  are  too  sublime  for  com-
prehension, nay,  too  subtle  for  the  mind  to  conceive.

(321)  And  amongst  them  (my  friends)  do  not  call  me  by  the
epithet  of  "favourite"  (muqarrab),  which  in  virtue  of  my  union
(with  God)  I  deem  to  be  a  sinful  severance ;

(322)  For  my  meeting  is  my  parting,  and  my  nearness  is  my
being  far,  and  my  fondness  is  my  aversion,  and  my  end  is  my
beginning,

(323)  Since  for  Her  sake  by  whom  I  have  disguised  myself
— and  'tis  but  myself  I  mean — I  have  cast  off  my  name  and  my
style  and  my  name  of  honour,

(324)  And  have  journeyed  beyond  where  those  of  old  stood
still,  and  where  minds  perished  misled  by (the  search  after
intellectual)  gains.

(325)  I  have  no  attributes,  for  an  attribute  is  a  mark  (of
substance).  Similarly,  a  name  is  a  sign  (of  an  object).  Therefore,
if  thou  wouldst  allude  to  me,  use  metaphors  or  epithets.

(326)  From  "I  am  She"  I  mounted  to  where  is  no  "to,"  and
I  perfumed  (phenomenal)  existence  by  my  returning;

(318-20)  The  argument  is:  "Gnostic,"  a  name  appropriate  to  the
meanest  of  my  disciples,  is  a  term  of  abuse  in  relation  to  me,  who  am  the
source  of  all  gnosis.

(321)  Muqarrab,  literally  "one  who  is  brought  near  (to  God)."  §tifis
often  use  this  term,  which  is  borrowed  from  the  Koran,  to  describe  the
highest  class  of  the  saints.  See  Kildb  al-Luma',  ch.  43.  The  muqarrab
prefers  union  to  separation,  whereas  in  perfect  union  there  are  no  con-
traries. Cf.  note  on  vv.  294-5.

(323)  I.e.  the  name  "She,"  or  "Beloved,"  disguises  me,  for  it  really
signifies  the  One  Essence,  which  is  my  true  and  eternal  self.

(324)  The  intellect  moving  in  the  world  of  relations  and  distinctions
cannot  reach  the  Absolute.

(326-7) Three  stages  of  Oneness  (ittijidd)  are  distinguished  here:

1.  "I  am  She,"  i.e.  union  (jam1)  without  real  separation  (tafriqa),
although  the  appearance  of  separation  is  maintained.  This  was  the  stage  in
which  al-Hallaj  said  Ana  'l-Haqq,  "I  am  God."

2.  "I  am  I,"  i.e.  pure  union  without  any  trace  of  separation  (in-

in]  The  Odes  of  Ibnu  'l-Fdrid  231

(327)  And  (I  returned)  from  "I  am  I"  for  the  sake  of  an
esoteric  wisdom  and  external  laws  which  were  instituted  that  I
might  call  (the  people  to  God).

(328)  The  goal  of  my  disciple  who  was  rapt  to  Her  (in  ecstasy)
and  the  utmost  limit  reached  by  his  masters  is  the  point  to  which
I  advanced  before  my  turning  back ;

(329)  And  the  highest  peak  gained  by  those  who  thought
themselves  foremost  is  the  lowest  level  that  bears  the  mark  of  my
tread;

(330)  And  the  last  pinnacle  of  that  which  is  beyond  indication,
and  where  is  no  progress  upwards  (but  only  backwards) — that  is
where  my  first  footstep  fell !

(331)  There  is  nothing  existent  but  hath  knowledge  of  my
grace,  nor  aught  in  being  but  utters  my  praise.

(332)  No  wonder  that  I  lord  it  over  all  who  lived  before  me,
since  I  have  grasped  the  firmest  stay  (which  is  a  verse)  in  (the
chapter  of  the  Koran  entitled)  Td-hd.

(333)  My  greeting  to  Her  is  metaphorical :  in  reality  my  saluta-
tion is  from  me  to  myself.

Here  Ibnu  l-Farid  inserts  in  praise  of  his  Beloved  an
ode  of  fifty-two  verses  (336-387)  in  the  same  metre  and  rhyme

dividuality).  This  stage  is  technically  known  as  "the  intoxication  of  union"
(sukru  'l-jam').

3.  The  "  sobriety  of  union ''  (sahwu  'l-jam'),  i.e.  the  stage  in  which  the
mystic  returns  from  the  pure  oneness  of  the  second  stage  to  plurality  in
oneness  and  to  separation  in  union  and  to  the  Law  in  the  Truth,  so  that  while
continuing  to  be  united  with  God  he  serves  Him  as  a  slave  serves  his  lord  and
manifests  the  Divine  Life  in  its  perfection  to  mankind.

"Where  is  no  'to,' "  i.e.  the  stage  of  "I  am  I,"  beyond  which  no  advance
is  possible  except  by  means  of  retrogression.  In  this  stage  the  mystic  is
entirely  absorbed  in  the  undifferentiated  oneness  of  God.  Only  after  he  has
"returned,"  i.e.  entered  upon  the  third  stage  (plurality  in  oneness)  can  he
communicate  to  his  fellows  some  perfume  (hint)  of  the  experience  through
which  he  has  passed.  "An  esoteric  wisdom,"  i.e.  the  Divine  providence
manifested  by  means  of  the  religious  law.  By  returning  to  consciousness  the
"  united  "  mystic  is  enabled  to  fulfil  the  law  and  to  act  as  a  spiritual  director.

(328)  "His  masters,"  literally  "his  objects  of  desire"  (murddihi),  i.e.
those  eminent  theosophists  whom  the  disciple  seeks  to  imitate,  but  who  have
not  reached  the  highest  degree  of  perfection.

(331)  All  created  things  glorify  God  with  diverse  tongues  which  are
heard  and  understood  by  spiritual  men. Cf.  The  Mystics  of  Islam,  p.  64.

(332)  I.e.  "I  have  attained  to  perfection  in  ittihdd  through  my  faith  in
the  verse  (Kor.  20,  7) : '  God,  there  is  no  god  but  He.' "  This  proves,  according
to  the  Sufis,  that  nothing  but  God  has  a  real  existence.

232  Studies  in  Islamic  Mysticism  [CH.

as  the  rest  of  the  Td'iyya.  Beautiful  as  this  lyric  interlude  is
and  welcome  for  the  relief  which  its  warm  colouring  affords
to  imaginations  fatigued  by  "the  white  radiance  of  eternity,"
it  interrupts  the  course  of  the  poem  and  may  be  omitted  here.
After  a  short  passage  (w.  388-393)  concerning  the  "  railer"
and  the  "slanderer,"  whom  the  mystic  when  he  regards
them  under  the  aspect  of  union  (jam1)  perceives  to  be  really
inspired  by  love,  not  by  enmity,  Ibnu  '1-Farid  resumes  his
description  of  the  unitive  state  at  its  supreme  level,  marked
by  the  return  from  ecstasy  to  a  new  and  enlarged  conscious-
ness of  the  One  Reality  which  manifests  itself  in  every  form  of
thought  and  sense.

(394)  And  therein  (in  ittihdd)  are  matters  of  which  the  veil  was
entirely  raised  for  me  by  my  recovery  from  intoxication,  while
they  were  screened  from  every  one  besides.

(395)  A  mystic  can  dispense  with  plain  words  and  will  under-
stand me  when  I  speak  allusively  on  account  of  those  who  would
trip  me  up.

(396)  None  may  divulge  them  without  making  his  lifeblood
the  forfeit,  and  in  symbols  there  is  a  meaning  that  words  cannot
define.

(397)  Now  my  exposition  begins  with  the  twain  who  sought  to
bring  about  my  severance,  albeit  my  union  defies  separation.

(398)  Those  twain  are  one  with  us  (the  Beloved  and  me)  in
inward  union,  though  in  outward  separation  we  and  they  are
counted  as  four.

(399)  For  truly  I  and  She  are  one  essence,  while  he  who  told
tales  of  her  and  he  who  turned  me  away  from  her  are  attributes
which  appeared.

(396)  The  mysteries  of  Oneness  cannot  be  revealed  otherwise  than
symbolically :  an  open  statement  would  not  only  cost  the  writer  his  life  but
would  also  fail  to  convey  the  meaning,  which  is  too  subtle  to  be  expressed
by  direct  explanation  and  definition.

(397)  "The  twain,"  i.e.  the  railer  and the  slanderer;  cf.  verse  51.
"My  union  defies  separation,"  because  the  mystic  who  has  attained  to
permanent  union  ($afrwu  'l-iam')  knows  that  all  things  in  spite  of  their
apparent  plurality  are  really  one.

(398-9)  Under  the  aspect  of  union  the  Divine  attributes  are  identical
with  the  Essence:  only  in  the  realm  of  phenomena  do  they  appear  as
particular  modes  of  the  Essence  and  distinct  from  it  in  respect  of  their
partic  u  larisatio  n .

in]  The  Odes  of  Ibnu  'l-Fdrid  233

(400)  That  one  (the  slanderer)  helps  the  spirit,  guiding  it  to
its  region  for  the  sake  of  a  contemplation  which  takes  place  in  a
spiritual  mould;

(401)  And  this  one  (the  railer)  helps  the  soul,  driving  it  to  its
companions  for  the  sake  of  an  existence  which  occurs  in  a  material
form.

(402)  Whoever  knows,  as  I  do,  (the  real  nature  of)  those
figures,  his  doctrine  in  removing  the  perplexity  of  doubt  (as  to  the
Divine  Unity)  is  unmixed  with  polytheism.

(403)  My  essence  endowed  with  delights  the  whole  sum  of  my
worlds  (of  being)  both  in  particular  and  in  general,  in  order  to
replenish  them  with  its  all-embracing  unity.

(404)  And  it  bounteously  poured  forth  its  overflow  when  there
was  as  yet  no  capacity  for  acquisition  (of  being),  and  it  was
capable (of  overflow) before there was any preparation for
receiving  (the  overflow).

(400)  From  the  standpoint  of  "  separation  "  (farq),  the  slanderer  and  the
railer  are  types  (cf.  note  on  v.  51)  of  two  influences  which  work  upon  the
heart.  The  slanderer — literally,  the  spy  whose  affection  for  the  Beloved
impels  him  to  prevent  any  rival  from  approaching  her — is  the  spirit  (rub);
the  railer  is  the  soul  (nafs) :  in  the  language  of  theology  the  former  is  de-
scribed as  the  Angel  who  inspires  the  heart  with  good  thoughts ;  the  latter  as
the  Devil  who  tempts  it  with  evil  suggestions  (see  D.  B.  Macdonald,  The
religious  attitude  and  life  in  Islam,  p.  274  foil.).  But  in  the  sphere  of  union
(jam1)  there  can  be  no  duality:  lover,  beloved,  railer  and  slanderer  are  so
many  aspects  of  the  One  Being.  Here,  then,  the  slanderer  or  the  spirit  (n'th)
represents  Universal  Spirit,  the  first  emanation  from  the  Absolute;  and  the
railer  or  the  soul  (nafs)  stands  for  Universal  Soul.  [Cf.  the  introduction  to
K.'s  commentary,  p.  20  foil.,  where  the  First  Intelligence,  "the  slanderer,"
is  said  to  be  the  luminosity  of  Universal  Spirit,  and  the  Second  Intelligence,
"the  railer,"  is  said  to  be  the  luminosity  of  Universal  Soul.]  The  human
spirit  is  guided  by  Universal  Spirit  to  its  "region,"  i.e.  the  Divine  Essence,
while  the  human  soul  belongs  to  Universal  Soul,  which  as  the  animating
principle  of  the  sensible  world  brings  the  soul  into  contact  with  its  "com-
panions," i.e.  bodies.

(402)  "Those  figures,"  i.e.  the  Beloved,  the  lover,  the  railer,  and  the
slanderer.

(403-4)  In  v.  403  I  read  imddd.  The  reading  amddd  gives  the  same  sense,
if  taken  (as  it  should  be)  as  the  plural,  not  of  madd,  but  of  madad.  Cf.  my
Selected  Poems  from  the  Divdni  Shamsi  Tabriz,  pp.  216  and  334.  The  process
of  emanation  (fayd)  by  which  Absolute  Being  diffuses  itself  does  not  depend
on  the  existence  of  capacities  for  receiving  that  which  is  rayed  forth.
Plurality  is  the  self-manifestation  of  the  One,  the  irradiation  whereby  the
One  becomes  visible  to  itself.

234  Studies  in  Islamic  Mysticism  [CH.

(405)  The  forms  of  existence  were  made  happy  by  the  Soul,
and  the  spirits  of  (the  plane  of)  contemplation  were  refreshed  by
the  Spirit.

The  inward  oneness  of  the  Essence  with  its  attributes  or
emanations  is  now  further  illustrated  by  reference  to  what
takes  place  in  audition  (samd'),  when  the  mystic  falling  into
ecstasy  at  the  sound  of  music  finds  God,  only  to  lose  Him
again  as  soon  as  the  momentary  transport  has  ebbed  away.

(406)  My  twofold  contemplation  of  a  slanderer  hastening  to
his  region  and  a  railer  bestowing  good  advice  on  his  companions

(407)  Bears  witness  to  my  state  in  the  samd',  a  state  caused
by  two  things  which  draw  me  (to  and  fro),  namely,  the  law  of  my
abiding  home  and  the  law  of  the  place  where  my  sentence  is
passed.

(408)  And  my  denial  of  being  perplexed  (with  doubts  touching
ittihdd)  by  the  five  external  senses  is  established  to  be  true  by  the
agreement  of  the  two  images.

(409)  Now,  before  (I  come  to)  my  purpose,  let  me  tell  thee
the  mystery  of  that  which  my  soul  received  secretly  from  them
(the  external  senses)  and  communicated  (to  the  inward  senses).

(410)  Whenever  the  idea  of  beauty  appears  in  any  form,  and

(405) "Made  happy,"  i.e.  endued  with  existence.

(406-7)  "To  his  region " — cf.  verse  400.  The  poet  means  to  say  that  his
contemplation  of  the  Essence  under  the  aspect  of  its  two  attributes  sym-
bolically described  as  the  slanderer  and  the  railer  is  analogous  to  his
perception  of  oneness  in  the  samd1 :  in  each  case  the  appearance  of  duality
is  illusory.  His  "state  in  the  samd',"  i.e.  the  state  of  agitation  and  suspense
between  "finding  God"  (wujtid)  and  "losing"  Him  (faqd),  is  the  result  of
two  diverse  aspects  which  are  inherent  in  the  nature  of  the  Essence  itself.
One  of  those  aspects  is  "union"  (jam1),  i.e.  the  oneness  in  which  plurality
is  non-existent  or  only  potentially  existent;  the  other  aspect  is  "separation  "
(tafriqa)  in  which  the  Essence  passes  forth  from  its  oneness  in  order  that  it
may  become  conscious  of  itself.  The  former  is  the  mystic's  "abiding  home."
"The  place  where  my  sentence  is  passed,"  i.e.  the  phenomenal  world,  which
the  mystic,  on  coming  forth  from  the  state  of  "union"  (jam'),  judges  to  be
the  abode  of  "separation"  (tafriqa).

(408)  The  unity  of  Being  is  affirmed  by  the  correspondence  existing
between  sense  and  spirit.  The  mystic  finds  God  in  every  object  perceived  by
the  senses,  so  that  the  image  of  every  object  in  his  perception  is  identical
with  the  image  of  God  in  his  heart.

(409)  "My  purpose,"  i.e.  to  explain  what  is  experienced  in  the  samd'.
(410-12) These verses illustrate "the correspondence of the two

images."  Thought  is  inward  sight  and  memory  is  inward  hearing.

in]  The  Odes  of  Ibnu  'l-Fdrid  235

whenever  one  afflicted  by  sorrow  raises  a  mournful  cry  in  (reciting)
the  verses  of  a  chapter  of  the  Koran,

(411)  My  thought  beholds  Her  with  the  eye  of  my  phantasy,
and  my  memory  hears  Her  with  the  ear  of  my  intelligence,

(412)  And  my  mind  brings  Her  in  imagination  before  my  soul,
so  that  my  understanding  deems  Her  sensibly  at  my  side,

(413)  And  I  wonder  at  my  drunkenness  without  wine,  and  am
thrilled  in  the  depths  of  my  being  by  a  joy  that  comes  from  myself,

(414)  And  my  heart  dances,  and  the  trembling  of  my  limbs
doth  clap  its  hands  like  a  chanter,  and  my  spirit  is  my  musician.

(415)  My  soul  never  ceased  to  be  fed  with  (spiritual)  desires
and  to  efface  the  (sensual)  faculties  by  weakening  them,  until  at
last  it  waxed  strong.

(416)  Here  I  found  all  existing  things  allied  to  aid  me —
though  the  aid  (really)  came  from  myself —

(417)  In  order  that  every  organ  of  sense  might  unite  me  with
Her,  and  that  my  union  might  include  every  root  of  my  hair,

(418)  And  that  the  veil  of  estrangement  between  us  might  be
cast  off,  albeit  I  found  it  no  other  than  friendship.

(419)  Mark  now — and  do  not  hope  to  learn  this  by  study —
how  the  sense  conveys  to  the  soul  by  immediate  revelation  what
She  brings  to  light.

(420)  When  a  north  wind  travelling  by  night  from  Her  blows
at  dawn,  its  coolness  recalls  the  thought  of  Her  to  my  spirit,

(421)  And  mine  ear  is  pleased  when  in  the  forenoon  grey  doves
warbling  and  singing  on  the  branches  arouse  it,

(422)  And  mine  eye  is  gladdened  if  at  eve  flashes  of  lightning
transmit  and  give  it  from  Her  to  the  pupil  of  mine  eye,

(413-4)  The  ecstasy  of  vision  and  audition  is  not  produced  by  an
external  cause,  such  as  wine,  dancing,  and  music,  but  is  itself  the  mystic's
dance  and  song.

(415  foil.)  Perfect  union  with  God  depends  on  the  strength  of  the  soul,
i.e.  on  its  purification  from  sensuous  impressions.  But  when  the  soul  has
been  purified,  it  uses  as  a  means  of  becoming  united  with  God  the  same
faculties  which  formerly  hindered  it  from  attaining  its  end.  The  poet  says
that  this  aid  really  comes  from  himself,  because  the  senses  cannot  render  it
out  of  their  own  nature:  the  self  must  first  be  spiritualised,  in  order  that
through  its  organs  all  things  may  be  perceived  as  essentially  one,  according
to  the  doctrine  of  ittihdd.

(418) "No  other  than  friendship":  cf.  note  on  v.  82.

(420)  There  is  only  an  allusion  in  this  verse  to  the  sense  of  smell,  while
the  other  four  senses  are  mentioned  explicitly  in  the  verses  which  follow.

(421-4) "  It "  in  these  verses  is  "the  thought  of  Her"  (dhikruhd).

236  Studies  in  Islamic  Mysticism  [CH.

(423)  And  it  is  bestowed  on  my  taste  and  touch  by  the  wine-
cups  when  they  are  passed  round  to  me  at  night,

(424)  And  my  heart  conveys  it  as  an  inward  thing  to  the
mental  faculties  through  the  medium  of  the  outward  thing  that
was  delivered  by  the  bodily  messengers  (the  senses).

(425)  He  that  chants  Her  name  in  the  assembly  (of  listeners)
makes  me  present  with  Her,  so  that  as  I  listen  I  behold  Her  with
my  whole  being.

(426)  My  spirit  soars  towards  the  heaven  whence  it  was
breathed  (into  me),  while  my  theatre  of  manifestation  (my  soul),
which  was  fashioned  by  the  spirit,  stoops  to  its  earthly  peers.

(427)  Part  of  me  is  pulled  towards  Her  and  part  of  me
pulls  towards  itself,  and  in  every  pull  there  is  a  tug  like  giving  up
the  ghost.

(428)  The  cause  of  this  is  my  soul's  recollecting  its  real  nature
from  Her  when  She  inspired  it,

(429)  So  that  it  longed  in  the  limbo  of  earth  to  hear  the  Divine
call  alone  (uncontaminated  by  the  call  of  the  lower  self),  since  both
(the  spiritual  and  the  sensual  natures)  take  hold  of  my  bridle-
reins.

(424)  In  Moslem  psychology  the  heart  (qcUb)  "suggests  the  inmost,
most  secret  and  genuine  thoughts,  the  very  basis  of  man's  intellectual
nature"  (see  D.  B.  Macdonald,  The  religious  attitude  and  life  in  Islam,  p.  221
foil.). It  receives  from  the  outer  senses  the  outward  idea  of  God,  viz.  the
forms  of  sense-objects,  and  transmits  the  corresponding  universal  idea,  viz.
the  essence  and  attributes  of  God,  to  the  inner  senses,  i.e.  to  the  cogitative,
memorative,  estimative,  and  apprehensive  faculties.  These  two  ideas  are
identical  in  so  far  as  they  are  correlative  aspects  of  Being.  The  mystic
contemplates  as  pure  reality  that  which  he  perceives  objectively  in  the  forms
of  phenomena.  According  to  the  commentator,  the  preposition  which  I  have
translated  by  "  through  the  medium  of  "  should  have  the  meaning  of  "  simul-
taneously with,"  i.e.  the  delivery  of  the  sense-datum  to  the  heart  syn-
chronises with  its  transmission  by  the  heart  to  the  intellectual  faculties.

(425)  Here  the  poet  begins  his  promised  explanation  (which  is  based
upon  the  foregoing  theory)  of  his  "state  in  the  samd',"  He  says  that,  whilst
listening  to  the  music,  he  nevertheless  contemplates  God  with  his  whole
spiritual  and  sensuous  self.

(426-9)  These  verses  answer  the  question,  Why  does  music  agitate  and
transport  those  who  hear  it  ?  Because,  the  poet  replies,  the  higher  and  lower
elements  in  man  draw  and  are  drawn  in  opposite  directions.  Man  is  led
sometimes  by  the  spirit  (ruh),  sometimes  by  the  flesh  (nafs);  but  music,  in
which  God  reveals  Himself,  brings  back  to  him  the  recollection  of  what  he
was  before  he  had  a  bodily  existence :  then  he  falls  into  ecstasy  and  his  soul
(nafs)  struggles  like  a  captive  bird  to  escape  from  its  cage.

in]  The  Odes  of  Ibnu  'l-Fdrid  237

(430)  Concerning  my  state  in  audition  a  babe,  even  though  he
grow  up  to  be  dull,  will  inform  thee  by  throwing  it  upon  thy  mind
like  (a  flash  of)  inspiration  or  insight.

(431)  When  he  moans  because  of  the  tight  swaddling-clothes
and  restlessly  yearns  to  be  relieved  from  exceeding  distress,

(432)  He  is  soothed  with  lullabies,  so  that  he  lays  aside  all  the
weariness  which  came  over  him  and  listens  to  his  soother  like  one
attending  silently,

(433)  And  the  sweet  words  make  him  forget  his  bitter  grief
and  remember  the  speech  that  passed  in  times  of  old,

(434)  And  by  his  state  he  explains  the  state  of  samd'  (audition)
and  confirms  the  absence  of  imperfection  from  the  mystic  dance :

(435)  When  through  the  one  that  is  hushing  him  he  becomes
distraught  with  longing  and  would  fain  fly  to  his  first  home,

(436)  He  is  quieted  by  being  rocked  in  his  cradle  as  the  hands
of  his  nurse  move  it  to  and  fro.

(437)  I  have  felt,  when  She  is  called  to  mind  by  the  beautiful
tones  of  a  reciter  (of  the  Koran)  or  the  piercing  notes  of  a  singer,

(438)  As  the  sufferer  feels  in  his  agony  when  the  angels  of
Death  take  to  themselves  his  all.

(439)  For  one  who  feels  pain  in  being  driven  to  part  (from  his
body)  is  like  one  who  is  pained  by  feeling  (rapture)  in  his  yearning
after  his  (spiritual)  companions :

(440)  As  the  soul  of  the  former  had  pity  for  that  (body)  in
which  it  appeared,  so  my  spirit  soared  to  its  high  origins.

Having  exhibited  the  phenomena  of  the  samd'  in  their  due
relation  to  the  doctrine  of  ittihdd,  Ibnu  '1-Farid  returns  to  the
region  of  the  self-contained  Unity  which  is  sole  actor  on  the
universal  stage.

(441)  My  spirit  passed  the  gate  which  barred  my  going

(433)  "The  speech  that  passed  in  times  (or  'covenants')  of  old" — see
the  notes  on  vv.  69  and  156.

(434-6)  Many  Sufis  looked  with  disfavour  on  the  ecstatic  dance,  which
is  a  well-known  feature  of  the  samd'.  Cf.  the  saying,  al-raqs  nags,  "dancing
is  a  fault."  Ibnu  '1-Farid  justifies  it  on  the  ground  that  it  is  an  anodyne  to
the  fever  of  the  soul :  its  violent  movements  calm  the  agitating  reminiscences
awakened  by  music  and  rock  the  soul  to  rest.

(440)  Cf.  vv.  426-7. As  death  causes  the  lower  soul  (nafs)  to  grieve  for
the  loss  of  its  earthly  home,  so  music  causes  the  spirit  (rtih)  to  grieve  for
the  loss  of  its  heavenly  home.

(441)  Elsewhere  (Diwdn,  p.  217, 1.  10)  Ibnu  '1-Farid  says:  "If  others  are

238  Studies  in  Islamic  Mysticism  [CH.

beyond  union  (with  the  Beloved)  and  soared  to  where  no  barrier
of  union  remained.

(442)  He  that  like  me  makes  it  (this  gate)  his  chosen  quest,
let  him  follow  me  and  ride  for  it  with  firm  resolution !

(443)  Before  entering  it,  I  have  plunged  into  how  many  a
deep!  wherefrom  none  that  craved  (spiritual)  wealth  was  ever
blest  with  a  draught.

(444)  I  will  show  it  to  thee,  if  thou  art  resolved,  in  the  mirror
of  my  poesy,  therefore  turn  the  ear  of  insight  to  what  I  let  fall.

(445)  I  cast  aside  from  my  speech  the  word  "  self-regard,"  and
from  my  actions  self-interest  in  any  act;

(446)  And  my  looking  for  fair  recompense  for  my  works,  and
my  care  to  preserve  my  mystical  states  from  the  shame  of  sus-
picion,

(447)  And  my  preaching — all  these  things  I  put  away  with
firm  resolution  as  one  who  is  entirely  disinterested;  and  my
casting  aside  regard  for  my  casting  aside  applies  to  each  division.

(448)  So  my  heart  is  a  temple  in  which  I  dwell :  in  front  of  it
(hindering  approach)  is  the  appearance  from  it  of  the  attributes
belonging  to  my  veiledness.

(449)  Amongst  them  my  rignt  hand  is  a  pillar  (corner-stone)
that  is  kissed  in  myself,  and  because  of  the  law  in  my  mouth  my

content  with  His  image  seen  in  dreams,  I  am  not  content  even  with  being
united  to  Him."  In  this  verse  (441)  and  also  in  the  verse  quoted  he  uses  the
word  wi$dl,  properly  "conjunction."  Wi$dl,  wa$l  and  ittisdl  contain  the  idea
of  duality  and  are  therefore  inferior  to  jam'  or  complete  union  and  ittifrdd
or  tvuffit.  Cf.  Nallino,  op.  cit.  p.  60,  note  i.

(443)  The  way  to  this  gate  is  through  the  deeps  of  j 'and.  Those  who  seek
not  God  alone  but  spiritual  wealth,  i.e.  good  works  and  godly  dispositions,
desire  the  continuance  of  their  phenomenal  self -existence.

(445-7)  These  lines  describe  the  poet's  ikhld?,  a  term  denoting  freedom
from  every  form  of  self-regard.  Inasmuch  as  no  one  who  is  purely  dis-
interested can  attribute  disinterestedness  to  himself,  Ibnu  '1-Faritf  says  that
in  every  instance — words,  deeds,  works,  and  states — "he  has  cast  aside
regard  for  his  casting  aside,"  i.e.  he  is  not  disinterested  (mukhli?)  but  un-
conscious of  being  disinterested  (ntukhla?).  See  R.  Hartmann,  Al-Kuschairts
Darstellung  des  $Afttums,  p.  17,  and  Kitdb  al-Luma',  p.  218,  1.  6  foil.

(448)  The  heart  (qalb),  in  which  the  essence  of  man  resides,  is  veiled  by
the  attributes  limiting  that  essence,  just  as  the  temple  of  a  deity  is  shrouded
by  curtains.

(449)  According  to  an  Apostolic  Tradition,  God  (the  essence  of  man)  is
contained  in  the  believer's  heart,  which  is  therefore  likened  to  the  Ka'ba,
while  by  the  same  analogy  ritual  acts  of  worship  performed  in  the  pil-
grimage are  acts  of  the  Essence,  i.e.  Divine  acts. One  of  these  rites  is  the

Ill]  The  Odes  of  Ibnu  'l-Fdrid  239

kiss  (qubla)  comes  from  my  qibla  (the  object  to  which  I  turn  in
worship).

(450)  My  circumambulation in the spirit  is  really  round
myself,  and  my  running  from  my  Saf  a  to  my  Marwa  is  for  the  sake
of  my  own  face  (reality).

(451)  Within  a  sanctuary  of  my  inward  my  outward  is  safe,
while  my  neighbours  around  it  are  in  danger  of  being  snatched
away.

(452)  My  soul  was  purified  by  my  solitary  fasting  from  other
than  myself,  and  gave  as  alms  the  overflow  of  my  grace;

(453)  And  the  doubling  of  my  existence  during  my  contem-
plation became  single  in  my  oneness  (ittihdd)  when  I  awoke  from
my  slumber;

(454)  And  my  inmost  self's  night-journey  to  myself  from  the
special  privilege  of  the  Truth  is  like  my  voyage  in  the  general
obligation  of  the  Law;

(455)  And  my  divinity  did  not  make  me  neglectful  of  the

kissing  of  the  Black  Stone,  "the  right  hand  of  God"  (yamin  Allah).  Since
the  religious  law  is  the  Word  of  God,  the  kiss  which  it  prescribes  and  which
is  included  in  it,  comes,  as  it  were,  from  the  mouth  of  God,  who  as  the
essence  of  the  creature  (al-khalq)  adores  Himself  as  the  Creator  (al-Ifaqq).

(450)  Saf  a  and  Marwa  are  two  hills  near  Mecca.  The  commentator
thinks  that  Safa  signifies  the  present  life  and  Marwa  the  life  hereafter.

(451)  When  the  phenomenal  self  and its  faculties  are  within  the
sanctuary  of  the  heart,  i.e.  absorbed  in  God,  they  are  safe  from  the  assault
of  "otherness,"  to  which  they  are  exposed  outside  it  (cf.  Koran,  29,  67).

(452)  The  mystic's  fast  consists  in  abstaining  from  whatsoever  is  not
real  and  Divine  and  in  being  alone  with  his  essence ;  his  alms-giving  is  the
communication  to  others  of  the  Divine  grace  which  flows  from  his  essence.

(453)  The  reference  to  prayers  in  this  verse  is  indicated  by  the  words
shaf  (double)  and  witr  (single),  which  may  also  be  rendered  "two  genu-
flexions" and  "a  single  genuflexion"  in  the  canonical  prayer  (saldt). In
ittihdd  the  worshipper  is  made  one  with  the  object  of  worship  and  realises
that  his  individual  existence  was  a  dream.

(454)  The  term  "night-journey"  is  used  in  the  Koran,  17,  i,  of  the
ascension  (mi'rdj)  of  the  Prophet.  Since  an  ascension  from  the  Truth  or  the
Essence  implies  that  there  is  something  higher  than  that,  the  poet  answers
this  objection  by  pointing  out  that  the  journey  of  the  Perfect  Man  from  the
Truth  is  like  his  journey  in  the  Law,  i.e.  both  journeys  are  really  movements
of  his  essence  in  and  to  and  from  itself. Here  the  "night-journey"  denotes
the  third  stage  of  Oneness  (see  note  on  vv.  326-7)  in  which  the  mystic  returns
from  "the  intoxication  of  union"  to  "the  sobriety  of  union."

(455)  Divinity  (Idhtit)  and  humanity  (ndstit)  are  correlative  attributes  or
aspects  of  the  One  Reality.  Man,  created  in  the  image  of  God,  must  never-
theless fulfil  the  law  imposed  on  his  corporeal  nature,  yet  while  recognising

240  Studies  in  Islamic  Mysticism  [CH.

requirement  of  my  theatre  of  manifestation,  nor  did  my  humanity
cause  me  to  forget  the  theatre  in  which  my  wisdom  is  manifested.

(456)  From  me  the  covenants  derived  their  binding  power
upon  the  soul,  and  by  me  the  laws  of  religion  were  instituted  to
restrain  the  senses,

(457)  Inasmuch  as  there  had  come  to  me  from  myself  an
Apostle  to  whom  my  sinning  was  grievous,  one  taking  jealous  care
of  me  from  compassion,

(458)  And  I  executed  my  command  (given)  from  my  soul
unto  herself,  and  when  she  took  charge  of  her  own  affair  she  did
not  turn  back ;

(459)  And  from  the  time  of  my  covenant,  before  the  era  of  my
elements,  before  the  (prophetic)  warning  was  sent  to  (the  world)
where  men  shall  be  raised  from  the  dead,

(460)  I  was  an  apostle  sent  from  myself  to  myself,  and  my
essence  was  led  to  me  by  the  evidence  of  my  own  signs.

(461)  And  when  I  conveyed  my  soul,  by  purchase,  from  the
possession  of  her  own  land  to  the  kingdom  of  Paradise —

(462)  For  she  had  fought  a  good  fight  and  had  died  a  martyr
in  her  cause  and  had  gotten  joy  of  her  contract  when  she  paid  the
price —

(463)  She  soared  with  me,  in  consequence  of  my  union,  beyond

and  obeying  it  he  must  remember  that  as  a  spirit  he  is  the  oracle  of  Divine
Wisdom.

(456)  "The  covenants,"  i.e.  the  acknowledgment  by  human  souls  in
their  state  of  pre-existence  that  they  should  love  and  worship  God.  Cf .  note
on  verse  69.

(457-60)  The  Apostle  is  Universal  Spirit,  which  emanates  from  the
Essence  regarded  as  Pure  Oneness  to  the  Essence  regarded  as  Universal  Soul.
This  emanation  is,  relatively  at  least,  an  eternal  process.  Mohammed  (identi-
fied with  Universal  Spirit)  said,  "  I  was  a  prophet  when  Adam  was  water  and
clay."  i.e.  before  the  Creation.  The  "signs"  or  evidential  miracles  given  to
the  Soul  by  the  Apostle  of  Universal  Spirit  are  the  attributes  of  the  Essence,
which  thereby  reveals  itself  to  itself.

(461-2)  These  lines  are  best  explained  by  a  passage  in  the  Koran  (9,
112):  "Lo,  Allah  hath  purchased  of  the  true  believers  their  souls  and  their
substance,  promising  them  Paradise  in  return,  on  condition  that  they  shall
fight  in  the  cause  of  Allah  and  slay  and  be  slain — a  promise  binding  on  Him
in  the  Torah  and  the  Gospel  and  the  Koran;  and  who  fulfilleth  his  pledge
more  faithfully  than  Allah?  Rejoice  therefore  in  the  contract  which  ye  have

(463)  In  the  following  verses  (463-477)  the  poet  describes  himself  in  the
state  of  union  (jam1),  i.e.  on  the  plane  of  Absolute  Being,  emancipated  from
the  relations  to  which  he  is  subject  in  the  phenomenal  world.  "  The  earth  of

in]  The  Odes  of  Ibnu  'l-Fdrid  241

everlasting  life  in  her  heaven  (Paradise),  since  I  did  not  consent
to  incline  towards  the  earth  of  my  vicegerent ;

(464)  And  how  should  I  come  under  (the  dominion  of)  that
over  which  I  am  lord,  like  the  friends  of  my  kingdom  and  my
followers  and  my  party  and  my  adherents?

(465)  There  is  no  celestial  sphere  but  therein,  from  the  light
of  my  inward  being,  is  an  angel  who  gives  guidance  by  my  will,

(466)  And  there  is  no  region  but  thereon,  from  the  overflow
of  my  outward  being,  falleth  a  drop  that  is  the  source  of  the  clouds'
downpouring.

(467)  Beside  my  countenance  the  far-spreading  light  (of  the
sun)  is  like  a  gleam,  and  beside  my  watering-place  the  all-encom-
passing sea  is  like  a  drop.

(468)  Therefore  the  whole  of  me  is  seeking  the  whole  of  me  and
is  directing  itself  towards  it,  and  part  of  me  is  drawing  part  of  me
with  reins.

(469)  Every  direction  tends  to  the  all-guiding  face  of  him  who
is  above  (the  relation  of)  "below"  and  below  whom  is  (the  relation
of)  "above."

(470)  Thus  (in  my  experience)  the  "below-ness"  of  the  earth
is  the  "  above-ness  "  of  the  aether,  because  of  the  closing  of  that

my  vicegerent,"  i.e.  the  body.  The  human  soul  governs  the  body  as  the  vice4-
gerent  (khalifa]  of  God.

(464)  The  "united"  mystic  (sdhibu  'l-jam')  is  lord  over  all  relations,  i.e.
he  transcends  them  and  is  not  conditioned  by  any  of  them.  "The  friends  of
my  kingdom,  etc."  i.e.  those  who  follow  me  but  have  not  attained  to  One-
ness, so  that  they  still  belong  to  the  realm  of  phenomenal  existence.

(465-6)  He  means  to  say  that,  in  respect  of  his  mystical  identification
with  the  Absolute,  he  is  the  ultimate  source  of  all  that  exists  in  the  visible
world  as  well  as  in  the  universe  of  the  Unseen:  the  former  is  the  external
aspect  of  Reality,  while  the  latter  is  its  hidden  ground.

(468)  "  Every  part  of  me — spirit,  heart,  soul  and  body — is  seeking  my
Essence,  i.e.  the  Universal  in  which  all  particulars  are  comprised."  When  the
spirit  contemplates  God  alone,  it  draws  to  itself  the  heart,  so  that  the  heart
desires  God  alone;  and  the  heart  then  draws  to  itself  the  soul,  so  that  the
soul  worships  God  alone  and  draws  to  itself  the  body,  which  God  then  causes
to  be  employed  entirely  in  good  works.

(469)  Absolute  Being  is  the  centre  to  which  all  particular  objects
converge.

(470)  The  phrase,  "because  of  the  closing,  etc."  is  borrowed  from  Kor.
21,  31 :  "  Did  not  the  unbelievers  discern  that  the  heavens  and  the  earth  were
closed  until  We  clave  them  asunder  and  made  every  living  thing  of  the  water
(that  gushed  forth)  ? "  Whatever  meaning  the  Prophet  may  have  attached
to  these  metaphors,  Ibnu  '1-Farid  evidently  signifies  by  "the  closing"  that

N.  s.  ii  16

242  Studies  in  Islamic  Mysticism  [CH.

which  I  clave  asunder;  and  the  cleavage  of  that  which  was  closed
is  only  the  outward  aspect  of  my  way  (sunna).

(471)  And  there  is  no  doubt,  since  union  is  the  essence  of
certainty,  and  no  direction,  since  place  is  a  (relation  of)  difference
arising  from  my  separation ;

(472)  And  there  is  no  number,  since  numeration  cuts  like  the
edge  of  a  sword,  and  no  time,  since  limitation  is  the  dualism  of  one
who  fixes  a  definite  term ;

(473)  And  I  have  in  the  two  worlds  no  rival  who  should  doom
to  destruction  what  I  built  or  whose  command  should  cause  the
decree  of  my  authority  to  be  enforced;

(474)  Nor  have  I  in  either  world  any  opposite,  for  thou  wilt
not  see  amongst  created  beings  any  incongruity  in  their  mode  of
creation,  but  all  are  alike  (in  perfection).

(475)  And  from  me  appeared  that  which  I  made  a  disguise  to
myself,  and  by  means  of  me  the  phenomena  were  caused  to  return
from  me  to  myself;

(476)  And  in  myself  I  beheld  those  who  bowed  in  worship  to
my  theatre  of  manifestation,  and  I  knew  for  sure  that  I  was  the
Adam  to  whom  I  bowed;

(477)  And  I  discerned  that  the  spiritual  rulers  of  the  earths

state  which  he  elsewhere  calls  "  union  "  (jam1),  i.e.  Being  viewed  synthetically
as  the  inner  unity  in  which  all  distinctions  are  reconciled,  and  by  "the
cleavage  of  that  which  was  closed"  the  state  of  "separation"  (tafriqa),  i.e.
Being  viewed  analytically  in  its  external  and  phenomenal  aspect.

(472)  Number  and  Time  involve  division  and  limitation,  which  are
inconsistent  with  real  unity.

(473)  "No  rival,"  i.e.  no  partner  in  the  attributes  of  deity;  cf.  Kor.
21,  22 :"  If  there  were  any  gods  besides  Allah  in  heaven  or  earth,  verily  both
(heaven  and  earth)  would  be  ruined."

(474)  Kor.  67,  3:  "Thou  dost  not  see  any  incongruity  (imperfection)  in
the  creation  of  the  Merciful  (God)."  Were  there  two  opposed  creators,  like
Ormuzd  and  Ahriman,  their  difference  would  manifest  itself  in  the  objects
created  by  them.

(475)  The  illusion  of  phenomena  does  not  impair  the  real  unity  which
creates  from  itself,  reveals  to  itself,  and  again  withdraws  from  its  manifested
into  its  occult  self.

(476)  In  reality  the  worshipper  and  the  object  of  worship  are  one.  The
angels  who  worshipped  Adam  (Kor.  15,  28  foil.)  symbolise  the  relation  of
a  Divine  attribute  to  its  Essence.

(477)  The  Divine  attributes  as  manifested  in  Man  may  be  distinguished
from  each  other,  so  that  we  speak  of  higher  and  lower  natures,  faculties,  and
powers,  but  they  are  fundamentally  one  and  identical  in  respect  of  the
Essence  of  which  they  are  modes. For  this  symbolic  use  of  "angels"  cf.
p.  1 15  foil.

in]  The  Odes  of  Ibnu  'l-Fdrid  243

amongst  the  angels  of  the  highest  sphere  are  equal  in  relation  to
my  rank.

(478)  Although  my  comrades  craved  right  guidance  from  my
horizon  that  is  near  (to  them),  the  union  of  my  unity  was  shown
forth  from  my  second  separation,

(479)  And  in  the  swoon  that  crushed  my  senses  my  soul  fell
prostrate  before  me  in  order  that  she  might  recover  ere  repenting
as  Moses  repented.

(480)  For  there  is  no  "where"  after  (vision  of)  Reality,  since  I
have  recovered  from  intoxication,  and  the  cloud  that  veiled  the
Essence  has  been  cleared  away  by  sobriety.

(481)  The  end  of  a  self-effacement  that  preceded  my  (indi-
vidual self's)  conclusion  is  like  the  beginning  of  a  sobriety  (self-
consciousness),  because  both  are  circumscribed  by  a  period.

(482)  I  weighed  in  a  scale  him  who  is  rapt  by  an  obliterating
effacement  in  death  (to  self)  with  him  who  is  cut  off  by  the  sobriety
of  sense  (self -consciousness)  in  separation  (from  God).

(478)  The Essence  appears  from  two  horizons, i.e.  in  two  aspects:
(i)  without  attributes  or  actions;  (2)  qualified  by  the  whole  of  its  attributes
and  actions.  "  My  horizon  that  is  near  "  refers  to  the  former  epiphany,  which
produces  in  the  mystic  the  state  of  union  (jam')  without  separation  (tafriqa),
a  state  necessarily  accompanied  by  ecstatic  unconsciousness. In  the  latter
and  more  exalted  epiphany,  the  Essence  reveals  itself  together  with  its  attri-
butes as  the  unity  of  the  One  and  the  Many,  the  synthesis  of  union  and  sepa-
ration. This  aspect  of  reality  is  associated  with  "the  second  separation,"
i.e.  the  return  from  ecstasy  to  a  higher  plane  of  consciousness  than  any  that
was  experienced  before  the  ecstasy  began  (cf.  notes  on  233-5,  326-7).

(479)  See  note  on  v.  n  and  vv.  288-9. "Ere  repenting,  etc."  i.e.  before
coming  back  to  the  world  of  sense.  Moses  asked  to  see  God  with  his  pheno-
menal nature  and  was  punished  by  being  thrown  into  the  state  of  "in-
toxication,"  in  which  it  is  not  possible  to  have  perfect  clairvoyance;
therefore  his  repentance  and  recovery  involved  a  return  to  normal  con-
sciousness, whereas  Ibnu  '1-Farid's  recovery  endowed  him  with  the  abnormal
consciousness  which  is  characteristic  of  the  unitive  life.

(480)  "No  'where'  (ayn)  after  Reality  ('ayn),"  which  is  free  from  all
limitation.  The  meaning  of  the  remainder  of  the  verse  has  been  sufficiently
explained  above.

(481-2)  The  higher  mystical  life,  before  it  reaches  the  perfect  oneness
which  is  its  goal,  swings  to  and  fro  between  states  of  ecstasy  and  conscious-
ness :  self-effacement  (mahw)  and  self-restoration  (ithbdt),  intoxication  (sukr)
and  sobriety  (sahw),  etc.  This  ever-changing  succession  (talwin)  of  comple-
mentary states  only  ceases  with  the  conclusion  of  self-existence,  i.e.  when
the  mystic's  individuality  has  entirely  passed  away,  so  that  he  is  permanently
one  with  the  timeless  and  infinite  being  of  God.  Such  permanent  conscious
oneness  with  God  is  described  symbolically  as  "the  second  separation"

1 6 — 2

244  Studies  in  Islamic  Mysticism  [CH.

(483)  Therefore  the  dot  of  the  "z"  of  "film"  was  effaced
from  my  sobriety,  and  the  wakefulness  of  the  eye  of  the  Essence
annulled  my  self-effacement.

(484)  One  who  loses  (God)  in  sobriety  and  finds  (God)  in  self-
effacement  is  incapable,  owing  to  his  alternation,  of  the  fixity  of
nearness  (to  God).

(485)  The  drunken  and  the  sober  are  alike  inasmuch  as  they  are
qualified  by  themarkof  "  presence  "  or  by  the  brand  of  "  enclosure."

(486)  No  followers  of  mine  are  they  in  whom  the  attributes  of
"disguise"  or  the  vestiges  of  any  remnant  (of  these  attributes)
succeed  each  other.

(487)  He  that  does  not  inherit  perfection  from  me  is  faulty,  a
backslider  into  chastisement.

(488)  In  me  is  naught  that  would  lead  to  the  ' '  disguise ' '  resulting
from  a  remnant  (of  self -existence),  nor  any  shadow  (of  phenomenal
being)  that  would  condemn  me  to  return  (to  an  inferior  degree).

(489)  How  little  may  a  heart  communicate  in  the  form  of
thought  or  a  tongue  utter  in  the  mould  of  speech !

(490)  All  sides  (of  Being)  joined  in  me  and  the  carpet  of  other-
ness was  rolled  up  in  virtue  of  the  equality  (of  all),

(al-farqu  'l-thdni)  or  "the  second  sobriety"  (as-sahwu  'l-thdni).  Viewed  from
that  summit,  negative  or  positive  states,  like  mahw  and  sahw,  are  equally
imperfect;  hence  the  poet  says,  "  I  weighed,  etc,"  i.e.  "  I  found  both  of  them
wanting."  Mahq  (misinterpreted  by  K  )  is  nearly  equivalent  to  mahw.  See
Kitdb  al-Luma',  355,  17.

(483)  "The  dot  of  the  V  of  'film'":  literally,  "the  dot  of  the  (letter)
ghayn  of  (the  word)  ghayn  (film  or  cloud),"  i.e.  in  the  first  place  my  individual
existence  was  effaced  from  my  consciousness ;  then  self-effacement  was  super-
seded by  "the  wakefulness  of  the  eye  of  the  Essence,"  i.e.  by  the  divine  or
cosmic  consciousness,  which  is  technically  named  "the  second  sobriety."
Ghayn  (film)  becomes  'ayn  (eye  or  essence)  when  the  dot  of  its  initial  letter
is  removed.

(484)  Alternation  (talwin),  fixity  (tamkin):  cf.  note  on  vv.  481-2  and
Kashf  al-Mahjtib,  p.  370  foil.

(485)  Cf.  verse  482. Perfect  Oneness  is  the  unity  which  combines  two
main  aspects  of  Being  as  it  is  revealed  to  mystics  (cf.  note  on  v.  478).
"Presence"  (hutfur)  is  here  equivalent  to  "union"  (jam1),  and  "enclosure"
(hazlra)  to  "separation" (tafriqa).

(486)  Cf.  note  on  vv.  481-2.  "The  attributes  of  'disguise'  "  refer  to  the
state  of  sobriety  (?ahw)  and  denote  the  normal  consciousness  which  follows
ecstasy  and  "veils"  the  mystic  from  God.  "The  vestiges  of  any  remnant"
refer  to  thestateof  self-effacement  (mahw)  in  which  these  attributes  disappear.

(489)  In  this  verse  wahy  refers  to  the  heart,  slgha  to  the  tongue.

(490)  "All  sides,"  i.e.  contrary  predications,  such  as  eternity  and  time.
above  and  below,  first  and  last,  etc.

ill]  The  Odes  of  Ibnu  'l-Fdrid  245

(491)  And  my  existence,  in  the  passing-away  of  the  duality  of
existence,  became  a  contemplation  in  the  abidingness  of  unity.

(492)  That  which  is  above  the  range  of  intellect — the  First
Emanation — is  even  as  that  which  is  below  the  Sinai  of  tradition—
the  last  handful.

(493)  Therefore  the  best  of  God's  creatures  forbade  us  to
prefer  him  to  the  Man  of  the  Fish,  although  he  is  worthy  of
preference.

(494)  I  have  indicated (the  truth  concerning  phenomenal
relations)  by  the  means  which  language  yields,  and  that  which  is
obscure  I  have  made  clear  by  a  subtle  allegory.

(495)  The  "Am  not  I"  of  yesterday  is  not  other  (than  what
shall  be  manifested)  to  him  who  enters  on  to-morrow,  since  my
darkness  hath  become  my  dawn  and  my  day  my  night.

(496)  The  secret  of  "Yea" — to  God  belongs  the  mirror  of  its
revelation,  and  to  affirm  the  reality  of  union  (jam1)  is  to  deny
"beside-ness."

(497)  No  darkness  covers  me  nor  is  there  any  harm  to  be
feared,  since  the  mercy  of  my  light  hath  quenched  the  fire  of  my
vengeance.

(498)  And  no  time  is,  save  where  is  no  time  that  reckons  the

(492)  According  to  the  monistic  doctrine  there  is  no  real  distinction  in
the  universe  of  created  things — from  their  metaphysical  source  in  Universal
Spirit  to  the  Resurrection  foretold  by  prophetic  tradition,  when  "the  whole
earth  shall  be  His  handful  and  the  heavens  shall  be  rolled  together  in  His
right  hand"  (Kor.  39,  67).

(493)  Mohammed  is  reported  to  have  said,  "Do  not  think  I  am  better
than  Yiinus  ibn  Matta  (Jonah)."

(495-6)  See  note  on  v.  69.  "  Yesterday  "  means  the  Primal  Covenant  by
which  the  souls,  before  their  bodies  were  created,  bound  themselves  to  love
God;  "to-morrow"  signifies  the  Resurrection.  Time  disappears  in  the  one-
ness of  the  Essence:  day  is  identical  with  night,  and  night  with  day.  "The
secret  of  'Yea'"  alludes  to  Kor.  7,  171 :  (When  God  said  to  the  children  of
Adam)  "Am  not  I  your  Lord?"  and  they  answered,  "Yea."  Those  who
affirm  the  oneness  of  Being  and  deny  "beside-ness,"  i.e.  deny  that  anything
exists  beside  God,  know  that  "Yea"  is  the  eternal  Word  of  God,  revealed
and  spoken  by  Himself  to  Himself.

(497)  The  commentator  quotes  two  sayings  ascribed  to  Mohammed:
(a)  that  God  said,  "My  mercy  was  before  My  wrath";  (b)  that  Hell  will  say
to  every  true  believer  who  approaches  it,  "  Pass,  O  true  believer,  for  lo,  thy
light  hath  quenched  my  fire."

(498)  Time  is  not  a  reality  except  in  the  spiritual  world  where  it  is
eternal  and  infinite.

246  Studies  in  Islamic  Mysticism  [CH.

existence  of  that  existence  of  mine  which  is  computed  by  the
reckoning  of  the  new  moons;

(499)  But  one  imprisoned  in  the  bounds  of  Time  does  not  see
what  lies  beyond  his  dungeon,  in  the  Paradise  everlasting.

(500)  Therefore  'tis  upon  me  the  heavens  turn,  and  marvel
thou  at  their  Qutb  (Pole)  which  encompasses  them,  howbeit  the
Pole  is  a  central  point.

(501)  And  there  was  no  Qutb  before  me,  whom  I  should
succeed  after  having  passed  three  grades  (of  sanctity),  although
the  Awtdd  rise  to  the  rank  of  Qutb  from  the  rank  of  Badal.

(502)  Do  not  overstep  my  straight  line,  and  seize  the  best
opportunity,  for  in  the  angles  there  are  hidden  things.

The  poet  now  describes  some  of  his  strange  experiences  in
love.  The  first  of  these  is  a  state  which  the  commentator
calls  "the  greatest  absence  from  self"  (al-ghaybiyyatu  7-
kubrd).

(506)  Through  Her  I  became  oblivious  of  myself,  so  that  I
thought  myself  another  and  did  not  seek  the  path  that  leads  to
thinking  myself  existent.

(507)  And  my  being  oblivious  (of  myself)  in  Her,  caused  me  to
lose  my  reason,  so  that  I  did  not  return  to  myself  or  follow  any
desire  of  mine  in  consequence  of  my  thinking  (that  I  existed).

(508)  And  I  became  distraught  for  Her,  engrossed  with  Her;
and  whomsoever  She  renders  distraught  through  being  taken  up
with  Her,  him  She  makes  forgetful  of  himself.

(509)  And  I  was  so  preoccupied  with  Her  as  to  forget  the  pre-
occupation that  made  me  forget  myself:  had  I  died  for  Her,  I
should  not  have  been  aware  of  my  departure  (from  the  world).

******

(512)  And  I  was  seeking  Her  from  myself,  though  She  was
ever  beside  me.  I  marvelled  how  She  was  hidden  from  me  by
myself.

(500)  Real  Being  is  the  axis  on  which  the  phenomenal  universe  revolves
as  well  as  the  circumference  within  which  all  particulars  are  contained.

(501)  The  explanation  of  this  verse  will  be  found  on  p.  194  supra.

(502)  "My  straight  line,"  i.e.  the  mystical  path  by  which  I  arrived  at
this  supreme  perfection.  The  poet  adds  that  the  doctrine  taught  in  the
Td'iyya  should  be  prized  by  §uffs:  in  its  obscure  expressions  they  will
discover  the  mysteries  of  the  Truth.

Ill]  The  Odes  of  Ibnu  'l-Fdrid  247

(513)  And  I  ceased  not  from  going  with  Her  to  and  fro  in
myself  (in  search  of  Her),  because  my  senses  were  intoxicated  by
the  wine  of  Her  beauties,

(514)  Travelling  from  the  knowledge  of  certainty  to  the
intuition  thereof;  then  journeying  to  the  fact  thereof,  where  the
Truth  is.

(521)  (So  was  I  seeking  Her  within  me)  until  there  rose  from
me  to  mine  eye  a  gleam,  and  the  splendour  of  my  daybreak  shone
forth  and  my  darkness  vanished.

(522)  Here  I  reached  a  point  from  which  the  intellect  recoils
before  gaining  it,  where  from  myself  I  was  being  joined  and  united
to  myself.

(523)  And  when  I  attained  unto  myself,  I  beamed  with  joy
because  of  a  certainty  that  saved  me  from  saddling  for  my
journey;

(524)  And  since  I  was  seeking  myself  from  myself,  I  directed
myself  to  myself,  and  my  soul  showed  the  way  to  me  by  means  of
me.

(525)  And  when  I  removed  the  curtains  of  the  shroud  of  sense
which  the  mysteries  of  mine  own  ordainment  had  let  down,

(526)  I  lifted  my  soul's  curtain  by  unveiling  her,  and  'twas
she  that  granted  my  request  (that  the  veil  should  be  removed).

(527)  And  I  was  that  which  cleansed  the  mirror  of  my  essence

(514)  Certainty  (al-yaqin)  denotes  real  faith  in  the  Unseen.  The  three
stages  or  categories  mentioned  in  this  verse  are  variously  denned  by  Sufi
writers.  According  to  Kashani,  a  man  who  has  the  knowledge  of  certainty
('ilmu  'l-yaqin)  knows  that  the  object  of  his  search  is  within  him;  in  the
second  stage  ('aynu  'l-yaqin)  he  sees  this  intuitively  with  the  eye  of  mystical
contemplation;  in  the  last  stage  (haqqu  'l-yaqin}  the  illusion  of  subject  and
object  disappears  and  he  reaches  absolute  unity  (ittihdd}.

(522)  Thought,  which  involves  duality,  cannot  apprehend  "the  fact  of
certainty  "  ( haqqu  'l-yaqin},  i.e.  the  pure  Oneness  allegorically  depicted  in  the
following  passage.

(523)  When  the  mystic  realises  the  fact  of  ittihdd,  he  has  arrived  at  his
journey's  end.

(524)  I.e.  I  was  the  seeker,  the  guide,  and  the  object  sought.
(525-6) The  soul  is  "veiled"  (ignorant  of  the  truth)  so  long  as  she  does

not  perceive  that  the  bodily  senses  (sight,  hearing,  taste,  etc.)  are  really
attributes  of  the  universal  Soul  with  which  she  is  essentially  one.

(527)  The  attributes,  which  limit  the  essence  and  prevent  it  from  being
seen  as  it  is  absolutely,  are  compared  to  rust  that  darkens  the  surface  of  a
steel  mirror.

248  Studies  in  Islamic  Mysticism  [CH.

from  the  rust  of  my  attributes,  and  the  rays  that  surrounded  it
were  from  myself;

(528)  And  I  caused  myself  to  behold  myself,  inasmuch  as  in
my  beholding  there  existed  none  other  than  myself  who  might
decree  the  intrusion  (of  duality).

(529)  And  when  I  uttered  my  name,  that  which  uttered  it
caused  me  to  hear  it,  though  (in  truth)  'twas  my  soul  that  listened
and  pronounced  my  name  while  sensation  was  banished.

(530)  And  I  embraced  myself,  but  not  through  contact  of  my
limbs  with  my  ribs :  nay,  I  embraced  my  very  essence.

(531)  And  I  let  myself  smell  my  own  perfume,  while  the
perfume  of  my  breath  made  fragrant  the  scents  of  bruised  spices.

(532)  And  the  whole  of  me  was  transcending  the  dualism  of
sensation,  howbeit  my  transcendence  was  in  myself,  since  I  had
unified  my  essence.

Human  thought  distinguishes  the  essence  of  God  from  His
attributes,  names,  and  actions,  but  in  the  mystic's  vision  of
Oneness  all  is  essentialised  and  every  partial  relation  identified
with  the  Whole.

(533)  To  praise  my  attributes  because  of  me  (my  essence)
enables  my  praiser  to  glorify  me  (for  what  I  am  essentially),  but
to  praise  me  (my  essence)  because  of  my  attributes  is  to  blame  me
(my  essence).

(534)  Therefore  he  that  beholds  my  attributes  in  my  companion
(my  body)  and  beholds  me  (my  essence)  by  means  of  them  will
never  alight  at  my  abode — for  I  veil  myself  (with  my  attributes).

(529)  See  vv.  539-540  and  vv.  546-8  below.

(530)  This  verse  refers  to  v.  519:

And I press my  hand  on  my  vitals  that  peradventure I may
embrace  Her  when  I  lay  it  there  in  clasping.

The  whole  passage  (vv.  521-531)  is  parallel  to  the  verses  immediately
preceding  it  (510-520):  the  former  describes  mystical  "intoxication"  (sukr),
the  latter  mystical  "sobriety"  (sabw).

(531)  I.e.  I  did  not  cry,  like  Mohammed,  "O  God,  let  me  smell  the
perfume  of  Paradise!"  for  I  myself  was  the  perfumer,  the  perfume  and
everything  that  is  perfumed.

(532)  Cf.  v. 529. The  deified mystic  is  transcendent "in  himself"
because  he  is  One  and  All.

(534)  "Will  never  alight  at  my  abode,"  i.e.  will  never  attain  to  know-
ledge of  my  essence.

Hi]  The  Odes  of  Ibnu  'l-Fdrid  249

(535)  And  to  call  to  mind  my  Names  through  me  (my  essence)
is  a  waking  vision  (a  revelation  of  the  Truth),  but  to  call  me  (my
essence)  to  mind  through  them  is  the  (false)  dream  of  one  that
slumbers  in  the  night.

(536)  Likewise,  he  that  knows  me  (my  essence)  through  my
actions  knows  me  not,  whereas  he  that  knows  them  through  me  is
a  knower  of  the  Truth.

(537)  Receive,  then,  the  knowledge  of  the  principal  attributes,
which  are  attached  to  outward  abodes  (visible  organs),  from  a  soul
well  acquainted  therewith,

(538)  And  (receive)  the  understanding  of  the  Names  of  the
Essence,  which  are  made  manifest  through  them  (the  attributes)
but  (themselves)  reside  in  the  inward  (invisible)  worlds,  from  a
spirit  that  gives  an  indication  thereof  (by  means  of  symbols).

(539)  'The  manifestation  metaphorically  of  my  attributes  (e.g.
sight  and  hearing)  from  the  names  of  my  bodily  organs  (e.g.  the
visual  and  auditory  faculties) — names  by  which  my  soul  was
named  because  of  my  judgment  (that  in  reality  they  belong  to  the
soul,  not  to  the  body) —

(540)  Consists  of  a  knowledge  (latent  in  the  soul) — marks
traced  on  the  veils  of  forms  (bodily  organs)  and  throwing  light  on
what  is  beyond  sense-perception  in  the  soul.

(536)  Knowledge  derived  by  means  of  induction  is  inferior  to  knowledge
revealed  in  contemplation.  Perfect  knowledge  of  God  is  truly  a  recognition
of  that  which  the  soul  contemplated  before  the  existence  of  the  body.

(537)  "The  principal  attributes,"  such  as  sight,  hearing,  speech,  and
power,  whose  respective  organs  are  the  eye,  the  ear,  the  tongue,  and  the
hand.

(538)  The  attributes,  although  their  real  nature  is  hidden  in  the  Essence,
manifest  themselves  in  the  bodily  organs.  The  Names,  having  no  such  organs
attached  to  them,  cannot  be  manifested  except  through  the  attributes :  thus,
before  we  apply  the  name  al-Rahmdn  (the  Merciful)  to  the  Divine  Essence,
we  must  be  assured  that  the  quality  of  ralima  (mercy)  is  latent  in  the
Essence.

(539-540)  There  is  only  a  metaphorical  (unreal)  connexion  between  the
attributes  of  the  Essence  and  the  physical  faculties  and  organs  with  which
they  are  associated.  In  reality  these  attributes  belong  entirely  to  the
Essence,  inasmuch  as  the  faculties  and  organs  through  which  they  are
manifested  are  themselves  no  more  than  objectified  aspects  of  the  Essence.
When  a  man  says  "I  saw"  and  "I  heard,"  naming  himself  by  the  names  of
the  attributes  of  sight  and  hearing,  he  does  so  because  he  judges  that  what
really  sees  and  hears  is  not  his  eye  and  his  ear,  but  the  spiritual  essence
underlying  them.

250  Studies  in  Islamic  Mysticism  [CH.

(541)  And  the  manifestation  actually  of  the  names  of  my
essence  from  the  attributes  of  my  inward  being,  for  the  sake  of
mysteries  whereby  the  spirit  was  gladdened,

(542)  Consists  of  hints  concerning  treasures  (of  knowledge) —
hints  revealing  the  significations  of  a  mystical  doctrine  and
encompassed  by  the  arcana  of  that  which  is  hidden  in  the  depths  of
the  heart.

(543)  And  their  effects  in  all  that  exists,  together  with  the
knowledge  of  them — and  created  things  are  not  independent  of  the
effects  produced  by  them  (the  Names  and  Attributes) —

(544)  Are  (shown  by)  the  existence  of  praise  that  is  gained
(by  God)  for  strength  of  dominion,  and  by  the  beholding  of  thanks
that  are  gathered  in  return  for  universal  favours.

(545)  They  (the  effects  of  the  Names  and  Attributes)  are
theatres  of  manifestation  for  me :  I  appeared  in  them,  although  I
was  not  hidden  from  myself  before  my  epiphany  (in  them).

(546)  For  speech — and  the  whole  of  me  is  a  tongue  that  tells
of  me — and  sight — and  the  whole  of  me  is  an  eye  in  me  for  regard-
ing me —

(547)  And  hearing — and  the  whole  of  me  is  ears (asmu1)
listening  to  the  proclamation  of  (my)  bounty — (and  power) — and
the  whole  of  me  is  a  hand  strong  to  repel  destruction,

(548)  (All  these  faculties)  are  a  means  of  manifestation  for

(541-42)  The  inmost  meaning  of  the  Divine  Names,  which  depend  on
the  Divine  Attributes  (see  v.  538),  cannot  be  apprehended  except  mystically
or  conveyed  otherwise  than  symbolically.  Knowledge  of  the  Names  and
Attributes  gladdens  the  spirit  by  revealing  the  mysteries  of  Oneness  (ittifrdd)
and  by  exalting  Man,  as  the  microcosm,  above  all  created  beings.

(543-4)  The  whole  world  of  phenomena  exhibits  the  effects  (dthdr)  of  the
Divine  Names  and  Attributes,  i.e.  it  is  constituted,  sustained,  and  replenished
by  a  continuous  series  of  illuminations  (tajalliydt)  proceeding  from  these
Names  and  Attributes.  All  created  beings  praise  God  and  render  thanks  to
Him  who  endows  them  with  existence,  since  they  know — and  this  is  the
import  of  the  words  "together  with  the  knowledge  of  them,"  i.e.  the
knowledge  of  the  dthdr — that  His  Names  and  Attributes  are  manifested  in
themselves.

(545)  Before  God  actually  revealed  Himself  in  Man  and  Nature,  He  was
potentially  revealed  to  Himself  in  His  eternal  knowledge.

(546-8)  -All  faculties  which  are  separate  and  distinct  in  the  body  are
united  and  indistinguishable  in  the  soul.  "The  soul,  having  no  parts,  speaks
with  hearing  and  sight,  and  sees  with  hearing  and  speech,  and  hears  with
sight  and  speech,  because  all  its  attributes  are  involved  in  one  another."  The
commentator  assigns  to  ma'dni  in  v.  548  an  unusual  meaning,  viz.  "places

ill]  The  Odes  of  Ibnu  '1-Fdrid  251

Attributes  which  established  (the  presence  in  the  soul  of)  what
transcends  the  (outward)  vesture  (the  body)  and  for  Essential
Names  which  spread  abroad  that  which  sensation  related  (to  the
soul).

In  language  so  figurative  as  to  be  almost  untranslatable
the  poet  describes  (vv.  549-574)  the  Divine  Names  according
to  (i)  their  characteristic  qualities;  (2)  the  benefits  which
accrue  from  them  to  body  and  soul;  and  (3)  their  respective
spheres  of  influence,  viz.,  the  visible  world  ('dlamu  'l-shahdda),
the  invisible  world  (dlamu  'l-ghayb),  the  world  of  dominion
(dlamu  'l-malakut),  and  the  world  of  almightiness  (dlamu
'l-jabarut)1.  Here  again  he  rises  to  the  plane  of  undifferen-
tiated  unity  (jam'),  where  plurality  (tafriqa)  has  disappeared.
This  phase,  however,  is  momentary.  As  we  have  seen,  in  the
highest  mystical  experience  plurality  returns  under  the  form
of  unity :  the  One  does  not  exclude  the  Many,  but  comprehends
them  in  its  own  nature,  so  that  every  part  is  the  essence  of  the
whole.

(575)  The  whole  of  me  performs  that  (devotion)  which  is
required  by  the  Path,  while  keeping  the  way  of  that  (unity)
which  was  required  by  my  Truth.

(576)  And  when,  no  longer  separating,  I  joined  the  rift,  and
the  fissures  caused  by  the  difference  of  the  attributes  were  closed,

(577)  And  nothing  that  leads  to  estrangement  was  left  between
me  and  a  firm  trust  in  the  intimacy  of  my  love,

(578)  I  knew  for  sure  that  we  (lover  and  Beloved)  are  really
One,  and  the  sobriety  of  union  restored  the  notion  of  separation,

of  submission  or  will  (to  manifestation)";  but  ma'dni  sifdtin  may  signify
"realities  (consisting)  of  attributes."  "That  which  sensation  related  to  the
soul"  is  the  multiformity  of  phenomenal  existence,  which  corresponds  to
the  variety  of  the  Essential  Names.  From  -perception  of  sensible  things  the
soul  rises  to  knowledge  of  their  spiritual  realities.

(575)  "Having  realised  the  Truth  (haqiqa),  namely,  that  subject  and
object  are  One,  I  continue  to  walk  in  the  Path  (tariqa),"  i.e.  to  observe  the
ascetic  and  ethical  discipline  which  the  Sufi  novice  learns  from  his  spiritual
director.

(576)  The  phenomenon  of  "separation"  arises  from  the  diversity  of  the
Divine  Names  and  Attributes,  not  from  any  duality  in  the  Essence  itself.

(577-8) Lover  and  Beloved  are  two  attributes  of  one  essence  (Love),

1  The  'dlamu  'l-malakut  and  the  'dlamu  'l-jabarut  denote  the  Attributes
and  the  Essence.

252  Studies  in  Islamic  Mysticism  [CH.

(579)  And  my  whole  was  a  tongue  to  speak,  an  eye  to  see,  an
ear  to  hear,  and  a  hand  to  seize.

All  particular  attributes  being  thus  dissolved  in  the
universality  of  the  Essence,  the  "unified"  mystic  can  say
that  his  eye  speaks,  his  tongue  sees,  his  hand  listens,  etc.,  and
that  his  sense  of  smell  speaks,  sees,  hears,  and  takes,  or
conversely,  that  his  tongue,  eye,  ear,  and  hand  are  endowed
with  the  sense  of  smell;  and  can  declare  that  all  his  faculties
are  exercised  simultaneously  by  every  atom  of  his  body
(w.  580-88).

(589)  Therefore  I  read  all  the  knowledge  of  the  wise  in  a  single
word,  and  show  unto  myself  all  created  beings  in  a  single  look ;

(590)  And  I  hear  the  voices  of  them  that  pray  and  all  their
languages  in  a  time  less  than  the  duration  of  a  gleam;

(591)  And  ere  mine  eye  winks,  I  bring  before  me  what  was
hard  to  convey  on  account  of  its  distance  ;

(592)  And  with  one  inhalation  I  smell  the  perfumes  of  all
gardens  and  the  fragrance  of  what  (herbs)  soever  touch  the  skirts
of  the  winds;

(593)  And  I  survey  all  regions  (of  the  earth)  in  a  flash  of
thought  and  traverse  the  seven  tiers  of  Heaven  in  one  step.

The  next  passage  indicates  the  origin  and  nature  of  these
extraordinary  powers  which  the  poet  claims  not  only  for
himself  but  for  all  prophets  from  Adam  to  Mohammed  and
for  the  Moslem  saints  in  general.  It  is  perhaps  unnecessary  to
add  that  where  he  uses  the  words  " I "  and  "my"  he  assumes
the  character  of  the  universal  Spirit.

(594)  The  bodies  of  those  in  whom  remains  no  remnant  (of
self)  because  of  my  union  (with  them)  are  like  the  spirits :  they  are
encompassed  (with  my  union)  and  made  light  (subtle) ;

and  their  union  quA  attributes  is  impossible,  since  the  former  is  characterised
by  need,  abasement  and  weakness,  while  power  and  pride  are  inherent  in  the
latter.  So  long  as  they  co-exist,  they  stand  opposed  to  one  another  and  in
peril  of  "estrangement " ;  only  by  absorption  in  their  essence,  i.e.  by  ceasing
to  be  attributes,  do  they  become  united.  The  mystic's  real  Beloved  is  the
oneness  of  Love,  which  begins  in  a  rapture  obliterating  all  distinctions  (jam1)
but  ends  by  "restoring  the  notion  of  separation"  (tafriqa),  i.e.  perceiving
clairvoyantly  that  Lover,  Beloved  and  Love  are  one.

Ill]  The  Odes  of  Ibnu  'l-Fdrid  253

(595)  And  whosoever  is  sovereign  or  munificent  or  mighty  in
onset  only  finds  his  way  (to  these  qualities)  through  my  aiding  him
with  a  particle  (of  my  union).

(596)  He  walked  not  on  the  water  nor  flew  in  the  air  nor
plunged  in  the  flames  but  in  virtue  of  my  volition,

(597)  And  I  am  the  source  whence  he  whom  I  aided  with  a
particle  (of  my  union)  became  changed  in  a  moment  from  all  his
(normal)  being,

(598)  And  whence  he  that  with  his  whole  being  followed  my
union  recited  the  Koran,  from  beginning  to  end,  a  thousand
times  in  an  hour  or  less.

(599)  And  had  a  breath  of  my  grace  been  bestowed  on  a  dead
man,  his  soul  would  have  been  given  back  to  him  and  caused  to
return.

(600)  Such  is  the  soul :  if  she  cast  off  her  desires,  her  faculties
are  multiplied  and  endow  every  atom  with  the  (entire)  activity  of
the  soul.

(60 1 )  Union  suffices  thee  (as  an  explanation  of  these  miracles) ;
they  are  not  produced  by  a  separation  consisting  in  two  extensions,
namely,  measurable  space  and  finite  time.

After  enumerating  some  miracles  of  pre-Islamic  prophets
— Noah,  Solomon,  Abraham,  Moses,  Jacob  and  Jesus — the
poet  explains  the  unique  position  of  Mohammed  as  the
spiritual  father  of  all  prophets  and  saints  and  the  real  author
of  all  miracles  past,  present  and  future.

(614)  The  inward  notion  that  produced  (miraculous)  effects  in
outward  things  is  that  (oneness)  which,  by  (Divine)  permission,
my  moulded  speech  communicated  to  thine  ear,

(615)  And the notions underlying all (the effects) that

(595)  Spiritual  dominion,  grace,  and  energy  emanate  from  the  Divine
Essence  with  which  the  prophets  and  saints  have  been  made  one.

(596)  "My  volition"  (himma),  i.e.  the  concentration  of  my  thought
upon  the  particular  Divine  Names  which  are  the  causes  of  the  (miraculous)
effects  that  I  desire  to  produce.

(600)  Cf.  notes  on  vv.  525-6,  539-40,  and  546-8

(601)  Miracles  are  the  effects  of  union  (jam')  with  the  Essence,  i.e.  the
unitive  state.  Time  and  Space  belong  to  "separation"  (tafriqa),  i.e.  the
phenomenal  world.

(615-6)  The  spirit  of  prophecy  attained  to  complete  and  final  manifesta-
tion in  Mohammed,  the  Seal  of  the  prophets ;  and  since  Universal  Spirit,  the

254  Studies  in  Islamic  Mysticism  [CH.

belonged  to  them  (the  former  prophets)  were  brought  (together)
by  him  (Mohammed)  who  caused  them  to  stream  over  us,  thereby
putting  the  seal  upon  a  time  when  no  prophets  arise;

(616)  And  there  was  none  of  them  (the  former  prophets)  but
had  called  his  people  to  the  Truth  by  grace  of  Mohammed  and
because  he  was  Mohammed's  follower.

(617)  And  a  divine  of  ours  is  one  of  those  prophets,  while  any
one  of  us  that  calls  (the  people)  to  the  Truth  performs  the  office  of
apostle ;

(6 1 8)  And  in  our  Mohammedan  era  our  gnostic  is  (like)  one
of  the  old  prophets,  one  who  clave  to  the  commandment  and  was
firm  (in  obedience  to  the  religious  law).

(619)  After  him,  the  evidentiary  miracles  of  the  prophets
became  acts  of  Divine  grace  (%a  planar  a)  towards  his  saints  and
vicegerents.

(620)  His  family  and  his  Companions  and  the  religious  leaders
of  the  next  generation  sufficed  mankind  instead  of  the  apostles.

(621)  Their  miracles  form  part  of  what  he  conferred  on  them
exclusively,  in  bequeathing  to  them  a  share  of  every  excellence
(of  his).

******

(627)  And  the  saints  who  believe  in  him,  though  they  never
saw  him,  are  elect  in  virtue  of  their  affinity:  they  are  near  (to
him)  as  brother  to  brother.

(628)  And  his  being  near  them  in  spirit  resembles  his  yearning
towards  them  in  form.  Marvel,  then,  at  a  presence  in  absence !

The  mystical  union  of  the  saints  with  the  Logos  expresses
itself  in  language  that  might  easily  be  mistaken  for  blasphemy.

first  emanation  from  Absolute  Being,  is  identified  with  Mohammed  and  was
revealed  by  him  in  its  whole  essential  nature,  whereas  the  prophets  before
him  manifested  no  more  than  particular  aspects  and  attributes,  his  prede-
cessors drew  their  inspiration  from  him  and  are  logically  his  followers.

(617-8)  Although  prophecy  ended  with  Mohammed,  the  Moslem  divines
and  mystics  may  be  described  as  the  prophets  and  apostles  of  the  Moham-
medan era.  Orthodox  §uffs  take  the  strictest  possible  view  of  their  religious
duties  (cf.  Kitdb  al-Luma',  p.  10,  1.  n  foil.).

(619)  For  the  distinction  between  mu'jizdt  (miracles  of  the  prophets)  and
hardmdt  (miracles  of  the  saints)  see  Kashf  al-Mafrjub,  p.  218  foil.

(628)  Yearning  (ishtiydq)  implies  that  the  object  of  desire  is  present  (to
the  mind),  though  absent  (in  the  body).

ill]  The  Odes  of  Ibnu  U-Fdrid  255

(629)  They  (the  prophets)  who  received  the  Spirit  called
(their  peoples) to  my  way  in  my  name  and  vanquished  the
miscreants  by  my  argument;

(630)  And  in  consequence  of  the  priority  of  my  essence  they
all  revolve  in  my  circle  or  descend  from  my  watering-place,

(631)  For  albeit  I  am  outwardly  a  son  of  Adam,  yet  in  him  is
a  spirit  of  mine  that  bears  witness  I  am  his  father.

(637)  Do  not  deem  that  this  matter  lies  outside  of  me,  for
none  gained  lordship  (as  a  prophet  or  a  saint)  except  he  entered
my  service,

(638)  Since,  but  for  me,  no  existence  would  have  come  into
being,  nor  would  there  have  been  a  contemplation  (of  God),  nor
would  any  secure  covenants  have  been  known.

(639)  None  lives  but  his  life  is  from  mine,  and  every  willing
soul  is  obedient  to  my  will;

(640)  And  there  is  no  speaker  but  tells  his  tale  with  my  words,
nor  any  seer  but  sees  with  the  sight  of  mine  eye ;

(641)  And  no  silent  (listener)  but  hears  with  my  hearing,  nor
any  one  that  grasps  but  with  my  strength  and  might;

(642)  And  in  the  whole  creation  there  is  none  save  me  that
speaks  or  sees  or  hears.

(643)  And  in  the  world  of  composition  (the  sensible  world)  I

(629)  "My  way,"  i.e.  the  way  of  real  oneness  with  God. "In  virtue  my
name,"  i.e.  the  prophets  manifested  in  their  miracles  the  potency  of  the
Divine  Names,  as  Jesus,  for  example,  called  the  dead  to  life  by  manifesting
the  Divine  Name  al-Muhyi,  the  Quickener.  "  My  argument,"  i.e.  evidentiary
miracles.

(630)  Cf.  note  on  vv.  615-6

(631)  Metaphysically,  Mohammed  is  the  father  of  Adam  in  the  sense
that  the  spirit  or  essence  of  Adam  is  Universal  Spirit  =  the  Logos  =  Moham-
med.

(637)  "This  matter,"  i.e.  prophecy  and  saintship.

(638)  Cf .  the  Tradition  in  which  it  is  related  that  God  said  to  Mohammed,
"But  for  thee  I  had  not  created  the  heavens." As  the  created  universe  is
the  form  of  the  Logos,  so  is  Divine  contemplation  an  attribute  of  the  same
Supreme  Spirit  (al-Rtihu  'l-a'zam),  whence  all  human  spirits  derive  their
powers. The  "covenants"  have  been  explained  above.

(643-5)  These  verses  describe  the  self -manifestation  of  the  Logos  to  the
senses  in  the  phenomenal  world  ('dlamu  'l-shahdda),  to  the  intellect  in  the
intelligible  world  ('dlamu  'l-^hayb),  and  to  the  spirit  in  the  world  of  mystical
contemplation,  which  the  intellect  is  unable  to  reach  ('dlamu  'l-malakut  and
4 dlamu  'l-jabarut:  cf.  p.  251).

256  Studies  in  Islamic  Mysticism  [CH.

manifested  in  every  (phenomenal)  form  a  reality  whereby  that
form  was  made  fair;

(644)  And  in  every  reality  that  was  not  revealed  by  my
phenomena  I  was  imaged,  but  not  in  a  corporeal  shape  ;

(645)  And  in  that  which  the  spirit  beholds  by  clairvoyance  I
was  hidden  from  fatigued  thought  by  my  subtlety.

The  clairvoyant  spirit  contemplates  itself  as  the  Whole
that  pervades  every  aspect  of  reality  and  as  the  Identical  in
which  all  contraries  are  united.

(646)  In  the  mercy  of  "expansion"  the  whole  of  me  is  a  wish
whereby  the  hopes  of  all  the  world  are  expanded;

(647)  And  in  the  terror  (wrath)  of  '  '  contraction  '  '  the  whole  of  me
is  an  awe,  and  o'er  whatsoever  I  let  mine  eye  range,  it  reveres  me  ;

(648)  And  in  the  union  of  both  these  attributes  the  whole  of
me  is  a  nearness.  Come,  then,  draw  near  to  my  beauteous  qualities  !

(649)  In  the  place  where  "in"  ends  I  ceased  not  to  feel,
through myself, the majesty of contemplating myself  —  an
experience  arising  from  the  perfection  of  my  nature  ;

(650)  And  where  is  no  "in"  I  ceased  not  to  contemplate  in
myself  the  beauty  of  my  Being,  not  with  the  sight  of  mine  eye.

Perception  of  reality  is  impossible  so  long  as  sense-
impressions,  which  affirm  that  things  exist  by  themselves,  are
allowed  to  stand  in  the  way.

(651)  So  if  thou  art  of  me,  seek  union  with  me  and  efface  the
distinction  of  my  separation  and  be  not  turned  aside  by  the
darkness  of  Nature,

(652)  And  receive  the  signs  of  my  inspired  wisdom  which
(646-7) "Expansion"  (bast)  and  "contraction"  (qabd)  are  modes  of

feeling  in  the  gnostic  which  correspond  to  "  hope  "  (rajd)  and  "  fear  "  (khawf)
in  the  lower  stages  of  the  mystical  life  :  cf.  R.  Hartmann,  Al-Kuschairts  Dar-
stedung  des  $Af(tutns,  p.  84.  Basf  is  the  effect  of  Divine  mercy,  qabd  of  Divine

wrath. Cf.  Kor.  2,  246:

(648)  "A  nearness,"  i.e.  a  negation  of  farness  (difference)  in  the  ground
of  Pure  Being. Distinction  first  appears  when  the  Essence  manifests  itself
through  its  Names  and  Attributes.

(649)  In  the  sphere  of  the  Essence  there  is  no  "in,"  i.e limitation  of
space  and  time. "The  perfection  of  my  nature"  denotes  the  inherent  self-
identity  (jam')  in  virtue  of  which  the  Essence  eternally  contemplates  itself
in  and  by  itself  as  the  One  in  Many  and  the  Many  in  the  One.

(651) I.e.  do  not  seek  me  in  the  phenomenal  world,  where  my  attributes
appear  to  be  separated  from  the  underlying  reality.

Ill]  The  Odes  of  Ibnu  U-Fdrid  257

will  remove  from  thee  the  false  judgments  of  opinion  formed
through  sensation.

Ibnu  '1-Farid  naturally  condemns  metempsychosis,  a
special  form  of  the  already  repudiated  doctrine  of  incarnation
(hulul)1.

(653)  Have  nothing  to  do  with  one  that  believes  in  naskh  (the
transmigration  of  souls  into  human  bodies) — for  his  is  a  case  of
maskh  (the  transmigration  of  souls  into  the  bodies  of  animals) —
and  hold  aloof  from  his  doctrine;

(654)  And  let  him  alone  with  his  assertion  offaskh  (the  trans-
migration of  souls  into  plants) — for  if  raskh  (the  transmigration  of
souls  into  minerals)  were  true,  he  deserves  to  suffer  it  everlastingly
in  every  cycle.

If  we  scorn  the  notion  of  a  spirit  doomed  to  perpetual
confinement  in  matter,  how  shall  we  represent  the  true
monistic  relation  between  them?  Our  minds  can  never  know
that  relation  as  it  really  is:  like  all  mystical  truth,  it  is
unseizable  by  thought.  But  mystics  have  their  own  ways  and
means  of  communicating  with  each  other,  and  the  poet  has
just  announced  himself  as  a  hierophant  (v.  652),  bidding  his
readers  attend  to  "the  signs  of  his  inspired  wisdom."  The  best
commentary  on  this  phrase  is  Ibnu  'l-'Arabi's  remark  that
mystical  "states"  cannot  be  explained,  but  can  only  be
indicated  symbolically  to  those  who  have  begun  to  experience
the  like2.

(655)  My  coining  parables  for  thee  time  after  time  concerning:
my  state  is  a  favour  from  me  to  thee.

(656)  Consider  the  Maqdmdt  of  the  Sarujite  and  draw  a  lesson
from  his  variety  (of  disguise) — then  wilt  thou  deem  it  good  to  have
taken  my  advice,

(656-8)  The  following  passage  should  be  compared  with  vv.  239-85  and
vv.  525-48  supra.  The  metaphor  of  "disguise"  (labs:  cf.  note  on  vv.  284-5)
shadows  forth  the  oneness  of  reality  and  appearance.  In  Hariri's  Maqdmdt
(see  my  Literary  History  of  the  Arabs,  pp.  329-336)  the  hero,  Abu  Zayd,  a
native  of  Sanij  in  Mesopotamia,  assumes  all  sorts  of  disguises  to  get  money
from  his  dupes.  "  In  whatever  form  and  shape, "  e.g.  in  the  eye  or  the  ear  and
in  sight  or  hearing.  "For  the  soul  labours  not  in  earnest,"  i.e.  "if  any  one
objects  that  Hariri's  fiction  does  not  correspond  with  the  nature  of  Reality,

1  See  v.  277  foil.  z  Tarjumdn  al-ashwdq,  p.  68.

N.  s.n  17

258  Studies  in  Islamic  Mysticism  [CH.

(657)  And  thou  wilt  perceive  that  the  soul  in  whatever  form
and  shape  she  appears,  inwardly  masks  herself  in  sensation ;

(658)  And  if  his  (Hariri's)  work  is  fiction,  yet  the  Truth  makes
of  it  a  parable,  for  the  soul  labours  not  in  earnest.

(659)  Therefore  be  understanding,  and  while  doing  justice  to
thy  soul  look  upon  thy  phenomenal  actions  with  thy  (faculty  of)
sense ;

(660)  And  wouldst  thou  have  thy  soul  unveil  herself,  contem-
plate what  thou  seest  without  doubt  in  the  burnished  mirrors.

(661)  Was  it  another  that  appeared  in  them? Or  didst  thou
behold  thyself  by  means  of  them  when  the  rays  were  refracted?

(662)  And  listen  how  the  sound  of  thy  voice,  when  it  dies  away,
is  returned  to  thee  by  the  walls  of  lofty  buildings.

(663)  He  that  talked  with  thee  there,  was  he  some  one  else?
Or  didst  thou  hear  words  uttered  by  thy  voiceful  echo?

(664)  And  tell  me,  when  thy  senses  had  been  hushed  in
slumber,  who  imparted  to  thee  his  lore?

(665)  Ere  to-day  thou  didst  not  know  what  happened  yester-
day or  what  shall  happen  to-morrow,

(666)  And  now  thou  art  acquainted  with  the  histories  of  them
that  are  past  and  with  the  secrets  of  them  that  shall  come  after —
and  the  knowledge  makes  thee  proud.

(667)  Think'st  thou  it  was  another,  not  thyself,  that  con-
versed with  thee  in  the  drowsiness  of  sleep  touching  diverse  sorts
of  noble  knowledge?

(668)  Twas  none  but  thy  soul,  what  time  she  was  busied
with  her  own  world  and  disengaged  from  the  theatre  of  humanity.

(669)  She  unveiled  herself  to  herself  in  the  invisible  world  in
the  form  of  a  sage  that  led  her  to  the  apprehension  of  wondrous
meanings;

(670)  For  already  had  the  sciences  been  imprinted  on  her,  and

I  reply  that  my  analogy  is  perfectly  just,  inasmuch  as  the  soul  creates  and
maintains  the  illusion  of  phenomenal  existence."  Cf.  v.  677,  where  pheno-
mena are  described  as  the  playthings  of  a  soul  in  earnest,  and  also  v.  709.

(659)  "Doing  justice  to  thy  soul,"  i.e.  recognising  that  all  bodily
activities  are  effects  (dthdr)  of  the  soul.

(668)  The  body  is  the  theatre  in  which  humanity  (human  nature)  is
exhibited.

(669-71)  In  dreams  the  soul  knows  itself  as  it  was  in  the  state  of  pre-
existence,  i.e.  as  one  with  the  Being  which  is  the  subject  and  object  of  all

ill]  The  Odes  of  Ibnu  'l-Fdrid  259

she  was  anciently  taught  the  names  (realities)  thereof  through  the
inspiration  of  fatherhood,

(671)  Not  by  knowledge  derived  from  the  "separation"  of
otherness  was  she  blest;  nay,  she  enjoyed  that  which  she  dictated
to  herself.

(672)  Had  she  become  naked  (detached  from  the  body)  before
thy  dream,  thou  wouldst  have  beheld  her,  as  I  do,  with  an  eye  that
sees  true  (in  a  waking  vision).

(673)  And  her  being  normally  detached  (in  sleep)  in  the  first
place  confirms  her  being  detached  in  the  eternal  world  (of  mystical
contemplation)  in  the  second  place;  therefore  be  steadfast,

(674)  And  be  not  one  whom  his  studies  made  foolish,  so  that
they  enfeebled  and  unsettled  his  mind ;

(675)  For  there,  beyond  tradition,  lies  a  knowledge  too  subtle
to  be  apprehended  by  the  farthest  reach  of  sound  understandings.

(676)  I  received  it  from  myself  and  derived  it  from  myself:
'twas  with  mine  own  bounty  my  soul  was  replenishing  me.

One  of  the  most  amazing  things  in  Von  Hammer's  version
of  the  Td'iyya  is  his  translation  of  w.  677-8.  Their  language
could  scarcely  be  plainer,  they  introduce  a  passage  in  which
the  poet  dwells  on  the  relative  value  of  sense- perception
viewed  as  an  illustration  of  the  nature  of  reality — and  this
is  how  Von  Hammer  translates  them:

Du  spiele  nicht  mit  Scherz  und  fasle  nicht  im  Leben,
Du  sei  den  Possen  nicht,  dem  Ernste  sei  ergeben !
O  hiite  dich  und  wend'  dich  ab  von  alien  Bildern,
Von  alien  Fantasei'n,  die  nur  Getraumtes  schildern.

In  a  different  context  Ibnu  '1-Farid  might  have  said  this
or  something  like  it;  but  here,  as  it  happens,  he  says  just  the
opposite.

knowledge,  and  which,  qua  Universal  Spirit  (the  father)  eternally  begets  in
itself,  qud  Universal  Soul  (the  mother),  the  ideal,  i.e.  non-externalised,
essences  of  individual  things.  Cf.  Kor.  2,  29 :  "And  He  (Allah)  taught  Adam
the  Names,  all  of  them."  See  also  p.  186,  note  4,  and  v.  631  supra.

(672)  "Become  naked"  (tajarradat):  so  Plato  speaks  of  TJ  ^VXTI  yvftvi)

TOV  (TOWXTOS.

(673)  Cf.  a  passage  of  the  Masnavi  quoted  and  translated  in  Selected
Poems  from  the  Divdni  Shamsi  Tabriz,  p.  298  fol.

17—2

260  Studies  in  Islamic  Mysticism  [CH.

(677)  Be  not  wholly  neglectful  of  the  play  (illusion),  for  the
jest  of  the  playthings  (phenomena)  is  the  earnestness  of  a  soul  in
earnest,

(678)  And  beware  of  turning  thy  back  on  every  tinselled  form
or  unreal  and  fantastic  case ;

(679)  For  in  the  sleep  of  illusion  the  apparition  of  the  shadow-
phantom  brings  thee  to  that  which  is  shown  through  the  thin
(semi-transparent)  curtains.

Here  Ibnu  '1-Farid  refers  to  the  shadow-lantern  by  means
of  which  leathern  figures,  moved  by  wands  against  a  muslin
curtain,  are  illuminated  and  made  visible  to  the  spectators
on  the  other  side  (see  Nallino,  op.  cit.,  p.  93).  The  verses
immediately  following  (680-706)  have  been  translated  above
(p.  189  foil.) .  They  describe  how  the  showman,  standing  behind
the  screen,  displays  his  figures  in  every  variety  of  action  and
causes  the  spectators  to  sympathise  with  the  representation ;
yet  when  the  screen  is  taken  away,  he  alone  is  seen  to  be  the
real  actor.  This  analogy  guides  us  to  the  truth  of  things.  The
showman  is  the  soul,  the  shadowy  figures  are  the  phenomena
of  sensation,  the  screen  is  the  body:  remove  it  and  the  soul
is  one  with  God.

(707)  Even  thus (like  the  showman) I  was  letting  down
between  me  and  myself  the  curtain  that  obscures  the  soul  in  the
light  of  darkness,

(708)  That  in  producing  my  actions  at  intervals  I  might
appear  to  my  sensation  gradually,  thereby  accustoming  it  (and
preparing  it  for  complete  illumination).

(709)  I  joined  the  play  (illusion)  thereof  to  my  work  (reality),

(677-9)  "The  phenomenal  is  a  bridge  to  the  real"  (al-majdz  qanfaratu
'l-haqiqa).  Cf.  Tarjumdn  al-ashwdq,  p.  100:  "In  the  survival  of  the  sub-
stance of  phenomenal  being  the  Divine  Presence  and  its  lovely  Nam-
manifested,  and  this  is  the  beauty  of  phenomenal  being;  if  it  perished,  thou
wouldst  not  know  aught,  since  all  kinds  of  knowledge  are  divulged  by  means
of  forms  and  bodies."

(707)  The  body  is  dark,  inasmuch  as  it  belongs  to  the  world  of  appear-
ance, but  also  light,  in  so  far  as  knowledge  of  reality  first  comes  to  the  soul
through  sense-perception.  Regarded  as  faculties  of  the  soul,  the  senses  are
capable  of  receiving  gradual  illumination.

Ill]  The  Odes  of  Ibnu  'l-Fdrid  261

in  order  to  bring  near  to  thy  understanding  the  ends  of  my  far-off
purposes.

(710)  Although  his  (the  showman's)  case  is  not  (essentially)
like  mine,  there  is  a  resemblance  between  us  in  regard  to  the  two
forms  of  manifestation :

(711)  His  figures  (puppets)  were  the  forms  in  which,  with  the
aid  of  a  screen,  he  displayed  his  action :  they  became  naught  and
withdrew  when  he  revealed  himself  ;

(712)  And  my  soul  resembles  him  in  action,  for  my  sensation
is  like  the  figures  (puppets),  and  the  (bodily)  vesture  is  my
screen.

(713)  When  I  removed  the  screen  from  me,  as  he  removed
it  (from  him),  so  that  my  soul  appeared  to  me  without  any
veiling —

(714)  And  already  the  sun  of  contemplation  had  risen,  and
all  existence  was  illumined,  and  through  myself  the  knots  of  the
tethering-rope  (of  sense-perception)  were  untied —

(715)  I  slew  the  youth,  my  soul,  while  on  the  one  hand  I  was
setting  up  the  wall  (of  consciousness)  to  safeguard  my  laws  and
on  the  other  staving  in  my  (bodily)  boat,

(716)  And  turned  to  shed  my  replenishing  grace  over  every
created  being  according  to  my  actions  at  every  time ;

(717)  And  were  I  not  veiled  by  my  attributes,  the  objects  in
which  I  manifest  myself  would  be  consumed  by  the  splendour  of
my  glory.

(712)  The  soul  acts  on  the  senses  through  a  corporeal  medium  in  the
same  way  as  the  showman  uses  a  screen  in  order  to  act  on  his  puppets.

(713-5)  These  lines  describe  the  states  of  fand  and  bag  a — the  lifting  of
the  bodily  veil  and  the  consequent  union  with  reality — which  are  here
indicated  by  means  of  metaphors  strange  to  us  but  easy  for  any  Moslem  to
understand,  since  they  refer  to  a  famous  passage  in  the  Koran  (18,  64-81).
"I  slew  the  youth,  my  soul,"  i.e.  I  died  to  self  (fand).  "While... I  was  setting
up  the  wall... to  safeguard  my  laws,"  i.e.  my  living  (baqd)  in  and  through  God
was  accompanied  by  the  maintenance  of  the  religious  law.  The  perfect
mystic,  after  having  "staved  in  his  boat,"  i.e.  having  destroyed  his  indi-
vidual existence,  nevertheless  in  his  unitive  state  "makes  the  Law  his  upper
garment  and  the  Path  his  inner  garment"  :  cf.  The  Mystics  of  Islam,  p.  163.

(716)  The  unified  soul  is  one  with  the  eternal  source  of  energy  whence
the  existence  of  phenomena  is  diffused  and  perpetually  renewed.  Imddd  in
this  verse  has  its  usual  meaning:  see  vv.  403-4.

(717)  A  paraphrase  of  the  celebrated  Tradition  concerning  the  70,000
veils  of  light  and  darkness  which  hide  the  face  of  Allah.

262  Studies  in  Islamic  Mysticism  [CH.

Once  the  illusion  of  selfhood  is  destroyed,  nothing  remains
but  "the  Master  of  the  Show,"  the  one  real  person  in  the
drama

Which,  for  the  Pastime  of  Eternity,
He  doth  Himself  contrive,  enact,  behold.

(718)  The  tongues  of  all  beings,  wilt  thou  but  hearken,  bear
eloquent  witness  to  my  unity.

(719)  And  touching  my  oneness  (ittihdd)  there  hath  come  down
a  sure  Tradition,  whose  transmission  by  (oral)  relation  (from  the
Prophet)  is  not  infirm,

(720)  Declaring  that  God  loves  (His  creatures)  after  they  draw
nigh  unto  Him  by  voluntary  works  of  devotion  or  by  the  obser-
vance of  that  which  is  obligatory;

(721)  And  the  point  that  the  doctrine  bids  us  mark  is  made
as  clear  as  the  light  of  noon  by  the  words  "I  am  to  him  an
ear."

(722)  I  used  the  (religious  and  devotional)  means  to  reach
unification  until  I  found  it  (unification),  and  the  agency  of  the
means  was  one  of  my  guides  (thereto) ;

(723)  And  I  unified  in  respect  of  the  means  until  I  lost  them,
and  the  link  of  (this)  unification  was  the  way  of  approach  (to  unity)
that  availed  me  best;

(724)  And  I  stripped  my  soul  of  them  both,  and  she  became
single  (detached  from  the  world  of  relations) — yet  had  she  never
at  any  time  been  other  than  single  (in  her  real  nature)  ;

(725)  And  I  dived  into  the  seas  of  union,  nay,  I  plunged  into
them  in  my  aloneness  and  brought  out  many  a  peerless  pearl,

(719)  The  poet  refers  to  another  and  equally  apocryphal  Hadith  (see
p.  5  suf>ra),  the  gist  of  which  lies  in  the  statement  that  those  whom  God  loves
are  one  with  Him,  so  that  He  is  their  organ  of  sight,  hearing,  and  speech.

(722)  Although  the  mystic  at  the  beginning  of  his  unification  values
devotional  exercises  as  a  means  of,attaining  to  union  with  God,  he  ultimately
comes  to  know  that  the  attainment  of  union  does  not  depend  on  secondary
causes,  which  are  non-existent  in  reality,  or  on  any  act  that  he  may  ascribe
to  himself.  Cf .  Kashf  al-Mahjtib,  p.  202  foil. ;  The  Mystics  of  Islam,  p.  74  foil.

(723)  "  I  unified  in  respect  of  the  means,"  i.e.  I  perceived  that  God  is  the
real  agent  in  every  act.

(724)  "  I  stripped  my  soul  of  them  both,"  i.e.  both  of  my  regard  for  the
means  themselves  (v.  722)  and  of  my  regard  for  my  unification  of  them
(v.  723).  Even  in  the  latter  there  is  still  a  remnant  of  dualism,  inasmuch  as
the  unification  is  attributed  to  the  individual  self.

in]  The  Odes  of  Ibnu  U-Fdrid  263

(726)  That  I  might  hear  mine  acts  with  a  seeing  ear  and  behold
my  words  with  a  hearing  eye.

(727)  So  if  the  nightingale  lament  in  the  grove,  whilst  the
birds  in  every  tree  warble  a  response  to  her,

(728)  And  if  the  flute-player  make  music  in  accord  with  the
strings  touched  by  the  hand  of  a  singing-girl

(729)  Who  chants  tender  poetry,  so  that  the  souls  (of  the
hearers)  mount  to  their  Paradisal  lote-tree  at  each  trill —

(730)  I  take  delight  in  the  effects  of  mine  own  art,  and  I  ever
declare  my  union  and  society  to  be  free  from  partnership  with
others.

It  follows  from  the  doctrine  of  ittihdd  that  all  forms  of
worship  are  essentially  divine.  Even  dualism  and  polytheism
represent  certain  aspects  in  which  God  expresses  Himself.
This  passage  (vv.  731—49)  should  be  compared  with  the  views  set
forth  by  Ibnu  'l-'Arabi  and  Jili  (see  pp.  130  foil,  and  157  foil.).

(731)  Through  me  the  assembly  of  them  that  praise  my  name
is  (attentive  like)  the  ear  of  one  reading  (a  book),  and  for  my  sake
the  wine-seller's  shop  is  (open  like)  the  eye  of  a  scout;

(732)  And  virtually  no  hand  but  mine  tied  the  infidels'  girdle ;
and  if  it  be  loosed  in  acknowledgement  of  me,  'twas  my  hand  that
loosed  it.

(733)  And  if  the  niche  of  a  mosque  is  illuminated  by  the  Koran,
yet  is  no  altar  of  a  church  made  vain  by  the  Gospel;

(734)  Nor  vain  are  the  books  of  the  Torah  revealed  to  Moses
for  his  people,  whereby  the  Rabbis  converse  with  God  every
night.

(726)  In  union  (jam1)  each  attribute  is  identical  with  every  other
attribute  and  with  the  Essence.

(729)  The  words  "mount  to  their  Paradisal  lote-tree "  depict  the  highest
rapture  of  which  the  soul  is  capable,  as  the  sidratu  'l-muntahd  (Koran,  53,
14)  marks  the  boundary  of  the  seventh  heaven,  and  neither  prophet  nor
angel  may  pass  beyond  it.

(731)  "The  assembly  of  them  that  praise  my  name"  alludes  to  Sufis
who  meet  together  for  the  purpose  of  dhikr  (see  The  Mystics  of  Islam,  p.  45
foil.). Every  student  of  Persian  mystical  poetry  knows  what  is  meant  by
"the  wine-seller's  shop" :  others  may  consult  the  Gulshani  Rdz  of  Mahmiid
Shabistari,  ed.  by  E.  H.  Whinfield,  p.  78  foil,  of  the  English  translation.

(732)  Christians,  Jews  and  Zoroastrians  under  Mohammedan  rule  wore
a  girdle  round  the  waist  to  distinguish  them  from  the  Faithful;  hence  their
"loosing"  it  would  be  a  sign  of  their  conversion  to  Islam.

264  Studies  in  Islamic  Mysticism  [CH.

(735)  And  if  a  devotee  fall  down  before  the  stones  in  an  idol-
temple,  there  is  no  reason  for  religious  zeal  to  take  offence;

(736)  For  many  a  one  who  is  clear  of  the  shame  of  associating
others  with  God  by  means  of  idolatry  is  in  spirit  a  worshipper  of
money.

(737)  The  warning  from  me  hath  reached  those  whom  it
sought,  and  I  am  the  cause  of  the  excuses  put  forward  in  every
faith.

(738)  Not  in  any  religion  have  men's  eyes  been  awry,  not  in
any  sect  have  their  thoughts  been  perverse.

(739)  They  that  heedlessly  fell  in  love  with  the  sun  lost  not
the  way,  forasmuch  as  its  brightness  is  from  the  light  of  my
unveiled  splendour;

(740)  And  if  the  Magians  adored  the  Fire — which,  as  history
tells,  was  not  quenched  for  a  thousand  years —

(741)  They  intended  none  but  me,  although  they  took  another
direction  and  did  not  declare  the  purpose  they  had  formed.

(742)  They  had  once  seen  the  radiance  of  my  light  and  deemed
it  a  fire,  so  that  they  were  led  away  from  the  true  light  by  the
rays.

(743)  And  but  for  the  screen  of  existence,  I  should  have  said
it  out:  only  my  observance  of  the  laws  imposed  on  phenomena
doth  keep  me  silent.

(744)  So  this  is  no  aimless  sport,  nor  were  the  creatures  created
to  stray  at  random,  albeit  their  actions  are  not  right.

(737)  Those who  disobeyed the Divine message  delivered by the
prophets  are  to  be  excused  on  the  ground  that  God  did  not  create  in  them
the  spiritual  capacity  which  would  have  enabled  them  to  understand  and
obey.

(738)  God  in  one  aspect  or  another  is  the  real  object  of  every  religious
belief.

(740)  The  extinction  of  the  sacred  Fire  of  the  Persians,  after  it  had
burned  unceasingly  for  a  thousand  years,  is  recorded  amongst  the  portents
that  occurred  on  the  night  of  the  Prophet's  birth  (A.D.  572-3).

(743)  "Were  it  not  that  I  appear  under  the  form  of  externality,  as
a  creature  dependent  on  the  Divine  will  and  subject  to  the  Divine  law,  I
should  have  said  plainly  that  nothing  exists  in  reality  except  One  Being,
who  manifests  Himself  in  every  thought  and  action."

(744)  The  language  of  this  verse  is  borrowed  from  Kor.  23,  117:  "Did
ye  think  that  We  created  you  in  idle  sport?  "  and  75,  36:  "Doth  man  think
he  shall  be  left  uncontrolled  ?  "  The  existence  of  evil,  i.e.  relative  imperfection,
follows  by  necessity  from  the  self-manifestation  of  the  Absolute. See  pp.  85
93.  131

Ill]  The  Odes  of  Ibnu  'l-Fdrid  265

(745)  Their  affairs  take  a  course  according  to  the  brand  of  the
Names;  and  the  wisdom  which  endowed  the  Essence  with  (diverse)
attributes  caused  them  to  take  that  course  in  consequence  of
the  Divine  decree,

(746)  Disposing  them  in  two  handfuls — "and  I  care  not... and
I  care  not " — one  destined  for  happiness  and  one  for  misery.

(747)  Oh,  let  the  soul  know  that  the  case  stands  thus,  or  else
let  her  not  (seek  to)  know  (at  all),  for  according  to  this  the  Koran
is  recited  every  morning.

(748)  And  her  knowledge  arises  from  herself:  'twas  she  that
dictated  to  my  senses  what  I  hoped  (of  mystic  knowledge).

(749)  Had  I  singled,  I  should  have  swerved  (from  the  truth)
and  been  stripped  of  the  signs  of  my  union  (jam')  through  associ-
ating my  handiwork  (as  an  equal  partner)  with  myself.

Protesting  that  he  is  not  to  be  blamed  for  having  divulged
the  sublime  mysteries  with  which  the  grace  of  God  illuminated
him,  the  poet  bids  his  disciple  farewell.  Let  him  follow  in  his
master's  footsteps  and  be  one  with  the  Essence,  even  as  he  is
one.

(759)  In  the  world  of  reminiscence  the  soul  hath  her  ancient
knowledge— my  disciples  beg  it  of  me  as  a  boon.

(745)  Good  and  evil,  salvation  and  perdition,  are  effects  determined  by
the  Divine  Names,  e.g.  al-Hddi  (He  that  guides  aright),  al-Mudill  (He  that
leads  astray),  and  by  the  Divine  Attributes,  e.g.  i'zdz  (exaltare  humiles)  and
idhldl  (deponere  potentes).

(746)  Ibnu  '1-Farid  refers  to  the  Tradition  that  when  God  created  Adam,
He  drew  forth  his  posterity  from  his  loins  in  two  handfuls,  one  white  as
silver  and  one  black  as  coal,  and  said,  "  These  are  in  Paradise  and  I  care  not;
and  these  are  in  Hell-fire  and  I  care  not."

(747)  "For  according  to  this,"  e.g.  in  Kor.  16,  95:  "Allah  misguides
whomso  He  pleaseth  and  leads  aright  whomso  He  pleaseth."

(748)  Cf.  v.  671  and  vv.  675-6.

(749)  "Had  I  singled,"  i.e.  if  I  had  limited  the  action  of  the  soul  by
singling  out  and  assigning  to  her  the  attributes  of  beauty  (which  are  the
source  of  good),  while  I  deprived  her  of  the  attributes  of  majesty  and  awe
(which  are  the  source  of  evil),  then  I  should  have  set  up  beside  her  a  rival
Being  in  whom  these  latter  attributes  and  the  effects  proceeding  from  them
must,  ex  hypothesi,  subsist.

(759)  This  is  the  Platonic  doctrine  of  di>dij.vri<ris.  In  dreams  and  in
moments  of  ecstasy  the  soul  recovers  the  knowledge  of  true  being  which  is
hidden  from  her  during  her  bodily  existence.  Cf.  vv.  428-9  and  664  foil.

266  Studies  in  Islamic  Mysticism  [CH.  in

(760)  Do  thou,  therefore,  make  haste  to  enjoy  my  eternal
union,  in  virtue  of  which  I  found  the  full-grown  men  of  the  tribe
(of  Sufis  no  wiser  than)  little  babes.

(761)  For  my  contemporaries  drink  only  the  dregs  of  what  I
left;  and  as  for  those  before  me,  their  (vaunted)  merits  are  my
superfluity.

INDEX  I

NAMES  AND  TITLES

Arabic  names  to  which  the  definite  article  al*  is  prefixed  willTbe
found  under  their  initial  letter.  Titles  of  books  and  poems  are  printed
in  italics.

'Abdu  '1-Karim,  Khwaja,  47,  67
'Abdu  '1-Qadir  al-Jili  (Jilani,  Gilani),
^TrTTSr-T^T —
'Abdu '1-Rahman, son of Ibnu

'1-Farid,  165

'Abdu  '1-Rahman,  Ustad.  65
'Abdu  '1-Samad,  14
'Abdu  '1-Wali,  Mawlavi,  48
Abiward,  17
Abraham,  132,  133,  137,  173,  201,

214.  253

Abu  '!-' Abbas  Bashshar,  55
Abu  '!-' Abbas  Qassab,  n,  17,  21,  22,

23,  24,  66

Abu  'AM,  Sayyid,  27
Abii  'Alij^a.^.  (?),  1 8

Abu  'Ali  Daqqaq,  19,  24

Abii  'Alf  Zahir,  6,  7,  8

Abu  Bakr  Ishaq  Karrami,  29-32

Abu  '1-Fadl  Hasan,  of  Sarakhs,  7,

8-12,  14,  15,  17,  23-25,  62
Abu  '1-Khayr,  father  of  Abu  Sa'id,

3.  4

Abu  Nasr^l-Sarraj,  of  Tiis,  10,  58.
See  Kitdb  al-Luma'

Abu  Sa'fd  ibn  Abi  '1-Khayr,  1-76.
See  Index  of  Subjects

Abii  Sa'id,  Shaykhu  '1-Islam,  grand-
son of  Abii  Sa'id  ibn  Abi  '1-Khayr,

25.  59

Abu  Salih  Dandani,  Pir,  47
Abii  Tahir,  eldest  son  of  Abu  Sa'id

ibn' Abi  '1-Khayr,  15,  24,  35,  36,

43,  44,  7°

Abii  Zayd  of  Sariij,  198,  257
Adam,  54,  78,  79,  80,  87,  97,  106,

109,  in, 112,  113,  119-122,  124,

130,  136,  140,  149,  155,  186,  187,

198,  205,  206,  223,  229,  240,  242,

245,  252,  255,  265
Ahmad,  a  name  of  the  Prophet,  104,

229. See  Mohammed
Ahmad,  son  of  Abu  '1-Hasan  Khara-

qanf,  43

Ahmad  'Ali  Nasawi,  19

Ahmad  Najjar,  17

Ahmad  Nasr,  Shaykh,  19

Ahriman,  163,  242

'Ali,  grandson  of  Ibnu  '1-Farid,  164,

165
'Ali  ibn  Abi  Talib, the  Prophet's

son-in-law,  10,  226
'Alij,  182

Amul,  n,  17,  21,  23,  28,  66
Andrae,  Tor,  in
Angelo,  Michael,  162
'Anqa,  the,  83,  93
Aura  Mainyu,  163
'Aqiq,  valley  of,  170
'Arafat,  222

Arnold,  Matthew,  9  v

Ash'arites,  the,  154
Asia  Minor,  72
Asma,  113
Asrdru 'l-tawhid fi maqdmdti 'l-

Shaykh  A  bi  Sa'id,  by  Muhammad

ibnu  '1-Munawwar,  1—3
Athdru  'l-bildd,  by  Qazwini,  76
'Attar,  Faridu'ddin,  3,  42,  162
Avicenna,  42
'Ayniyya,  the,  by  Jili,  90,  143  foil.

See al-Nawddiru 'l-'ayniyya ft

'l-bawddiri  'l-ghaybiyya
'Ayyari,  Abii  Muhammad,  4
'Ayyari,  Abii  Sa'id,  4
'Azazil,  120. See  Iblis
al-Azhar,  mosque,  165
Azrael, the  Angel of Death, in,

116,  117,  123
'Azza,  113,  222,  223

Baba  Kiihi,  of  Shiraz,  48
Badr,  in  the  Hijaz,  174
Badru'ddin  al-Shahid,  113
Baghdad,  10,  66,  105,  152,  162
Baku,  57
Balkh,  65
Bashkhwan,  74,  75

268

Index  I

Bashkhwani,  Bu  'Amr,  74,  75

Basra,  10

Baward,  17

Bayazid-i BisUmi, 44, 76. See

al-Bisfcimf
Bigg,  C.,  142

Bishr-i  Yasin,  Abu  '1-Qasim,  4,  5
Bistam,  44,  76
al-Bistdml, Abu Yazid, 77. See

Bayazid-i  Bist&mi
Black,  J.  S.,  163
Blake,  W.,  167
Blochet,  E.,  195
Bohme,  Jacob,  94,  103
Bousset,  W.,  86,  87
Brockelmann,  C.,  99
Browne,  Prof.  E.  G.,  61,  165,  170
Bu  'Abdallah  Baku,  Shaykh,  57,  58
Bii  'All  Turshizi,  36
Bu  'Amr,  40
Bu '1-Khayr, Babu. See Abu '1-

Khayr

Bu  '1-Qasimak,  31
Bu  Tahir. See  Abu  Tahir
Bukhara,  66
Bulghar,  124

al-Burfni,  Hasan,  162,  168,  186
Buthayna,  223,  224

Caird,  £.,96
Cairo,  164,  165
Caspian,  the,  81
Catherine  of  Siena,  St,  167
Christ,  87,  104,  135,  140,  187. See
Jesus

al-Dahdah, Rushayyid b. Ghalib,

162

Dajjal,  135
Damghan,  44

Dandani,  Pir  Abii  Salih,  47
Dante,  191
Darij,  183
Darra-i  Gaz,  1 7
David,  123,  137,  161
Dawud  Ta'f,  10,  n
De  Lagrange,  Grangeret,  165,  166
De  rerum  natura,  191
De  Sacy,  Silvestre,  165
De  Slane,  Baron,  164,  168
Deussen,  Paul,  103
Di  Matteo,  Sac.  Ignazio,  162
Dihya  al-Kalbi,  219,  225
Divdn-i  Shams-i  Tabriz,  by  Jalalu-

'ddin  Rumf,  80,  168,  233,  259
Dozy,  R.,  29

Eckhart,  51,  212
Egypt,  165,  181
Elijah,  73

Ethe,  H.,  4,  48
Eve,  223

Faridu'ddin  'AtUr. See  'Attar

Fawcett,  E.  D.,  94

Fliigel,  G.,  93,  195

Furati,  Abu  '1-Fadl,  41

Fususu  'l-hikam,  by  Ibnu  'l-'Arabl,

77,  83,  88,  91,  96,  100,  115,  130,

134,  136,  141,  149-161
al-Futuhdtu l-Makkiyya, by Ibnu

'l-'Arabi,  77,  82,  88

Gabriel,  in,  n6,  219,  225

Gairdner,  W.  H.  T.,  in

Gaz,  valley,  17

Gerson,  51

Ghazali,  80,  in,  150

Ghazna,  29,  33

Ghiyathu'ddin  Muhammad  ibn  Sam,

Ghurid  prince,  i
al-Ghuwayr,  183
Ghuzz,  the,  a  Turcoman  tribe,  2,  20,

27.  45.  73

Gibb,  E.  J.  W.,  62,  in
Gilan,  8 1

Goldziher,  Prof.  I.,  81,  82
Gospel,  the,  137-140,  240,  263
Gulshani  rdz,  by  Mahmud  Shabistari,

263

Habib-i  'Ajami,  10,  u

Hafiz,  162

Hdjir,  182

Hdldt u Sukhundn-i Shaykh Abu

Sa'id  ibn  Abi  'l-Khayr,  1-3
Hallaj,  Husayn  ibn  Mansur,  32,  54,

79,  80,' 88,  107,  121,  158,  193,  230.

See  Kitdb  al-Tawdsin
Hammer-Purgstall, Joseph, 162.

See  Von  Hammer
Hanafites,  the,  29
Haneberg,  D.,  195
Hariri,  198,  257,  258
Hartmann,  Richard,  34,  53,  73,  220,

238,  256

Hasan  of  Basra,  10,  n
Hasan-i  Mu'addib,  27,  29,  30,  32,

35-40,  42
Hegel,  89,  94,  118
Hiiaz,  the,  36,  164,  181,  182
Hind,  113
Hippolytus,  77
Hirf,  Abu  'Uthman,  19
Hirschfeld,  H.,  no
Holof  ernes,  177
Hubbi,  Pfr,  47
Hujwiri, 3, 22, 34, 58, 79. See

Kashf  al-mahjtib
al-Husri,  Abii  :Abdallah,  6

Index  I

269

Iblfs,  54,  72,  112,  Iiy,  IIQ,  I2O,  121,

124. See  Satan
Ibnu  'l-'Arabi,  77,  82,  83,  88,  93,  99,

IOI,  102,  103,  IO7,  115,  119,  134,
136,  138,  141,  142,  I49-l6l,  164,
169,  184,  193,  257,  263

Ibnu  '1-Farid,  119,  162-266

Ibn  Khallikan,  164,  168

Ibn  Sina,  42

Ibn  Surayj,  6

Idrfs,  the  prophet,  123

Ihyd,  the,  of  Ghazalf,  80

Ikhwanu  '1-Safa,  139

India,  81

Inge,  W.  R.,  128

al-Insdnu  'l-kdmil,  by  Jilf,  77  foil.,

149,  194

Iqbal,  Dr  Muhammad,  77,  94
Ishf  Nilf,  69,  70
Isma'ilak-i  Daqqaq,  35
Isma'ilfs,  the,  61
Israelites,  the,  179
Israffl,  115,  123. See  Seraphiel
Istildhdtu 'l-Sufiyya, by  'Abdu '1-

Razzaq  al-Kashani,  94

al-Jabartf,  Sharafu'ddin,  Isma'il  ibn
,  Ibrahim,  81,  87,  105,  118
Jacob,  the  prophet,  201,  253
Jalalu'ddin  Rumf,  80,  159,  162,  167,
1 68, 1 80. See Divdn-i Shams-i
Tabriz  and  Masnavi-i  ma'navi
Jamf,  3,  162
Jamil,  224
Jerusalem,  66
Jesus,  25,  no,  123,  137,  139,  140,

141,  253,  255. See  Christ
Jflan,  8 1

Jili,  'Abdu  '1-Karim,  author  of  the
Insdnu  'l-kdmil,  77-148,  149,  153,
157,  160,  193,  263

Jili  (Jilani,  Gilani),  'Abdu  '1-Qadir,
81,  115,  141
ob,  158,  201
ohn,  the  Baptist,  25
ohn,  St,  88
onah,  245

ones,  Sir  William,  49,  165
Joseph,  the  prophet,  123
Junayd,  of  Baghdad,  10,  n,  159
Jurjani,  93,  118
Juwayni,  Abu  Muhammad,  73

Ka'ba,  the,  15,  25,  36,  44,  62,  213,

214,  222,  238
Kalim (Kalimu'llah), 229. See

Moses
Kamalu'ddin Muhammad, son of

Ibnu  'J-Farid,  165
Karramis,  the,  28

Kdshanf,  'Abdu  '1-Razzaq,  94,  149,

162,  193,  194,  199  foil.
Kashf  al-mahjub,  by  Hujwfrf,  3,  22,

24,  34,  61,  79,  152,  208,  221,  226,

244,  254,  262
Kashfu 'l-sirri 'l-ghdmid  fi sharhi

Diwdn Ibni 'l-Fdrid, by 'Abdu

'1-Ghani  al-Nabulusi,  162
Kashfu  'l-wujuhi  'l-ghurr  li-ma'dni

nazmi  'l-durr,  by  'Abdu  '1-Razzaq

al-Kashani,  162
Kazima,  182
Khadir,  the  prophet,  13,  66,  82,  124,

141
Khamnyya,  the, of  Ibnu '1-Farid,

165,  183-188

Khanaqah-i  Sarawi,  at  Nasa,  19
Kharaqan,  26,  42-44
Kharaqani,  Abu  '1-Hasan,  26,  42-

44.  76

al-Kharraz,  Abu  Sa'id,  152

Khawaran,  3

al-Khayf,  181

Khoten,  66

Khurasan,  2,  3,  19,  20,  38,  76

Khurqan. See  Kharaqan

Khurqani,  Abu  '1-Hasan.  See  Kha-
raqani

Kitdb  al-Luma',  by  Abu  Nasr  al-
Sarraj,  34,  61,  96,  200,  220,  230,
238,  244,  254

Kitdb  al-Tawdsin,  by  Hallaj,  54,  79,
80,  107,  I2i,  136,  139,  142,  193

Koran,  the,  4,  8,  13,  15,  16,  17,  25,
28,  32,  37,  43,  46,  51.  56,  59,  60,
62,  64,  75,  78,  79,  82,  87,  92,  104,
107,  109,  no,  in,  113,  120,  123,
126,  130,  131,  132,  135,  136,  138,
139,  140,  149,  i5i>  157,  J59,  i?3»

179, 197, 200, 201, 205, 206,  209,

223,  225,  226,  228, 230, 231,  235,

237»  239, 240, 241, 242, 245,  253,
256, 259, 26l, 263, 264, 265

Kushi,  8 1
Kuthayyir,  222-224

La'la',  182

Lane,  E.,  94

Law,  H.  D.  Graves,  48

Layla,  127,  222

Le  Strange,  G.,  26

Lees,  Nassau,  3,  19

Loosen,  Paul,  6

Loth,  O.,  77,  81

Lubna,  222,  223

Lucretius,  191

al-Luma', by  Abu  Nasr  al-Sarraj.

See  Kitdb  al-Luma'
Luqman,  of  Sarakhs,  6,  7
Lyall,  Sir  C.,  163

270

Index  I

Ma'arrf,  Abu  'l-'Ala,  160,  162
Macdonald,  Prof.  D.  B.,  28,  57,  73,

79,  119,  129,  154,  188,  233,  236
Mackail,  J.  W.,  167
al-Madani,  Ahmad  ibn  Muhammad,

Maljmud-i  Murfd,  Khwaja,  27

Mahmud  Shabistari,  263

Majnvin,  222

Malamatis,  the,  208

Maqam  Ibrahim,  214

Maqdmdt,  of  Hariri,  the,  257

Ma'nif  Karkhi,  10

Marwa,  239

Mary,  the  mother  of  Jesus,  140

Masnavi-i  ma'navi,  by  Jalalu'ddin
Rumi,  159,  168,  259

Massignon,  L.,  54,  79,  80,  81,  107,
121,  136,  139,  142,  193

Mas' xid,  Amir,  41,  42

Mayhana,  2,  3,  4,  5,  8,  n,  12,  14,
15,  17,  18,  20,  24,  26-29,  43.  45.
65,  69,  72,  73,  74.  See  Mihna

Mecca,  25,  43,  44,  61,  62,  66,  74,  164,
165,  174,  179,  181,  183.  222,  239

Medina,  66,  170,  174

Meleager,  167

Merv,  6,  12,  17,  65

Mesopotamia,  257

Michael,  in,  118,  123

Mihna,  2,  18. See  Mayhana

al-Mina,  181

Mishkdtu  'l-anwdr,  by  Ghazali,  in

Mohammed,  the  Prophet,  5,  6,  9,  n,
15,  19,  25,  29,  47,  50,  59,  67,  78,
79,  86,  87,  88,  91,  92,  94,  104,  105,
106,  109,  no,  112-120,  123,  129,
130,  132,  135-139,  141.  157.  168,
172,  174,  187,  188,  194,  195,  198,
206,  219,  223,  225,  226,  227,  229,
239,  240,  241,  245,  248,  252-255,
264.  See  Index  of  Subjects

Moses,  123,  137,  139,  141,  200,  226,
229,  243,  253,  263

al-Mudabbir,  angel,  in

al-Mufassil,  angel,  in

Muhammad,  the  Prophet.  See
Mohammed

Muhammad,  Hajib,  38,  39

Muhammad  (ibn)  'AH  ('Ulayyan)
al-Nasawi,  19

Muhammad  Fadl,  17

Muhammad  ibnu  '1-Munawwar,  i,  25

Muljyi'ddfn  Ibnu  'l-'Arabi.  Seelbnu
'l-'Arabf

Mu'jamu  'l-bulddn,  by  Yaqut,  6

Munro,  H.  A.  J.,  192

Muqattam,  Mt,  164

Murta'ish,  of  Baghdad,  10

Musil,  A.,  139

Mutanabbi,  162,  166
Muzaffar,  Khwaja,  son  of  Abu  Sa'id
ibn  Abi  '1-Khayr,  44

al-Nabulusi, 'Abdu '1-Ghani, 162,

164,  168,  172,  184,  187,  199  foil.
Nafahdtu  'l-Uns,  by  Jami,  3,  19
Najd,  182

Najjar,  Khwaja,  47

Nallino,  Prof.  C.  A.,  162,  164,  168,

177,  186,  200,  207,  214,  221,  238,

260

al-Naqa,  182
Nasa,  4,  17-19
al-Nasawi,  Ahmad  'AH,  19
al-Nasawi,  Muhammad  (ibn)  'Ulay-

yan,  19

al-Nasrabadi,  Abu  '1-Qasim,  14
al-Nawddiru  'l-'ayniyyafi  'l-bawddiri

'l-ghaybiyya,  by  Jill,  99,  143. See

'Ayniyya
Na?mu  'l-suluk,  by  Ibnu '1-Farid,

165,  169, 1 88. See  al-Td'iyyatu
'l-kubrd

Newman,  Cardinal,  163

Nishapur,  14,  22,  26,  27,  28,  33,  34,

36.  37.  38.  41-45.  57.  59.  65,  66,

69,  70,  71,  73
Nizamu  '1-Mulk,  27
Noah,  201,  253
Noldeke,  Prof.  Th.,  163
Nu'm,  183,  187
al-Nun,  angel,  in
Nyberg, H.  S.,  94, 104, no, in,

121,  122,  123

Omar  Khayyam,  i,  77
Origen,  149
Ormuzd,  163,  242

Pascal,  9

Pentateuch,  the,  137-139.  See  Tor  ah

Petrarch,  167

Philo,  77,  82,  138,  142,  149

Plato,  22,  137,  174,  223,  259,  265

Plotinus,  153

Prophet,  the. See  Mohammed

Psalms,  the,  137

Pushangan,  41

al-Qaffal,  Abu  Bakr,  6
~1n,  60

,'ini,  Muhammad,  Khwaja,  60,  61

Lys,  222,  224
^cczwini,  76
Qushayri,  Abu  '1-Qasim,  26,  33-36,

58,  73,  77- See  Hartmann

Rayy,  44

Republic,  of  Plato,  the,  223

Index  I

271

al-Risdlatu 'l-Qushayriyya  fi 'ilmi

'l-tasawwuf,  33,  77
Ribat-i  Kuhan,  12,  13
Rum,  72

Russell,  Bertrand,  82
Ruysbroeck,  55

Sabunf,  Isma'fl,  73

§adda,  226

Sa'df,  162

Safa,  239

Sa'id,  Qadi,  29-32

Sal',  182  '

Sale,  G.,  174

Salma,  113

Sam'ani,  18

Sana'i,  162

Sarakhs,  6,  7,  10,  n,  12,  14,  17,  23,

24,  62

Sari  Saqati,  10
al-Sarraj,  Abu  Nasr,  of  Tus,  10,  58.

See  Kitdb  al-Luma'
Saruj,  257

Satan,  131,  223. See  Iblfs
Schopenhauer,  94
Sellar,  W.  Y.,  192
Seraphiel,  in,  115. See  Israfil
Seth,  156

Shadhardtu  'l-dhahab,  164
al-Shadhili,  Abu  '1-Hasan,  210. See

Haneberg
Shdfi'ites,  the,  29
Shah  Mayhana,  17,  1 8
SMhfna,  18
Sham-i  kiichak,  a name given  to

Nasa,  1 8
Shamfna,  18
Shelley,  176
Shi'b  'Amir,  183
Shibli,  Shay kh,' 66,  105
Shf'ites,  the,  29
Shiraz,  48
Shirwan,  57,  74
Shirwanf,  Bu  Nasr,  73,  74
Sidney,  Sir  Philip,  175
Siegfried,  C.,  138
Sinai,  Mt,  200,  226,  228,  245
Solomon,  123,  253
Song  of  Solomon,  the,  168
Sparrow,  John,  103
Spenta  Mainyu,  163
Sprenger,  A.,  94
Subkt,  6
al-Suhrawardi, Shihabu'ddfn Abu

Hafs  'Umar,  165

al-Sulaml,  Abu  'Abd  al-Rahman,  of

Nishapiir,  14,  19,  22,  57
Sulayma,  182,  183
Syria,  18,  139

Tabaqdtu  'l-Shdfi'iyya  al-kubrd,  by

Subki,  6
Tabaqdtu  'l-Sufiyya,  by  Abii  'Abd

al-Rahman  al-Sulami,  14,  19
Tabaristan,  17
Tadhkiratu 'l-Awliyd, by Faridu-

'ddfn  'Att^r,  3,  42
al-Td'iyyatu 'l-kubrd, by  Ibnu '1-

Farid, 119, 162, 165, 168, 180,

187,  188-266
al-Td'iyyatu  'l-sughrd,  by  Ibnu  '1-

Farid,  165

Tarasusf,  Abu  'All,  27
Ta'rifdt,  the,  by  Jurjanf,  93,  118
Tarjumdn al-ashwdq, by Ibnu '1-

'Arabf,  99,  138,  164,  257,  260
Tayyi',  tribe,  164
Teignmouth,  Lord,  165
Tor  ah,  the, 240, 263. See Penta-
teuch

Turshfzi,  Bu  'AH,  36
Tus,  27,  70

al-'Udhayb,  171,  182

Uhud,  15

'Umar  ibnu  '1-Farid,  Sharafu'ddin,

164. See  Ibnu  '1-Farid
Underbill,  Evelyn,  167

Valerga,  P.,  165

Von  Hammer,  Joseph,  188-190,  259.

See  Hammer-Purgstall
Von  Hartmann,  94
Vullers,  J.  A.,  113

al-Wa'sa.  182
Wensinck,  A.  J.,  225
Whinfield,  E.  H.,  159,  263
Wordsworth,  161
Wiistenfeld,  F.,  76

Yahya  ibn  Zakariyya,  25

Yaqut,  6,  18

Yaysama,  19

Yemen,  67,  81

Yuh,  82

Yunus  ibn  Matta,  245

Zabid,  81,  105
Zhukovski,  V.,  i,  2,  4

INDEX  II

SUBJECTS

Abu  Sa'fd  ibn  Abi  '1-Khayr,  1-76;
authorities  for  his  biography,  1-3 ;
his  birth  and  early  education,  3-5 ;
his  theological  studies,  6;  his  con-
version to  Siifism,  6-9 ;  his  lineage
as  a  Sufi,  10;  his  austerities,  n-
1 6 ;  he  buries  his  books  of  theology,
20;  the  tree  planted  by  him  at
Mayhana,  20;  his  mystical  illu-
mination, attained  at  the  age  of
forty,  24-25;  his  journey  to
Nishapur,  26,  27;  his  telepathic
powers,  27,  28-36,  38-41,  68;
charges  brought  against  him  by
the  Sunnfs,  Shf'ites.  and  Mu'ta-
zilites,  28,  29;  his  relations  with
Qushayrf,  33-36;  his  luxury  and
extravagance,  35-37 ;  anecdotes
showing  how  he  maintained  him-
self and  his  disciples,  38-41;  his
vengeance  on  an  Amir  who  re-
fused to  pay  his  debts,  42;  his
reported  meeting  with  Avicenna,
42;  his  visit  to  Abu  '1-Hasan
Kharaqani,  42-44;  his  refusal  to
make  the  pilgrimage  to  Mecca,  44,
61 ;  his  death,  45;  his  epitaph,  45;
description  of  his  personal  appear-
ance, 45;  regulations  which  he
made  for  the  inmates  of  his  con-
vent, 46,  76 ;  his  barber  and  tailor,
47 ;  his  desire  to  observe  the  Sunna
of  the  Prophet,  47;  the  quatrains
attributed  to  him,  i,  4,  48;  the
character  of  his  mysticism,  48  foil.,
70,  76;  sayings  on  self -negation,
50  foil. ;  he  called  himself  Nobody
the  son  of  Nobody,  53;  his  ideal
of  charity  and  brotherhood,  55,
56;  his  pantheism,  57,  64;  his
attitude  towards  Islam,  57  foil. ;
his  innovations  in  Sufistic  prac-
tice, 58;  his  miracles,  65  foil.;
veneration  paid  to  his  relics,  73-
75

Actions,  Divine,  the  illumination  of
the,  126;  human,  logically  self-
determined,  151

Adam,  created  in  the  image  of  God,
79,  80,  106,  in,  113;  the  micro-

cosm, 149,  154  foil.;  the  world-
spirit,  121 ;  the  vicegerent  of  God,
113,  130,  156.  See  Angels;  Man,
the  Perfect;  Man,  the  Primal;
Spirit,  the  created

Allah,  the  orthodox  and  mystical
conceptions  of,  79;  the  name
Allah,  knowledge  of  God  reached
by  means  of,  93,  107;  the  revela-
tion of  the  name,  93,  126-7;  the
name  repeated  in  dhikr,  7-9;
analysed  by  Jflf,  96.  See  God;
Divinity;  Essence,  the  Divine;
al-Haqq

Angels,  1 22  foil.,  205,  233;  the
worship  of  God  by,  15;  com-
manded to  worship  Adam,  112,
120,  242;  jealous  of  Adam,  205;
created  from  the  faculties  of  the
Perfect  Man,  106,  108,  115  foil.;
created  from  the  Spirit  (Logos).
111-113;  faculties  of  the  cosmos,
155;  the  Sublime,  112,  120.  See
Cherubim

Anthropomorphism,  140

Antinomianism,  7,  33,  37,  57,  60
foil.,  141,  184,  196

Asceticism,  Suff,  11-16,  24,  25,  46,
62,  63,  119,  208,  215-217,  224,  251

Atomists,  the  Ash'arite,  154

Attributes,  the  Divine,  83  foil.,  90-
93,  97  foil.,  249  foil.;  constitute
the  universe,  83,  100,  150;  not
ultimately  distinguishable  from
the  Essence,  83,  90,  150,  232,  242;
classified,  85,  100,  207;  the  seven
principal,  101 ;  the  illumination  of
the  Attributes,  85,  128-9

Beauty,  Absolute,  85,  90,  143,  174,

196,  199,  207
Beauty, material, 174, 196, 199.

See  husn
Beauty,  the  Divine  attributes  of,  85,

100,  103,  120,  131. See  jamdl
Begging,  14
Being,  Absolute,  83;  identical  with

Thought,  83;  its  three  stages  of

manifestation, 84, 94  foil. See

Essence

Index  II

273

Being,  contingent  or  phenomenal,
83,  104,  153,  186,  187,  189,  190,
199,  209,  221,  222-223,  232,  242»
251.  See  Phenomena

Being,  the  unity  of,  82,  152-154,
214,  234.  See  ittifydd

Bells,  the  ringing  of,  heard  in
ecstasy,  129

Blame,  welcome  to  the  lover,  1 79-1 80

Blamer,  the,  in  Arabic  love-poetry,
178-179;  in  mystical  poetry,  179,
180,  204,  205,  215,  232,  233,  234

Body,  the  faculties  of  the,  necessary
for  the  attainment  of  spiritual
perfection,  119

Body,  the  spiritual,  134

Body,  the  universal,  no

Books,  useless  to  the  Sufi,  20,  21

Brahmans,  the,  132,  133

Change,  the  meaning  of,  100
Charity,  the  best  means  of  attaining

to  God,  55

Cherubim,  the,  106,  no,  in,  117
Children,  the  heavenly  influence  of,

161

Christianity,  traces  of,  in  Sufism,  79,
87, 138; Jill's  apology  for, 139
foil.;  associated  with  wine-drink-
ing, 187. See  Gospel
Christians,  the,  132,  133,  138,  139,

140,  187,  263

Composition,  automatic,  167
Contemplation,  of  God,  62,  63,  130,

208, 2IO, 212, 215, 222, 226, 241,

255

Cosmology,  121  foil.
Creation,  the,  80,  90,  103,  115,  121,
122,  151,  154,  208,  229,  255

Dancing,  237. See  Music
Death,  92,  117,  134
Dervish  orders,  n,  81,  201
Determinism,  54,  102,  115,  120,  126,

r57.  I58.  198,  199,  265
Devil,  the,  179,  205,  223,  233. See

Iblis;  Satan
Directions,  the  six,  213
Director,  a  spiritual,  indispensable

to  the  Sufi,  10,  22,  23. See  pir
Divinity,  the  highest  manifestation

of  the  Essence,  84, 97 ;  invisible,  97
Dreams,  90,  91,  92,  105,  112,  118,

258,  259,  265
Dualists,  the,  131,  133

Earths,  the  seven,  124-125
Ecstasy,  4,  9,  25,  27,  34,  35,  36,  43,
56,  60,  61,  65,  78,  79, 167, 185,
188,  199  foil.,  218,  221,  234  foil.,

N.  S.  II

243.  See  Illumination;  Intoxica-
tion ;  fand

Emanation,  153,  155,  193,  233,  261

Eschatology,  133  foil.

Essence,  definition  of,  82;  may  be
regarded  as  with  or  without
attributes,  97,  150,  243

Essence,  the  Divine,  83  foil.,  89,  90,
97,  150;  unknowable  per  se,  83,
115,  150;  described  by  contraries,
83,  156;  unites  all  opposites,  152;
perceived  immediately,  92,  98;
veiled  by  phenomena,  173;  self-
diremption  of  the,  94,  96;  three-
fold nature  of  the,  86,  103,  104;
the  illumination  of  the  Essence,
85,  129-130.  See  God

Eternity,  100,  128

Euphuism,  177

Evil,  53;  only  relative,  85,  100;  not
permanent,  136;  a  necessary  con-
sequence of  the  self- manifestation
of  the  Absolute,  85,  93,  131,  264-
265.  See  Sin

Faculties  of  the  Perfect  Man,  the,

1 08  foil.
Fall,  the,  due  to  Man's  divine  nature,

119

Fasts,  miraculous,  70,  71
Fate,  157. See  Determinism
Forgiveness,  the  dearest  of  all  things

to  God,  54

Freethinkers,  Moslem,  62
Freewill,  54,  101,  102,  103,  120,  134
Frock,  the  patched,  worn  by  Sufis,
14;  investiture  performed  by  the
spiritual  director  (Pir),  22;  mean-
ing of  this  ceremony,  22,  23;  it  is
allowable  to  receive  the  frock  from
two  Pirs,  23;  frocks  torn  to  pieces
and  distributed,  43, 57, 58, 73.
See  khirqa
Fruit,  the  forbidden,  119,  223

God,  the  nature  of,  97  foil.,  103,  104,
149  foil. ;  the  substance  of  the
universe,  99,  152;  the  essence  of
all  religious  beliefs,  130  foil.,  159,
264;  the  only  real  agent,  16,  51,
52,  54,  126,  161,  262,  264;  the
ways  to,  innumerable,  50;  ths
way  to,  a  single  step,  50;  the
finite  God  of  religion,  159,  160.
See  Essence,  the  Divine;  Attri-
butes, the  Divine;  Names,  the
Divine;  Allah

Gospel,  the,  opening  words  of,  ac-
cording to  Jili,  139;  typifies  the
second  stage  in  the  mystical

18

274

Index  II

ascent  of  the  soul,  138;  the  true
doctrine  of,  140

Hadfth. See Traditions of the

'  Prophet

Hearing,  the  Divine  attribute  of,
101,  129

Heart,  the,  113-115,  159,  236,  239;
comprehends  God,  115,  238;  is
reflected  by  the  universe,  115;
compared  to  the  Ka'ba,  238.  See
qalb

Heavens,  the  seven,  122-123

Hell,  125,  135,  206,  245,  265;  denned
as  selfhood,  64;  the  mirror  of
Divine  Majesty,  too,  136;  created
from  the  Form  of  Mohammed,
135;  will  not  exist  actually  until
after  the  Resurrection,  135;  a
temporary  state,  136;  the  seven
limbos  of,  136;  dislike  of  Koranic
texts  describing  the  torments  of
Hell,  56;  the  pleasures  of  Hell,
132,  137,  160

Iblls. See  Index  I

Idolaters,  131,  132,  198

Illumination,  mystical,  24,  25,  164,
174,  200;  three  (or  four)  phases
of,  85,  125  foil.  See  tajalli

Incarnation,  the  Mohammedan  doc-
trine of,  79.  See  huliil

Indians,  the,  distinguished  by  a
monistic  tendency,  163

Intelligence,  the  First,  112,  113,  116,
123,  184,  233;  the  Second,  233

Intoxication,  mystical  term,  184,
J95.  !97.  !99.  200,  218,  220,  221,
224,  228,  243,  248

Jealousy,  a  sign  of  duality,  213
Jews,  the,  132,  133,  138,  141,  263.

See  Pentateuch
Jinn,  the,  101,  124,  190,  220
Judgment,  the  Day  of,  120

Knowledge,  denned  as  a  relation
depending  on  the  object  known,

I5L  157

Knowledge  of  God,  is  self-know-
ledge, 50,  215;  unattainable  by
the  intellect,  50,  116;  an  illumina-
tion, 152;  a  recognition,  249.  See
ma'rifa

Knowledge,  the  Divine  attribute  of,
101,  102,  103,  128,  151

Knowledge,  three  kinds  of,  im-
parted to  Mohammed,  139

Koran,  recitation  of  the,  13,  15,  16,
75,  79;  immutable,  159;  not  the

final  and  absolute  standard  of
truth,  59-60;  interpreted  alle-
gorically,  82,  149;  typifies  the
third  and  last  stage  in  the
mystical  ascent  of  the  soul,  138

Law,  the  Mohammedan  religious,
16,  20,  33,  34,  54,  57,  60,  184.  196.
261

Letters  of  the  Arabic  alphabet,  used
symbolically,  209

Life,  definition  of,  134

Life,  the  Divine  attribute  of,  85,  101

Life,  the  future,  134  foil.

Life, the mystic, three  stages  of,

221

Logic,  the  use  of,  by  Jill,  82,  88,

94  foil.,  127
Logos  doctrine,  the,  in  Jill  and  Ibnu

'l-'Arabi, 87, 104  foil., 154  foil.;

in  Ghazali,  1 1 1 ;  in  Philo,  138,  142.

See  Mohammed ;  Man,  the  Perfect;

Spirit,  the  created
Logos,  union  of  the  saints  with  the,

254
Lordship,  the  Divine  attribute  of,

98,  99,  119,  120,  137,  139
Love, disinterested, 4, 5, 18, 208,

212,  215,  238
Love,  Divine,  3,  4,  5,  18,  52,  80,  103,

168,  174,  184,  185,  186,  199,  208,

212,  214,  224,  251,  252,  262
Love,  the  essence  of  God's  essence,

80,  1 02 ;  the  highest  form  in  which

God  is  worshipped,  161
Love,  the  monistic  doctrine  of,  80,

251,  252
Love-poetry,  Arabian,  163,  178

Macrocosm,  the,  121-125

Magians,  the,"  132,  133,  264

Magic,  high,  139

Mahdf,  the,  135

Majesty,  the  Divine  attributes  of,
85,  100,  1 20,  131,  265.  See  jaldl

Man,  the  earthly,  82 ;  the  heavenly,
82,  103  foil.

Mm,  the  Great,  155.  See  Macrocosm

Man,  the  nature  and  function  of,
154  foil.

Man,  the  Perfect,  77  foil.,  184;
unites  the  One  and  the  Many,  78,
84;  created  in  the  image  of  God,
79,  80,  86,  1 06,  107;  the  micro-
cosm, 82,  84,  1 06;  the  Qutb  and
preserver  of  the  universe,  86,  105,
130;  the  vicegerent  of  God,  113,
130,  156;  his  threefold  nature,  86
103,  104;  identified  with  Adam,
1 54  foil.;  identified  with  Mo-

Index  II

275

hammed,  86,  88,  104  foil.;  the
Logos,  104  foil.;  not  absolutely
identical  with  God,  108,  118,  142;
the  Spirit  whence  all  things  have
their  origin,  108;  his  faculties,
115  foil.  See  Adam ;  Mohammed ;
al-insdnu  'l-kdmil

Man,  the  Primal,  86

Materialists,  the,  132,  133

Mercy,  Divine,  98,  99,  131,  160,  208,
245.  256

Metempsychosis,  106,  198,  257

Microcosm,  the.  See  Adam;  Man,
the  Perfect

Miracles,  of  the  prophets,  198,  252
foil.;  of  the  saints,  14,  27-41,  65
foil.,  198,  252  foil.

Mohammed,  imitation  of,  by  Sufis,
15;  the  Paraclete,  104;  the  abso-
lutely perfect  Man,  86,  88,  104
foil.;  the  Qutb,  87,  113,  195;  the
Logos,  87,  88,  104  foil.,  157,  168,

187,  194, 226; pre-existence  of,
87, 157, 187, 223, 240, 255;
appears  in  the  forms  of  saints,
105-106; the  real  author  of  all
miracles,  198,  253-254;  the  Form
of,  119,  135;  the  Idea  of,  109  (see
al-haqiqatu 'l-Muhammadiyya] ;
the  Light  of,  87, 115, 172, 188;
the  Spirit  of,  110-112,  113, 123,

188,  195,  198
Moonlighters,  the,  175

Music, singing and dancing, in

Sufism,  3,  4,  25,  34,  58,  188,  197,

234  foil. See  samd'
Mysticism,  Christian,  51,  128,  139
Mysticism  in  Persian  poetry, 162,

1 80,  184;  in  Arabic  poetry,  162,

163

Name,  definition  of,  93

Name, the, reveals the object

named,  93
Names,  the  Divine,  85,  89,  93,  249

foil. ;  their  effects  in  the  world,  93,

131,  198,  250,  251,  265;  the  three

cardinal,  138;  the  illumination  of

the  Names,  85,  126-127
Naqshbandf  order  of  dervishes,  the,

201
Nature,  correlated  with  Spirit,  120;

identified  with  the  Essence,  153
Neoplatonism,  150

Pantheism,  57,  64,  136,  141,  193,  194

Paraclete,  the,  104

Paradise,  206,  215,  265;  defined  as
selflessness,  64;  the  mirror  of
Divine  Beauty,  100;  created  from

the Form of  Mohammed, 135;
will  not  actually  exist  until  after
the  Resurrection,  135
Paradises,  the  eight,  135,  136
Paradox, the  love  of  mystics  for,

178-180

Path,  the  mystic,  24,  58. See  tariqa
Pen,  the  Divine. See  al-qalam
Pentateuch,  the,  the  nine  tables  of,
J39;  typifies  the  first  stage  in  the
mystical  ascent  of  the  soul,  138
Perfection,  the  Divine  attributes  of,

85,  100. See  kamdl
Persians,  the,  apt  to  seek  an  ulti-
mate principle  of  unity,  163;  the
sacred  Fire  of,  264
Phantasy,  91. See  khaydl
Phenomena,  the  outward  expression
of  reality,  82,  83,  222-223;  an  ilhi-
sion  created  by  the  soul,  226,  258;
compared  to  the  puppets  of  the
shadow-play,  189  foil.,  260-261;  a
bridge  to  reality,  251,  260. See
Being,  contingent  or  phenomenal
Philosophers,  the,  131,  133
Philosophy, speculative, a deadly

science,  118

Physicists,  the,  131,  133
Pilgrimage,  to  Mecca,  the,  179,  222,
238,  239;  interpreted  allegorically,
61;  regarded  with  contempt,  61-
62. See  frajj

Pilgrimage,  the  lesser,  179.  See'umra
Pilgrimage,  to  the  tombs  of  saints,
18,  24;  equivalent  to  making  the
pilgrimage  to  Mecca,  25,  44,  62
Plagiarism,  49
Planes, the five, in which God

reveals  Himself,  91
Plurality,  the  nature  of,  151-153
Poetry,  Islamic  mystical,  the  double
character  of,  163,  168;  the  inter-
pretation of,  169,  184
Poetry,  pre-Islamic,  6,  166,  182
Polytheism,  the  one  unpardonable
sin,  52;  the  mystical  meaning  of,
220

Poverty,  spiritual,  209,  215,  216
Power,  the  Divine  attribute  of,  101,

103,  129

Prayer,  the  essence  of,  61 ;  justifica-
tion of, 158; canonical,- 239;
ecstatic,  61,  79,  213,  214;  super-
erogatory, 5,  21
Prophecy,  130  foil.
Prophet,  the. See  Mohammed
Prophets,  the,  7,  78,  123,  131,  133,
137  foil. ;  superior  to  the  saints,
141;  types  of  Divine  attributes,
149

276

Index  II

Punishment,  future,  132,  136,  137,
160

Qadirite  order  of  dervishes,  the,  81
Qutb,  the,  79, 105,  no,  in,  113,
130,  194,  195,  197,  229,  246

Railer,  the,  179. See  Blamer
Reality,  the  timeless  nature  of,  187,

245,  253,  256

Reason,  the  faculty  of,  115-116
Reason,  universal,  115,  116,  187
Recollection,  the  mystical  practice

of,  7,  8,  13. See  dhikr
Religion. See  Law, the  religious;

Worship

Religion,  Jill's  philosophy  of,  130  foil.
Religions, revealed, contain the

fullest  measure  of  truth,  131
Religious  sects,  the  ten  principal,

131  foil.

Resurrection,  the,  101,  134,  135,  245
Revelation,  the  prophetic,  unity  of,

137;  contrasted  with  the  mystical,

59,  60,  138

Saint,  the  true,  definition  of,  55,  67

Saints,  the  Moslem,  18,  19,  65;  the
hidden  and  unrecognised,  67;
divine  powers  attributed  to,  38;
identified  with  God,  44,  73 ;  inter-
cession of  the,  64,  65,  78;  visits
to  their  tombs,  18,  24,  25,  44,  62;
veneration  of  their  relics,  73-75;
their  functions,  78-79;  hierarchy
of  the,  78,  79,  194,  195;  the  forty
on  whom  the  order  of  the  world
depends,  70;  regarded  as  vice-
gerents of  the  Prophet,  106,  in,
130,  141 ;  essentially  one  with  the
Prophet,  1 06;  question  whether
the  prophets  are  superior  to  the
saints,  141.  See  Miracles

Saintship,  Mohammedan,  founded
on  ecstasy,  56,  78;  the  essence  of
prophecy,  141

Salvation,  future,  ultimately  gained
by  all  souls,  133,  159,  160

Satan,  108,  131,  223.  See  Devil;
Iblis

Seas,  the  seven,  125

Sects, the  ten principal  religious,

I3I-I33
Self-abandonment,  16,  49  foil. See

Ecstasy ;  fand

Self-conceit,  16,  52,  209,  262
Self -mortification,  62,  63,  222. See

mujdhada;  Asceticism
Sense-perception,  the  value  of,  119,

235.  259,  260

Shadow-play,  the,  189  foil.,  198,
260-261

Sight,  the  Divine  attribute  of,  101

Sin,  prevents  God's  mercy  from
being  wasted,  54;  not  essentially
evil,  1 01 ;  determined  by  the
Divine  will  and  nature,  54,  120,
126,  131,  158.  See  Evil

Sirat,  the  bridge  of,  215

Slanderer,  the,  in  Arabic  love-
poetry,  178;  in  mystical  poetry,
205,  215,  232,  233,  234

Sleep,  dreamless,  117,  134

Sobriety,  mystical  term,  195,  197,
199,  200,  218,  220,  221,  228,  243.
See  safrw

Soul,  nature  of  the,  119-121;  five
phases  of  the,  121;  pre-existence
of  the,  56,  184,  193,  204,  206,  214,
236,  240,  249,  258,  259,  265.  See
nafs

Soul,  universal,  116,  197,  233,  240,
259

Speech,  the  Divine  attribute  of,  101,
129

Spirit,  the  created,  109  foil. ;  a  mode
of  the  Divine  Spirit,  109,  no,  146;
described  as  an  angel,  109,  no;
identified  with  the  Logos,  109,
no;  with  Adam,  186.  See  al-
ruh

Spirit,  the  Holy,  82,  108  foil.,  138,
1 86;  the  inbreathing  of,  139,  140,
155;  union  with,  109,  no,  128.
See  rtihu  'l-quds

Spirit,  universal,  197,  233,  240,  245,

253.  255,  259

Stone,  the  Black,  239

Substitution,  the  mystical  doctrine
of,  128

Stiffs,  the,  profess  to  interpret  the
esoteric  teaching  of  Mohammed,
ii,  59,  82,  225,  227;  spiritual
affinity  of,  56

Sufism,  the  basis  of,  4,  5;  not
founded  on  authority  and  tradi-
tion, 1 1 ;  definitions  of,  49,  50

Symbolism,  the  only  means  of  im-
parting mystical  truth,  193,  232,

257
Synteresis,  51

Tablet,  the  Guarded,  59,  102,  106,

in,  H2,  1 1 6,  203. See  al-Lawhu

'l-mahfuz
Telepathy,  instances  of,  27,  28-36,

38-41,  68
Thoughts,  the  power  of  materialising

them,  102,  136
Throne  of  God,  the. See  al-arsh

Index  II

277

Time, spiritual, 223, 245; unreal,

242,  245
Toleration,  religious,  55-57, 159-161 ,

194
Traditions  of  the  Prophet,  5,  6,  15,

50.  59,  64,  79,  91,  94,  97,  106,  112,

121,  122,  136,  139,  159,  204,  2O6,
209,  215,  223,  226,  238,  245,  248,
255,  261,  262,  265

Tribe,  the,  meaning  the  Sufis,  185,

202,  266
Trinity, the Christian, 57, 138,

139

Union,  mystical,  50  foil.,  125  foil.,
1 86,  2 13  foil.;  does  not  exclude
personality,  80 ;  not  dependent  on
any  secondary  cause,  262;  four
stages  of,  1 26  foil.;  three  stages
of,  230,  231 ;  the  highest  stage  of,
55,  218,  221,  227,  228  foil.  See  Ec-
stasy ;  Illumination ;  wisdl ;  jam' ;
ittihdd

Universals,  150

Universe,  the,  compared  to  a  dream,
90-92;  not  unreal,  92,  153;  sub-
stantially divine,  99;  created  in
the  image  of  Man,  121;  the  form
of  the  Logos,  255 ;  description  of,
122  foil.

Vedanta,  the,  97

Vine, the, signifies phenomenal

being,  184,  186
Vision,  the  beatific,  200,  226,  229

in Arabic love-
See raqib and

Watcher, the,

poetry, 178.

murdqib
Will,  the  Divine  attribute  of, 101,

102,  158
Wine,  symbolism  drawn  from,  183

foil.,  199,  263;  signifies  Absolute

Being  or  Divine  Love, 186. See

Intoxication;  Sobriety
World  of  command,  the,  214
World  of  similitudes,  the,  105,  122
World,  the  sensible,  a  dream,  91 ;

created from  the Light  of  Mo-
hammed, 115
Worship,  Divine,  the  end  for  which

all things are created, 131;

different  forms  of,  corresponding

to  the  variety  of  the  Divine  names

and  attributes,  131  foil.
Wrath,  Divine,  103,  131,  136,  208,

245,  256. See  Majesty

Zoroastrianism,  163
Zoroastrians, the, 198, 263. See
Magians

1 8—3

INDEX  III

TECHNICAL  TERMS,  ETC.

abad,  100

'abd,  104

abddl,  195

'abdallah,  94

'abdu  'l-Malik,  94,  127

'abdu  'l-Rahim,  94

adab,  8

'adam,  50

'adani-bdf,  27

'  adani-kubdn,  27

'adhdb,  136

105

a,  98,  104
al-Ahad,  93

ahadiyya,  84,  95,  97,  98,  104,  126
aAa;a7,  12,  21
'dlamu  'l-ghayb,  251,  255
'dlamu 'l-jabarut, 251, 255. See

yafcani*
'dlamu 'l-malakut, 251, 255. See

malakut
'dlamu  'l-mithdl,  122. S0e  World  of

Similitudes

'dlamu  'l-shahdda,  251,  255
alghdz,  165

al-'Alim,  93,  100,  127
alqdb,  229
'amd,  83,  94.  95.  97
anidna,  107
amddd,  233
amr,  54,  90,  TIO,  158
amr  ^//a/»,  no
ana,  96

ana  'l-Haqq,  79,  80,  230
aniyya,  84,  96,  97,  104,  106
aqdasi,  109
'a^/,  no,  112

al-'aqlu  'l-awwal, 115. vS><? Intelli-
gence, the-  i
al-'aqlu  'l-kulll,  115
'a^/M  'l-ma'dsh,  115
ara*u  'l-'ibdddt.  124

'l-ilhad,  124

'l-nuftis,  124
u  'l-shahwa,  124
u  'l-shaqdwa,  124

'l-fab',  124

'l-fughydn,  124
'a>t/,  136
al-'arsh,  106,  no,  in,  112,  114,  136

ashdb-i  ra'y,  29

athar,  93,  100,  158

dthdr,  116,  250,  258

athwdb,  203

awliyd,  78,  224

awtdd,  79,  194,  246

dydt-i  'adhdb,  56

ayydm  Allah,  120

a'ya'w,  151,  152,  154

al-a'ydnu  'l-thdbita,  155

ayn,  243

'ayn,  90,  92,  96,  114,  130,  150,  152,

154,  156,  160,  243,  244
'ayw  thdbita,  151
'aynw  'l-yaqin,  247
a^a/,  100

badal,  194,  246
al-Badi'  ,  135
fea/rf,  204
bandagi,  53

fta^rf,  55,  127,  172,  211,  214,  215,  261
al-baqd  ba'd  al-fand,  55,  218
barzakh,  92,  117,  134
6as/,  24,  199,  256
al-Bdfin,  89
al-baytu  'l-ma'mur,  62
binish,  54
budald,  195
95

chihila,  71

dahriyyun,  132
,  187

/,  89,  95,  97,  98,  104,  106,  203
f,  129

,  5,  13,  I5>  46,  93,  263
50

,  68

falaku  'l-'andfir,  123
al-falaku  'l-aflas,  123
falaku  'l-habd,  123
falaku  'l-hayuld,  123
falaku  'l-fabd'i',  123
/and,  9,  50,  55,  77, 127, 128, 135,

141,  172,  187,  202-205,  2°9.  2I°.

2ii,  214,  215,  218,  238,  261
faqd,  234

Index  III

279

fard,  151

al-fardu  'l-kdmil,  130
fardiyya,  157
fdrid,  164

farq,  219-223. See  tafriqa
al-farqu  'l-thdni,  244
faskh,  257

/ayrf,  153.  155,  193.  233
al-faydu  'l-aqdas,  155
TZ^W,  1  86

fikr,  1  10,  116,  118,  122
firdsa,  34,  59,  68,  69
furqdn,  87
,  8

gawzina,  29

al-Ghdfir,  135

ghafla,  92

al-ghd'ib,  96

al-ghawthu  'l-jdmi',  130

ghayb,  112

al-ghaybiyyatu  'l-kubrd,  246

ghaybubiyya,  96

ghayn,  221,  244

ghazal,  163

'  (habd),  108,  123
hadaq,  199
hadardt,  91
al-Hddi,  131,  265
fiadra,  202
al-hdfiza,  no
Aa/;',  44. See  Pilgrimage
£<#,  94
#a#a,  225
al-hamm,  114
haqd'iq,  126
haqiqa,  2,  91,  96,  104,  105,  106,  151,

251,  260

haqiqatu  'l-haqd'iq,  122
al-fraqiqatu  'l-Mujiammadiyya, 105,

109,  no,  113,  122
##<?#,  130,  142,  152,  154,  157,  160
al-Haqq,  63,  79,  81,  82,  94,  97,  98,

103,  104,  140,  142,  154,  239
al-haqqu  'l-makhltiq  bihi,  109
haqqu  'l-yaqin,  247
Jiayawdn,  51
Aaynz,  208
haytild,  91,  99,  106,  123

*«yy,  51

al-Hayy,  101
hazira,  21,  244

200

,  24,  221

,  173

himma,  74,  117,  123,  136,  253
hudtir,  92,  244
AM^/A,  102
fyukmi,  123

l,  79,  99,  117,  128,  194,  197,  225,
226,  257
rnyjva,  206

,  90,  100,  143,  199,  207
huwa,  96,  152

huwiyya,  84,  96,  97,  104,  106,  107,
"7.  133,  134

f,  265

,  220
ijtihdd,  159
ikhlds,  5,  50,  51,  238
ikhtird'  ,  102
ikhtiydri,  134
t7a/&,  150

ildhiyya,  96,  97,  98
ildhiyytin,  112
't7w,  115,  127
'i/w  ilhdmi,  101
't/mw  'l-yaqin,  247
'i/m-i  ^a'^iy,  20
iltibds,  120
iltifdt,  204

al-imdmu  'l-mubin,  112
imddd,  233,  261
infi'dl,  220
insdn,  155,  156
al-insdnu  'l-hayawdni,  101
al-insdnu  'l-kdmil,  77,  81,  118,  207
irdda,  54

'i5/f?, IO2

ishtiydq,  254
«sm,  93
wrrf/,  37
istiqdma,  53
istitdr,  95
ithbdt,  200,  243

ittihdd,  193,  196,  197,  218-225,  230,
232,  237,  238,  239,  247,  250
/,  238
,  265

jabartit,  91. See  'dlamu  'l-jabavtit
jaldl, 100, 103, 136, 207. See

Majesty;  Wrath
yaw',  216,  218,  219,  221,  222,  227,

230,  232,  233,  234,  238,  240-244,

251,  252,  253,  256,  263,  265
jamd'at-khdna,  21
jamdl,  90,  100,  103,  143,  207. See

Beauty,  the  Divine  attributes  of
jiddriyya,  95
al-jismu  '1-kuHi,  no
;w66a,  14,  73

kaldm,  129

kalima,  149

kamdl,  100,  103,  207. See  Perfection

al-Kdmil,  116

al-kdmilu  'l-tdmm,  77

280

Index  HI

kand'is,  105

kardmdt,  65-68,  254. See  Miracles  of

the  saints
Karim,  66
kashf,  6.  63
hashish,  54
kawn  jdtni' ,  154

khalifa,  113,  115,  130,  141,  155,  241
khalq,  79,  94,  97,  103,  104,  in,  140,

157.  239
khalqi,  98
khalqiyya,  99
khalwat,  ii
khdnaqdh,  7,  27
khashan,  22
al-Khdtam,  130
khdfiru  'l-haqq,  212
hhawf,  256
hhaydl,  91,  no,  118,  122,  125,  134,

170

khidma,  22
khirqa,  14,  22,  23,  43,  70,  73, 165.

500  Frock
khirqa-i  asl,  23
khirqa-i  tabarruk,  23
khustisu  'l-khusus,  78
Aun,  139,  151
Awnya,  229
Aursf,  in,  112
kiishish,  54

labdcha,  74
labbayk,  36,  219
/a&s,  225,  226,  257
ladhdhatu  'l-ildhiyya,  107
WAf,  179. 500  Railer
Idhut,  80,  91,  107,  193,  239
Id'im,  179. 500  Blamer

fa/</.  5i
o/-La/f/,  135
lafifa,  51,  1 06

al-lawhu  'l-mahfiiz  (lawh-i  mahfiiz),
59,  106,  112,  116,  203.  500  Tablet,
the  Guarded
lawzlna,  29,  36,  41
105
.  173

ma'dnl,  227,  250,  251

mahabba,  52

mahall,  91,  123

al-Mahdi,  130

maA^,  244

maAw,  200,  243,  244

ma;'^,  260

malakut.  91. See  'dlamu  'l-malakut

maldma,  52,  208

tna'luh,  150

ma'lum,  45

al-Manndn,  135

tnaqdma,  82

al-maqdmu  'l-mahmud,  136

al-maqd'i  bihi,  158

mavbub,  160

marhtim,  160

mdrid,  124

ma'rifa,  115,  116,  227.  500  Know-
ledge of  God

mas  hi' a,  158

maskh,  257

mathnawi,  163

ntawtu  'l-arwdh,  117

>«a^/,  1 02

mazdhir,  113

mazhar,  126

ma'zul,  220

mi'rdj,  239

mu'am/,  53

al-Mudill,  131,  jf">5

al-mudrika,  no

al-Muhyi,  255

mtijad,  151

mujdhada,  12,  15,  63.  500  Self-
mortification

mujid,  151

mu'jizdt,  254.  500  Miracles  of  the
prophets

mukdlama,  81

mukallamun,  129

mukhayyal,  91

mukhlas,  238

mukhlis,  238

mundzala,  220

munazzah,  152

al-Mun'im,  131

al-Muntaqim,  131

muqarrab,  230

muqayyad,  145

muqim,  29

muqri,  66

tnurdd,  229

murdqabat-i  ahwdl,  12

murdqabat-i  sirr,  13

murdqib,  201,  212

muraqqa',  45

murld,  229

musdfir,  29

musammd,  93

al-ntusawwira,  no

mushabbah,  152

mushdhada,  63. 500  Contemplation

mustahlik,  121

al-mufd',  in

nafasu  'l-Rahmdn,  153

nafkhu  'l-Ruh,  130

wa/s,  22,  44,  55,  89,  109,  no,  114,

IIQ, 135, 203, 208, 2O9, 2IO, 212,
213, 2*15, 220, 233, 236, 237. 50f

Soul

Index  HI

281

a  -nafsu  'l-ammdra,  121
al-nafsu  'l-lawwdma,  216
al-nafsu  'l-mutma'inna,  216
naskh,  257

ndsut,  80,  91,  107,  193,  239
nisab,  152

wyd*.  55

nubuwwatu  'l-tashri',  141

nubuwwatu  'l-wildya,  141

al-Ntin,  in

nuskha,  106

nuzul,  94

, IO,  22,  23,

-i  suhbat,  23

,  64

,  17,  24,  199,  256

,  157,  158
g-a^ar,  157
al-Qadim,  128
al-Qddir,  127,  135
al-Qdhir,  135

al-qalam,  106,  in,  112,  116
#a/6,  50,  113,  123,  156,  159,  212,  236,

238. See  Heart
qasida,  163,  165,  189
qawwdl,  3,  4,  25,  35
#i&/a,  213
qidam,  100

<?#'#,  165

qudsi,  log

al-Qur'dnu  'l-hakim,  126

<?M/&,  79,  86,  87,  105,  no,  in,  194,

195,  229,  246
al-qutbu  'l-haqiqi,  195
qutbdniyya,  195
qutbiyya,  in,  195

,  104,  1  60
al-Rabb,  127
rahim,  160

rahma,  98,  249. See  Mercy
al-Rahmdn,  93,  99,  118,  127,  249
rahmdniyya,  98
yo/'a,  256
yo^ife,  178,  200
r^s,  237
raskh,  257

r»6^,  13,  14
rijdlu  'l-ghayb,  82,  124
rwferf'tyy^,  i,  4,  8,  69,  165,  168
yw&tifcij/ya,  98,  99,  119.  See  Lordship
al-rtify,  109-112, 113,  119,  122,  135,

203,  213,  233,  236,  237.  See  Spirit,

the  created
rtihu  'l-'dlam,  121
rtih  Allah,  135
al-rtihu  'l-a'zam,  255
rtihu 'l-quds, 108, 109, 128, 140.

See  Spirit,  the  Holy

al-sd'atu  'l-kubrd,  135

al-sd'aiu  'l-sughrd,  135

sahib,  23

sdfyibu  'l-jam' ,  241

sdhib  ra'y,  37

saAz^,  243,  244,  248. See  Sobriety

sahwu  'l-jam' ,  228,  231,  232

al-sahwu  'l-thdni,  244

saldt,  239

salsalatu  'l-jaras,  129

sara<f ,  3,  34,  58,  60,  72,  234,  236,.

237. See  Music
shaf,  239
shaqd,  204
shar',  158

shari'a,  3. See  Law
shawq,  55
sAiVA,  49,  51,  220
siddiq,  62
sicft?,  62
si/a^,  90

sifdt-i  bashariyya,  22
al-sifdtu  'l-haqqiyya,  98
sifdti,  129
al-sihru  'l-'dli,  139
sw,  13,  50,  51,  77,  109, no,  114

119,  154,  212
sirr  Allah,  50,  51,  96
al-sirru  'l-ildhi,  109
'l-qadar,  157

'a/,  1 60
sudtir,  107

sw£y,  243,  248. See  Intoxication
sukru  'l-jam',  224,  228,  231
al-stiratu 'l-Muhammadiyya, 119,

J35

ta'ayyun,  94,  157

tadmin,  208

to/Hd,  216

tafriqa,  218,  219,  221,  227,  230,  234,

242,  243,  244,  251,  252,  253
tajalli,  85,  115,  125,  153,  154,  155,

202,  250. See  Illumination
tajsim,  140
takalluf,  49
takhallul,  153
talbis,  1 20
talwin,  243,  244
/awa',  5
tamkin,  244
tanazzul,  94,  126
tanzih,  100,  140

tariqa,  2,  3,  12,  19,  78,  251. See  Path
tashbih,  99,  100,  140
ta'thir,  153
tathlith,  138,  151
tawalli,  202
tawba,  51,  200
tawhid,  50,  52,  121

282  Index  III

tawil,  145
ta'nya,  53
thiydb,  203
al-fiil  wa'l-ard,,  107

'ubiida,  216

'ubtidiyya,  53,  216

'ulitww,  152

utnmu  'l-kitdb,  140

'wmra,  44.  5ce  Pilgrimage,  the  lesser

'uqald'u  'l-majdnin,  6

wahda,  220,  221

wahdatu  'l-wujtid,  82

wdfrid,  98,  104,  105

wdfridiyya,  95-98,  126,  155

wahm,  no,  116,  117,  123,  201,  212

wajh,  109,  no

wali,  78,  in,  130

wdrid,  6 1

wds/tf,  178. 5c«  Slanderer

wa$l,  210,  238

,  46,  6 1
wi$dl,  197,  238
zw'/r,  239
wutfii',  12

wujtid,  50,  221,  234
al-wujudu  'l-muflag,  97
al-wujtidu  'l-sdri,  log
wus'u  'l-'ilm,  115
o>tts'u  'l-khildfa,  115
wus'w  'l-mushdhada,  115

yamin  Allah,  239
;yo^n,  51,  117,  247
al-ydqtitatu  'l-bay4d,  122
yutm,  187

<tl-Zdhir,  89,  153
zdwiya-gdh,  21
zindiq,  62,  63
zuhtir,  95
zurfin,  113
zurqtinaj,  113

CAMBRIDGE  :  PRINTED  BY  J.  B.  PEACE,  M.A.,  AT  THE  UNIVERSITY  PRESS.


