THREE VOYAGES OF A NATURALIST
By Michael J. Nicoll — London: Witherby & Co., 1908
========================================================================

PROVENANCE NOTE (Tower of Babel staging): This text reproduces the 1908 first edition as scanned by the Internet Archive (identifier threevoyagesofna00nico). The 1908 publication is in the public domain. The work is complete, including 'The Great Sea-Serpent' chapter with the 1905 'Valhalla' sighting off Brazil.

========================================================================

« 

.  : 


• 


* 


■/?J? 


THREE    VOYAGES    OF    A    NATURALIST. 


w 

c 

*■■«. 

{H 

<U 

£ 

Q 

< 

5S5 

1-1 

< 

w 

a, 

(-1 

e 

> 

o 

THREE   VOYAGES 


OF    A 


NATURALIST 

BEING    AN    ACCOUNT     OF 

MANY     LITTLE-KNOWN     ISLANDS     IN     THREE 
OCEANS  VISITED  BY  THE  "VALHALLA"  R.Y.S. 

BY 

M.    J.    NICOLL 

MEMBER  OF  THE   BRITISH   ORNITHOLOGISTS'    CKION 


WITH  AN  INTRODUCTION  BY 

The  Rt.  Hon.   THE   EARL  OF  CRAWFORD 

K.T.    F.R.S. 


WITH  FIFTY-SIX  PLATES  FOUR  SKETCH-MAPS  AND  TEXT   ILLUSTRATIONS 


WITHERBY   &    CO. 

326   HIGH   HOLBORN    LONDON 

1908 


,\K3 


- 


i  r 


. 


CONTENTS. 

PAGE. 

Introductory  Note       -         -         -         -         -  xi. 

Preface        - xv. 

A  Voyage  round  Africa. 

CHAP. 

I.— St.  Paul's  Rocks 1 

II. — Fernando  de  Noronha  -        -        -         -  11 

III. — Itaparica,  Bahia  -         -         -         -         -  21 

IV.— South  Trinidad    -----  37 

V.— Martin  Vas  ------  59 

VI. — Tristan  da  Cunha  63 

VII. — Dassen  Island       -----  70 

VIII. — Mozambique     Channel     and     Comoro 

Islands           -----  82 

IX. — La  Foret  d'Ambre,  Madagascar    -        -  93 

X.—Glorioso  Island     -         -         -        -        -  100 

XI. — Assumption  Island        -         -         -  107 

XII.— Aldabra  Island     -         -        -        -        -  114 

XIII.— Seychelle  Islands  -         ...        -  125 

A  Voyage  to  the  West  Indies. 

XIV.— Martinique  -         -        -        -        -        -  139 

XV. — Grand  Cayman  Island  -         -        -  144 

XVI. — Little  Cayman  Island  -        -         -        -  152 


OF  ^N4JU 


vi         VOYAGES   OF  ^P  NATURALIST 


A  Voyage  round  the  World. 

CHAP.  PAGE. 

XVII  .—Monte  Video  and  the  Straits  of  Magellan  157 

XVIII. — Punta  Arenas,  Straits  of  Magellan         -  165 

XIX. — Smytke's    Channel — Gulf    of    Pefias — 

Valparaiso     -         -         -         -         -175 

XX.— Easter  Island        -----  192 

XXI.— Pitcairn  Island     -----  207 

XXII.— Tahiti,  Society  Islands  -  215 

XXIII.— Tutuila  Island,  Samoa-  226 

XXIV.— Upolu  Island,  Samoa  -  231 


LIST    OF    ILLUSTRATIONS 

Facing 
Page 

Frontispiece — "  Valhalla,"  R.Y.S. 

The  Earl   of   Crawford   and   the   live    Birds    and 

Animals  collected  in  1906         . .  . .  . .     xvi. 

Sacred  Ibises  (about  two  months  old)  from  Dassen 

Island        . .  . .  . .  . .  . .  . .  xxiii. 

Sacred  Ibises  (about  four  months  old)  from  Dassen 

Island       . .  . .  . .  . .  . .  . .  xxvi. 

St.  Paul's  Rocks,  mid-Atlantic        . .  . .  . .  5 

Some  of  the  Sharks  caught  off  St.  Paul's  Rocks  . .         9 
Frigate  birds  on  Glorioso  Island      . .  . .  . .        16 

Camp  on  Itaparica  Island     . .  . .  . .  . .        21 

Sketch  of  a  Marine  Animal,  seen  by  Mr.  E.  G.  B. 

Meade-Waldo  and  the  Author  off  the  Coast  of 

jz>razn        «•  ••  ••  ••  •• 

The  Lake,  Itaparica  Island 

South  Trinidad  Island,  near  the  landing  place 

Tree-ferns  on  South  Trinidad  Island 

Noddy  Tern  at  the  nest,  South  Trinidad  Island 

Petrels  on  South  Trinidad  Island.     Downy  young 

of      (Estrelata      trinitatis,      and      adults      of 

(E.  arminjoniana  . .  . .  . .  . .        43 

Crawford's   White   Tern   at   its   nesting   place  on 

South  Trinidad  Island   . .  . .  . .  . .        46 

Adult    and    young    of    Sulci    piscator    on    South 

Trinidad  Island  . .  . .  . .  . .  . .        48 

The  "  Crown  "  rock,  South  Trinidad  Island  . .       50 


22 
29 
36 
39 
41 


vni        VOYAGES   OF  A  NATURALIST 

South  Trinidad  Island,  from  the  highest  peak 
The  tree-fern  forest,  South  Trinidad  Island 

The  Islets  of  Martin  Vas 

Tristan  da  Cunha 

Jackass  Penguin  on  the  nest 

Tackass  Penguins,  Dassen  Island 

Jackass  Penguins,  Dassen  Island 

Cape  Cormorants,  with  sacred  Ibises  in  the  back 

ground,  Dassen  Island 
Jackass  Penguins,  Dassen  Island 
Virgin  forest,  Mayotte  Island 
Foret  d'Ambre,  Madagascar. . 
The  edge  of  the  Foret  d'Ambre,  Madagascar 
Foret  dAmbre,  Madagascar 
Foret  dAmbre,  Madagascar 
Landing  at  Glorioso  Island 
Glorioso  Island 
Glorioso  Island 
Assumption  Island 
Nest  of    Pink-footed   Gannet   (Sula  piscator)   on 

Assumption  Island 
Abbott's  Ibises  on  Aldabra  Island  . . 
Abbott's  Ibises  on  Aldabra  Island  . . 
Abbott's  Ibises  on  Aldabra  Island  . . 
River  near  Port  Victoria,  Mahe,  Seychelles 
Mahe  Island,  Seychelles 
Cascade,   Mahe,   Seychelles.     Home   of   the  Alec 

troenas  pulcherrima 
Water-worn     granite     rocks,    summit     of     Mahe, 

Seychelles 
Landing  place,  Felicite  Island,  Seychelles  . . 


Facing 
Page 

52 

57 
60 
64 
73 
75 
77 

78 

80 

85 

89 

90 

95 

96 

100 

103 

105 

108 

112 
114 
117 
119 
121 
123 

124 

126 

128 


ILLUSTRATIONS 

Valley    of    the    "  Coco-de-Mer,"    Praslin    Island 

Seychelles 
"  Coco-de-Mer,"  Praslin  Island,  Seychelles 
"Coco-de-Mer,"  Praslin  Island,  Seychelles 
St.  Pierre,  Martinique,  one  year  after  the  eruptions 
Leaf  Insects  from  the  Seychelles 
Female  Leaf  Insect  from  the  Seychelles    . . 
Tierra-del-Fuegians  alongside  the   "  Valhalla 

Smvthe's  Channel 
Gray's  Harbour,  Straits  of  Magellan 
Gray's  Harbour,  Straits  of  Magellan 
Human  Skulls  from  Easter  Island 
Pitcairn  Island 
Wooden   house   built   by   the    Mutineers    of    the 

"  Bounty,"  Pitcairn  Island 
Tautira,  Tahiti 


m 


IX 

Facing 
Page 


130 
132 
135 
139 
142 
146 

165 
185 

188 
192 

208 

212 

220 


Sketch-maps  of  the  Voyages. 

Page 

Sketch-map  of  Voyage  round  Africa  . .  . .  xxviii. 

Sketch-map  of  Voyage  to  the  West  Indies  . .      138 

Sketch-map  of  the  first  part  of  the  Voyage  round 

the  World  . .  . .  . .  . .  . .      156 

Sketch-map   of   the   second   part   of   the   Voyage 

round  the  World  . .  . .  . .  238 


INTRODUCTORY    NOTE. 

By  the  Right  Hon.  the  Earl  of  Crawford, 

K.T.,  F.R.S. 

It  is  usually  supposed  that  when  a  man  takes 
upon  himself  to  write  a  Preface  or  an  Introduction 
to  the  work  of  another,  he  should  have  some 
qualification — some  knowledge  of  the  subject  to 
be  dealt  with.  It  is  best,  therefore,  that  I  do  at 
once  disavow  any  qualification,  and  confess  to  a 
lamentable  ignorance  on  the  subject  of  Natural 
History.  My  only  desire  is  to  relate  in  a  few 
words  how  it  came  to  pass  that  the  possibility 
of  the  writing  of  the  book  arose. 

For  many  years  it  has  been  my  lot  to  live  in 
close  communion  with  two  inseparable  hangers-on 
— the  one  rheumatism,  the  other  asthma.  I 
found  relief  by  going  to  sea,  provided  it  was 
towards  the  Sunny  South.  The  cold  and  damp 
of  a  home  winter  I  have  not  faced  for  fifteen 
years. 

In  1902  I  was  preparing  to  go  round  the  world 
when  one  of  my  brother  trustees  of  the  British 
Museum  suggested  that  I  ought  to  bring  back 


xii      VOYAGES     OF    A    NATURALIST 

something  for  the  Natural  History  Department. 
The  result  was  that  I  was  strongly  recommended 
to  obtain  the  assistance  of  Mr.  Michael  Nicoll. 

Such  was  the  beginning  of  a  friendship  which 
has  endured  the  severest  known  test — that  of 
living  together  at  peace  on  a  ship  through  long 
calms. 

We  have  had  three  voyages,  in  the  course  of 
which  we  have  passed  many  southern  seas,  calling 
at  various  islands,  and  always  adding  to  the  store 
for  the  Museum — thus  sailing  down  the  east  coast 
of  South  America  through  the  Straits  of  Magellan 
up  to  Valparaiso  in  Chili,  we  struck  out  west  for 
an  eight  thousand  mile  run  across  the  Southern 
Pacific  Ocean,  visiting  islands  new  to  us  all,  each 
more  charming  than  the  other,  and  so  home  after 
going  round  the  world.  Again,  we  fitted  out  for 
a  less  ambitious  cruise  in  the  West  Indies  and 
the  Gulf  of  Mexico. 

How  we  again  set  forth  for  the  wilder  and  less 
known  Southern  Indian  Ocean,  taking  on  the 
way  the  islands  of  the  South  Atlantic — running- 
through  the  seas  of  Vanderdecken,  though  we  did 
not  see  the  Phantom  Ship  ;  how  we  encountered 
two  nice  little  cyclones  on  the  Madagascar  coast, 
and  got  into  the  group  of  practically  unknown 
islands  to  the  North,  where  man  is  so  seldom  seen 
that  the  birds  take  no  heed  of  the  visitor ;  how 
we  got  ashore,  and  got  off  again  without  hurt — 
all  these  things  are  told  in  the  pages  that  follow. 


INTRODUCTION  xm 

But  what  those  pages  do  not  tell  falls  to  my  lot. 
It  is  to  say  how  much  I  and  my  fellow  trustees 
of  the  British  Museum  have  appreciated  the  work 
done  by  Mr.  Nicoll,  his  skill  in  the  preparation 
of  the  many  hundreds  of  specimens  now  in  the 
National  collections,  and  his  whole-hearted  zeal 
for  his  favourite  science. 

Time  severs  many  links  and  brings  to  some 
promotion.  Thus,  on  his  return  from  our  last 
voyage,  Mr.  Nicoll  was  appointed  by  the  Egyptian 
Government  to  the  post  of  second  in  charge  of 
the  Zoological  Gardens  at  Giza,  near  Cairo,  and 
thus  our  rambles  together  are  as  of  the  past ; 
but  I  trust  that  the  pleasant  hours  in  many  and 
various  scenes  of  the  world  may  be  brought  to 
life  again  in  this  book,  which  I  hope  will  run  to 
many  editions. 

My  "rolling  stone"  has  started.  "Valhalla"  is 
now  taking  in  her  stores,  and  ere  these  words  of 
mine  see  the  ink  of  the  press,  I  shall  be  well  on 
my  way  to  the  far  East — alas,  without  my 
companion. 

CRAWFORD. 


PREFACE. 

Lord  Crawford  has  explained  in  his  most  kind 
Introduction  to  this  little  book  how  it  came  to 
pass  that  I  accompanied  him  on  three  delightful 
cruises  in  his  yacht  "  Valhalla." 

To  visit  so  many  out-of-the-way  spots,  and  to 
see  so  much  of  the  world  under  these  charming 
circumstances,  was  an  ideal  experience  and  a 
generous  education.  Seldom  does  it  fall  to  the 
lot  of  a  naturalist  to  be  given  the  opportunity 
of  examining  the  fauna  of  so  many  rarely- visited 
places,  nor  can  such  experiences  fail  to  produce 
matter  for  life-long  reflection.  No  words  of  mine 
can  express  adequately  the  gratitude  I  feel  to  my 
ever-kind  and  generous  host  for  having  provided 
the  means  to  enjoy  these  rare  and  never-to-be- 
forgotten  experiences  ;  I  can  but  say  that  whatever 
success  may  have  been  achieved  in  making 
collections  during  these  voyages  is  due  to  Lord 
Crawford's  ever-ready  help  and  encouragement. 

I  should  like  also  to  offer  my  very  best  thanks 
to  Dr.  P.  L.  Sclater,  F.R.S.,  to  whom  I  am  in- 
debted  for   my   introduction  to  Lord    Crawford. 


xvi      VOYAGES   OF  A  NATURALIST 

I  am  but  one  of  many  young  ornithologists  who 
have  been  started  and  encouraged  in  their  career 
by  Dr.  Sclater. 

In  the  following  pages  I  have  devoted  a  chapter 
to  each  of  the  most  interesting  and  the  least-known 
islands  or  regions  explored.  Some  places  were 
visited  more  than  once,  and  in  such  cases  all  my 
observations  have  been  brought  together,  so  that 
the  course  of  each  voyage  has  not  been  always 
strictly  adhered  to.  It  will,  therefore,  be  well 
to  give  a  brief  itinerary  of  each  voyage,  and  to 
set  down  the  chief  results  obtained. 

First,  however,  I  must  tell  of  the  good  ship 
that  carried  us  safely  through  calms  and  storms 
by  sail  and  steam  for  over  72,000  miles. 
"  Valhalla,"  R.Y.S.,  is,  I  believe,  the  only  ship- 
rigged  yacht  in  the  world.  She  is  of  1700  tons 
displacement,  and  is  fitted  with  auxiliary  screw, 
which,  under  favourable  conditions,  will  drive  her 
through  the  water  at  a  speed  of  about  10 \  to  11 
knots  an  hour.  It  is  under  sail,  however,  that 
"  Valhalla  "  is  at  her  best,  and  on  many  occasions 
we  logged  16  knots  per  hour.  A  better  "  sea  " 
ship  has  probably  never  been  built,  and  under  the 
worst  conditions  it  was  rarely  that  she  took  any 
water  aboard.  The  way  in  which  she  rode  out  a 
cyclone  off  the  Mozambique  coast  was  wonderful ; 
the  waves  towered  to  a  height  beyond  belief, 
yet  not  a  drop  of  water  came  aboard,  nor  was  any 
damage    sustained.     In    fact,    the    only    serious 


> 


fc 


H 
O 
H 

_: 
O 
o 

CO 

< 


Z 
Q 

CO 

P 

5 

> 


e 


o 
o 


pi 


**  PEEFACE  xvn 

mishap  experienced  during  my  voyages  occurred 
off  Cape  Guardafui,  in  1903,  when  a  sudden  whirl- 
wind snapped  the  jibboom,  hurling  it  into  the  air 
like   a  straw. 

"  Valhalla  "  was  the  first  ship  to  be  fitted  with 
the  "  Brougham  patent  electrical  steering-gear," 
an  invention  which  makes  steering  possible  from 
any  part  of  the  ship.  In  1905  she  took  part  in 
the  famous  yacht  race  for  the  German  Emperor's 
Cup,  from  Sandy  Hook  to  the  Lizard,  and,  although 
by  far  the  largest  yacht,  she  came  in  an  easy 
third. 

The  accommodation  on  board  is  palatial — 
most  ample  "  headroom,"  large  cabins,  and 
electric  light  throughout.  The  freezing  room  is 
capable  of  carrying  many  tons  of  meat,  sufficient 
for  a  very  long  cruise.  The  total  number  of 
crew  carried,  including  officers,  engineers,  and 
stewards,  was  about  sixty-five.  Indeed,  under 
any  consideration,  a  better  or  more  beautiful 
yacht  could  not  be  imagined. 

First   Voyage. 

During  the  first  voyage  our  party  consisted  of 
Lord  Crawford,  Major  L.  B.  Wilbraham,  Dr. 
W.  B.  Macdonald,  and  myself.  We  left  Cowes 
on  19th  November,  1902,  on  a  voyage  which 
lasted  rather  more  than  eight  months,  and  during 
this  time  38,000  miles  were  covered. 

After  calling  for  coal  at  Lisbon,  Madeira,  the 

B 


xviii     VOYAGES   OF  A  NATURALIST 

Canaries,  and  Cape  Verde  Islands,  we  ran  down 
the  Atlantic  coast  of  South  America,  calling  at 
some  of  the  islands,  and  visiting  Bahia  and  Monte- 
video for  coal,  thence  through  the  Straits  of 
Magellan  and  Smythe's  Channel  into  the  South 
Pacific.  From  Valparaiso  we  sailed  westwards 
amongst  the  South  Sea  Islands ;  thence  through 
Torres  Straits  into  the  Indian  Ocean.  After 
leaving  Ceylon  we  steamed  south-westwards  until 
the  African  coast  was  sighted,  hoping — and  in 
this  we  were  partly  successful — to  escape  the  fury 
of  the  monsoon.  The  remainder  of  the  voyage 
home  was  performed  by  way  of  the  Red  Sea  and 
Mediterranean,  and,  after  a  pleasant  passage 
through  these  waters,  Cowes  was  reached  on  1st 
August,  1903. 

Below    is    given    a    detailed    itinerary    of    this 

voyage : — 

Lisbon,  24th  to  26th  November,  1902  ; 

Madeira,    29th   to   30th   November ; 

Las  Palmas,  1st  to  3rd  December  ; 

St.    Vincent,    Cape    Verde    Islands,    10th   to 

12th  December  ; 
St.  Paul's  Rocks,  Mid-Atlantic,  17th  to  18th 

December  ; 
Fernando  de  Noronha,  20th  to  22nd  December; 
Bahia,  Brazil,  26th  December  to  5th  January, 

1903  ; 
Montevideo,  14th  January  to  20th  January ; 
Straits    of   Magellan,    28th   January   to    5th 

February  ; 
Smythe's  Channel,  5th  to  10th  February ; 


PREFACE  xix 

Valparaiso,  14th  to  24th  February ; 
Easter  Island,  10th  to  13th  March  ; 
Pitcairn  Island,  22nd  to  23rd  March  ; 
Tahiti,  Society  Islands,  31st  March  to   17th 

April ; 
Tutuila  Island,  Samoan  Group,  22nd  to  24th 

April ; 
Apia,    Upolu   Island,    Samoa,    25th   to    29th 

April  ; 
Suva,  Fiji  Islands,  3rd  to  6th  May ; 
Thursday  Island,  Torres  Straits,  18th  to  23rd 

May  ; 
Singapore,  3rd  to  9th  June  ; 
Colombo,  17th  to  20th  June  ; 
Aden,  2nd  to  3rd  July ; 
Suez,  10th  July  ; 
Port  Said,  11th  to  13th  July; 
Gibraltar,  22nd  to  26th  July  ; 
Cowes,  1st  August. 

The  collections  made  during  this  voyage  com- 
prised some  two  hundred  and  twenty  bird-skins, 
thirty  mammals,  a  few  hundred  fishes  and  reptiles, 
and  several  hundred  butterflies,  moths,  and  other 
insects. 

No  new  species  of  bird  or  mammal  was  obtained, 

but    a    series    of    skins    of    the   Pitcairn   warbler 

(Tatar e   vaughani)  was    of    considerable   interest. 

The  types  of  this  species  are  spirit  specimens  in 

the  British  Museum  :    no  skins  of  the  bird  had 

ever  been   collected   before  ;    moreover,    the   fact 

that  the  first  plumage  of  the  young  differs  very 

considerably  from  that  of  the  adult  of  this  warbler 

was  unknown  until  we  obtained  specimens. 

b2 


xx         VOYAGES   OF  A  NATURALIST 

Another  interesting  discovery  we  made  was 
that  Richardson's  skua  (Stercorarius  crepidatus) 
winters  in  great  numbers  in  the  Bay  of 
Valparaiso — many  hundred  miles  further  south 
on  the  west  coast  of  America  than  it  has  previously 
been  found. 

The  two  peculiar  species  of  land-birds  which 
inhabit  Fernando  de  Noronha,  the  Brazilian 
convict  island,  are  also  perhaps  worthy  of  notice, 
on  account  of  their  rarity  in  collections.  These 
are  a  flycatcher  (Elainea  ridleyana),  and  a 
warbler  (Vireo  gracilirostris),  which  were  pre- 
viously represented  in  the  British  Museum  by  the 
type-specimens  only. 

Amongst  the  fishes  obtained  during  this  voyage 
one — Corvina  crawfordi — from  the  harbour  of 
Montevideo,  proved  to  be  new  to  science. 

A  species  of  microlepidoptera — Pyroderces 
crawfordi  Walsingham — from  Tahiti,  was  also 
previously  unknown,  and  another  specimen  of 
this  group  of  little  moths — Heliostobes  mathewi — 
from  Valparaiso,  forms  the  only  other  known 
specimen  in  addition  to  the  type. 

Second    Voyage. 

The  second  voyage  upon  which  we  started  from 
Cowes  on  18th  December,  1903,  was  to  the  West 
Indies.  Our  party  for  this  cruise  consisted  of 
Lord  Crawford,  Mr.  C.  R.  Pawson,  Dr.  R.  C. 
MacWalters,    and   myself,   though    at    Barbadoes 


PREFACE  xxi 

we  were  joined  by  Colonel  C.  E.  Swaine,  who 
visited  all  the  West  Indian  Islands  with  us,  but 
left  us  at  Florida  for  a  trip  through  the  United 
States. 

The  voyage  occupied  about  five  months,  and 
after  calling  at  the  Canaries  for  coal  we  steamed 
across  to  Barbadoes,  thence  to  St.  Lucia,  St. 
Vincent,  and  Grenada,  afterwards  running  up  the 
entire  chain  of  islands  to  Jamaica,  the  Caymans, 
and  then  on  to  Cuba.  Thence  we  proceeded  to 
Florida,  where  some  excellent  tarpon  fishing  was 
enjoyed,  and  after  a  flying  visit  to  Key  West, 
for  the  purpose  of  coaling,  we  returned  home 
via  Bermuda  and  the  Azores,  reaching  Cowes 
on  8th  May,  1904.  An  itinerary  of  this  voyage 
is  appended  : — 

Madeira,  24th  to  27th  December,  1903  ; 

Teneriffe,    Canary    Islands,    28th    December 

to  1st  January,  1904  ; 
Barbadoes,    West    Indies,    15th    to    21st 

January  ; 
St.  Lucia,  22nd  to  25th  January  ; 
St.  Vincent,  25th  to  27th  January  ; 
Cariacou,  27th  to  28th  January  ; 
Grenada,   28th  January  to   1st  February ; 
St.  Lucia  (second  visit),  2nd  to  5th  February  ; 
Martinique,    5th   to    7th   February ; 
Dominica,  7th  to  10th  February  ; 
Montserrat,  10th  to  12th  February  ; 
St.  Kitts,  12th  to  15th  February  ; 
Antigua,  15th  to  17th  February  ; 
St.  Kitts  (second  visit),  17th  to  18th  February; 
St.  Croix,  19th  to  21st  February  ; 


xxii      VOYAGES   OF  A  NATURALIST 

St.  Thomas,  21st  to  24th  February  ; 
Porto  Rico,  24th  to  26th  February ; 
Jamaica,  29th  February  to  8th  March  ; 
Grand  Cayman,  9th  to  13th  March  ; 
Little  Cayman,  13th  to  14th  March  ; 
Havana,  Cuba,  17th  to  21st  March  ; 
Punta  Gorda,Florida,22nd  March  to  4th  April ; 
Key  West,  Florida,  5th  to  8th  April ; 
Bermuda,  13th  to  20th  April ; 
St.  Michael's,  Azores,  29th  April  to  2nd  May  ; 
Cowes,  8th  May. 

The  number  of  birds  obtained  during  this  trip 
to  the  West  Indies  somewhat  exceeded  four 
hundred,  of  which  the  following  three  proved  to 
be  new  to  science  : — 

Dendroeca  crawfordi,  from  Little  Cayman ; 

Vireo  laurae,  from  Grenada ; 

Pitangus  caymanensis,  from  Grand  Cayman. 

The  birds  found  in  all  the  West  Indian  Islands 
are  of  great  interest,  as  no  two  islands  have  an 
avifauna  exactly  similar,  so  that  all  our  collections 
were  of  value.  The  Cayman  Islands  specimens 
are  worthy  of  particular  notice,  as  nearly  all  the 
resident  birds  are  peculiar  to  the  islands,  and 
there  were  previously  very  few  specimens  from 
this  locality  in  the  British  Museum. 

About  one  hundred  fishes  and  reptiles  were 
also  obtained,  but  not  one  was  new,  nor  were 
there  any  of  great  rarity.  The  most  interesting, 
perhaps,  were  the  five  fine  specimens  of  tarpon, 
which  we  caught  off  the  Florida  coast.  These 
ranged  in  size  from  40  to  95  pounds  in  weight, 


X 


x 

i— i 

X 
X 
< 


o 


S-i 

x    a 


P 
O 

M 

^S 

x 

X 
I— I 

PQ 


P5 

o 
< 

x 


02 


PREFACE  xxni 

and  I  preserved  the  skins  of  four  of  them  on  our 
homeward  voyage. 

About  two  hundred  butterflies,  moths,  and 
other  insects  were  also  obtained. 

The  most  interesting  islands  visited  during  our 
sojourn  in  the  West  Indies  were  Martinique, 
famous  for  its  volcanic  eruptions  in  1902,  and  the 
Cayman  Islands,  which  have  been  but  seldom 
visited  by  a  naturalist. 

Third    Voyage. 

It  was  not  until  the  autumn  of  1905  that  I  again 
set  out  in  the  "  Valhalla "  on  my  last  and, 
perhaps,  most  interesting  voyage. 

On  this  cruise  we  had  a  somewhat  larger  party, 
for  besides  Lord  Crawford,  the  Hon.  Walter 
Lindsay,  Dr.  A.  Dean,  and  myself,  Mr.  E.  G.  B. 
Meade- Waldo  was  invited  to  accompany  us  for 
the  purpose  of  collecting  insects,  and  thus  I  was 
able  to  devote  my  whole  time  to  birds,  mammals, 
fishes,  and  reptiles,  with  the  consequence  that 
examples  of  several  new  species  were  obtained. 

We  sailed  from  Cowes  on  8th  November,  1905, 
and,  after  calling  at  Las  Palmas,  ran  down  amongst 
the  South  Atlantic  Islands  to  the  Cape  of  Good 
Hope ;  thence  northwards  through  the  in- 
hospitable waters  of  the  Mozambique  Channel  to 
Madagascar  and  the  little-known  islands  which 
lie  to  the  north-west.  After  visiting  the 
Seychelles  we  returned  home  via  the  Suez  Canal, 


xxiv     VOYAGES   OF  A  NATURALIST 

completing  a  voyage  of  seven  months,  during  which 
time  we  had  covered  about  19,000  miles.  The 
following  is  the  detailed  itinerary  : — 

Las  Palmas,  13th  to  16th  November,  1905  ; 
Put  back  to  Las  Palmas  owing  to  illness  of 

one  of  the  crew — 17th  November; 
St.  Paul's  Rocks,  2nd  December ; 
Bahia,  10th  to  30th  December  ; 
South  Trinidad,  3rd  to  5th  January,  1906  ; 
Martin  Vas,  5th  January  ; 
Tristan  da  Cunha,  17th  to  20th  January ; 
Cape  Town,  28th  January  to  8th  February  ; 
Durban,   14th  to  15th  February ; 
Mayotte,  Comoro  Islands,  23rd  February  to 

3rd  March  ; 
Diego  Suarez,  Madagascar,  4th  to  9th  March ; 
Glorioso  Island,  10th  to  11th  March; 
Assumption  Island,  12th  to  13th  March ; 
Aldabra,  13th  to  16th  March ; 
Aground  on  Assumption,  16th  to  17th  March  ; 
Mahe,    Seychelles    Islands,    22nd    March    to 

2nd  April ; 
Praslin  and  Felicite  Islands,  Seychelles,    2nd 

to  5th  April ; 
Mahe  (second  visit),  5th  to  8th  April ; 
Aden,  14th  to  17th  April ; 
Suez,  23rd  April ; 
Port  Said,  24th  to  27th  April ; 
Gibraltar,  5th  to  8th  May  ; 
Cowes,  13th  May,  1906. 

The  results  obtained  during  this  voyage  were 
more  important  than  those  of  the  two  preceding 
ones. 

The    collection    of    bird-skins,    numbering    five 


PREFACE  xxv 

hundred,  contained  specimens  of  eight  species 
new  to  science.  Besides  these  there  were  many 
rarities,  few  of  the  birds  of  the  small  coral  islands 
to  the  north-west  of  Madagascar  having  been 
previously  represented  in  the  National  collection. 
The  new  species  discovered  were  as  follows  : — 
A  white  tern   (Gygis  crawfordi)   from   South 

Trinidad  ; 
A  diving  petrel  (Pelecanoides  dacunhae)  from 

Tristan  da  Cunha  ; 
A  paradise-flycatcher  {Terpsiphone    lindsayi) 

from  Mayotte,  Comoro  Islands  ; 
A  swift  (Cypselus  mayottensis)  from  Mayotte, 

Comoro   Islands ; 
A    ground-cuckoo     (Centropus     assiimptionis) 

from  Assumption  Island ; 
A    turtle-dove      (Turtur    assumptionis)    from 

Assumption  Island  ; 
A  heron  (Butorides  crawfordi)  from  Assump- 
tion Island  ; 
A  sunbird   (Ginnyris  mahei)   from    Seychelle 
Islands. 
Many   fishes   and   reptiles   were   collected,    but 
none  of  these  proved  to  be  new  or  of  great  interest, 
except     a     large    specimen     of     the      ribbon-fish 
(Regalecus),  which  was  obtained  at  Cape  Town. 
This  fish  is  rare  in  collections,  its  pelagic  habits 
making  its  capture  difficult. 

Of   the   insects   obtained   I   learn   that   several 
belong  to  new  species,  or  are  otherwise  rare  or 


xxvi     VOYAGES   OF  A  NATURALIST 

important,  but  at  present  I  believe  nothing  has 
been  published  concerning  them. 

The  most  interesting  islands  visited  were  un- 
doubtedly South  Trinidad,  Dassen  Island, 
Glorioso,  Assumption,  Aldabra,  the  Comoros,  and 
Seychelles,  all  of  which  have  been  fully  dealt  with 
in  their  proper  place  in  the  following  pages. 

This,  then,  is  a  brief  outline  of  my  three  voyages 
on  the  "  Valhalla,"  and  if  some  of  the  notes  in 
the  following  chapters  are  not  as  full  as  is  desirable 
I  must  remind  my  readers  that  our  stay  in  many 
of  the  "  ports  of  call "  was  of  very  short  duration — 
a  difficulty  only  to  be  expected  on  a  long 
voyage,  when  coaling  or  other  necessary  though 
wearisome  proceedings  effect  frequent  delays  in 
the  larger  ports. 

If,  however,  my  account  of  our  experiences 
should  at  some  future  time  prove  of  use  to  any  of 
my  readers  who  themselves  set  off  for  these 
distant  parts  of  the  world  in  search  of  natural 
history  treasures,  or  if  the  following  pages  give 
to  the  reader  even  a  fraction  of  the  pleasure 
which  I  myself  experienced  in  visiting  the  islands 
therein  portrayed,  I  shall  feel  that  the  book  has 
not  been  written  wholly  in  vain. 

M.  J.  N. 

Giza,  Egypt. 

January,    1908. 


> 


> 


X 


< 

DC 

z 

s 

M 


o 


o 

EC 


o 


Eh 

_ 
O 
- 


EC 
— 

n 


r. 


A     VOYAGE     ROUND     AFRICA. 


y*0 


North 


Atlantic      / 


yo 


At  la  a/V/  c     Ocean 

\ 
\ 

^Ynstan  da  C 


Cunha 


.42 


6» 


47 


J> 


£ 


jL 


CO. 


ap 


SKETCH-MAP    TO    SHOW    THE    COURSE    OF    THE    VOYAGE    EOT7XD    AFSICA. 


CHAPTER    I. 

saint  paul's  rocks. 

Saint  Paul's  Rocks,  situated  in  mid- Atlantic, 
about  540  miles  from  the  nearest  point  of  the 
coast  of  South  America,  and  15  miles  north  of 
the  equator,  are  probably  the  most  interesting 
rock-islets  in  the  world. 

Roughly  about  half  a  mile  in  circumference, 
this  group  is  composed  of  five  peaks  of  rock,  the 
highest  of  which  is  only  64  ft.  above  the  level  of 
the  sea.  Darwin  has  stated*  that  Saint  Paul's 
group  is  not  volcanic,  and  thus  forms  the  only 
island  in  the  world,  with  the  exception  of  the 
Seychelles,  that  is  of  neither  volcanic  nor  coral 
formation. 

These  rocks  are  surrounded  by  deep  sea,  and  the 
Challenger  Expedition  could  discover  no  ridge 
under  the  sea  to  connect  them  either  with  the 
mainland  or  with  the  islands  of  Fernando  de 
Noronha,  about  200  miles  to  the  south. 

Owing  to  their  small  size,  Saint  Paul's  Rocks 
cannot  be  seen,   even  in  clear  weather,   from   a 

*  "Voyage  of  the  'Beagle.'" 


2  VOYAGES   OF  A  NATURALIST 

greater  distance  than  eight  miles.  Their  appear- 
ance from  a  short  distance  is  most  peculiar,  the 
two  highest  peaks  being  white  with  the  droppings 
of  the  numerous  sea-birds  which  nest  on  them, 
while  the  remainder  are  of  a  deep  greenish-black, 
very  dark  in  contrast  to  the  white  peaks. 
The  outlying  rocks,  as  can  be  seen  during  the  fall 
of  the  swell,  are  much  worn  below  the  water-line. 

My  first  visit  to  these  interesting  rocks  was 
made  in  1902,  during  my  first  voyage  with  Lord 
Crawford  in  the  "  Valhalla."  They  were  sighted 
from  aloft  at  1.30  p.m.  on  the  17th  December, 
and  shortly  afterwards  became  visible  from  the 
deck. 

Numbers  of  gannets  appeared  and  circled  round 
the  yacht,  while,  as  we  gradually  drew  near, 
great  numbers  of  birds  were  to  be  seen  flying  in  all 
directions  round  the  highest  peaks. 

At  3.30  we  were  close  in,  and  shortly  afterwards 
a  boat  was  lowered  and  we  set  out  for  the  shore. 
The  weather  was  perfectly  fine,  but,  owing  to  a 
slight  swell,  the  surf  was  breaking  on  the  rocks 
in  a  most  forbidding  manner.  As  we  rowed  closer, 
however,  we  found  that,  by  waiting  and  choosing 
the  right  moment,  the  boat  could  be  backed  in 
to  a  projecting  portion  of  the  rock,  and  then,  as 
we  rose  on  the  swell,  it  was  not  difficult  to  jump 
ashore. 

Accordingly  we  backed  in  carefully,  and  took 
our  turn  to  wait  for  the  lift  of  the  swell  and  then 


BOOBIES  3 

jump.  At  one  moment  the  rock  towered  above 
us,  at  the  next  the  boat  flew  upwards  until  it  was 
level  with  the  landing  place — then  was  the  time 
to  jump,  and  as  one  jumped  the  boat  was  pulled 
out  clear  of  the  surf.  Thus  one  by  one  we  landed 
safely. 

As  soon  as  we  were  ashore  we  noticed  a  vast 
number  of  crabs*  crawling  about  in  all  directions. 
Some  of  these  crabs  were  of  a  green  colour  ;  these 
were  the  smaller  and  more  numerous,  perhaps  the 
younger  ones,  while  others,  which  were  larger, 
were  of  a  bright  vermilion. 

The  landing  place  we  had  chosen  was  at  the 
foot  of  the  highest  peak,  which  Moseley  calls 
Booby  Hill,t  and  certainly  this  name  is  well 
chosen,  for  the  peak  was  covered  with  boobies, 
a  species  of  gannet — Sulci  leucogaster — and  their 
nests  were  so  close  together  that  it  was  almost 
impossible  to  walk  without  stepping  on  either  eggs 
or  young.  The  young  boobies,  sometimes  two 
in  a  nest,  were  of  all  ages,  from  bare,  newly-hatched 
chicks  to  fully-fledged  young. 

The  nest  of  this  gannet  is  merely  a  collection  of 
old  and  dirty  feathers  and  loose  stones.  Round 
about  each  nest  were  quantities  of  flying  fishes 
in  all  stages  of  decay,  brought  there  and  disgorged 
by  the  parent  birds  as  food  for  the  young.  The 
freshest  part  of  this  food  supply,  we  soon  discovered, 

*  Grapsaa  strigosus. 

f  "  Notes  of  a  Naturalist  on  H.M.S.   'Challenger.'" 


4  VOYAGES   OF  A  NATURALIST 

made  excellent  bait  for  the  innumerable  fishes 
which  swarmed  round  the  rocks ;  but  as  we 
found  later,  by  accident,  the  best  and  freshest 
bait  was  to  be  procured  by  gently  prodding  an 
old  gannet  while  it  was  sitting  on  its  nest,  when 
it  would  at  once  disgorge  a  fish. 

It  was  by  no  means  pleasant  to  walk  about 
amongst  these  nesting  birds,  and,  indeed,  we  found 
it  to  be  a  most  painful  proceeding,  as  both  old  and 
young  pecked  viciously  at  our  legs.  The  young 
birds  were  especially  annoying,  and  would  get 
out  of  their  nests  and  follow  us,  snapping  savagely 
at  our  legs  with  their  long  sharp  bills. 

At  the  base  of  Booby  Hill  I  came  on  a  colony 
of  noddy  terns.*  This  bird  lays  its  single  egg 
on  the  bare  rock.  Most  of  the  eggs  were  hard  set, 
and  there  were  many  young  ones  of  various  ages. 
Although  very  tame,  the  noddies  were  not  so  bold 
as  the  boobies,  and  we  did  not  succeed  in  catching 
more  than  one  adult  bird  of  this  species  with  our 
hands. 

Running  about  among  the  noddies  we  saw  a 
turnstone,f  a  well-known  visitor  in  the  spring 
and  autumn  to  the  shores  of  the  British  Isles. 
In  the  winter  it  is  distributed  practically  over 
the  whole  world.  This  bird  has  not  hitherto  been 
recorded  from  Saint  Paul's  Rocks,  however,  and 
it  was  probably  resting  there  while  on  migration. 

Besides  the  birds  already  mentioned,  a  second 

*  Anous  8tolidus.  f  Strepsilas  interpres. 


K5 


I 


H 


u 


,    ► 


t 

1 


CO 

M 

o 

o 
p; 

CO 


CO 


\  \ 


li4 


m  m 


NESTING   AT   ALL   SEASONS  5 

species  of  noddy  tern — Micranous  leucocapillus — 
a  smaller  and  darker  bird  than  the  common  noddy, 
was  seen  and  obtained.  This  small  tern  was  not 
nearly  so  abundant  as  the  larger  species,  and  it 
was  not  found  nesting  on  Booby  Hill.  It  was 
also  far  more  shy,  and  specimens  were  only 
obtained  with  difficulty. 

Thus  there  are  only  three  species  of  birds  which 
nest  on  Saint  Paul's  Rocks,  and  they  appear  to 
breed  all  the  year  round.  The  naturalists  of  the 
"  Beagle  "  landed  there  in  February,  those  of  the 
"  Challenger "  in  August,  while  we  were  there 
in  December,  and  on  all  of  these  occasions  both 
eggs  and  young  were  found. 

One  of  the  sailors  landed  with  us  in  the  boat 
to  collect  eggs  for  eating  purposes.  Whether  any 
of  the  crew  ate  any  I  never  heard,  but  as  nearly 
all  those  we  obtained  were  hard  set,  I  should 
imagine  they  did  not.  I  have  a  vivid  recollection, 
too,  of  being  called  up  in  the  small  hours  of  the 
following  morning,  with  the  news  that  several 
of  the  eggs  had  hatched  during  the  night. 

From  the  top  of  the  highest  peak  one  could  get 

a  good  view  of  the  rocks.     They  are  divided  up 

into   groups   of  jagged  peaks,   each  group  being 

separated  from  its  neighbour  by  a  channel  through 

which  the  sea  rushes  with  great  violence.     The 

rock   on   which   we   landed    appeared   to   be   the 

largest,  both  in  height  and  circumference. 

At  the  foot  of  Booby  Hill  were   several  tidal 

c 


6  VOYAGES   OF  A  NATURALIST 

pools  in  which  many  species  of  small  fishes  were 
seen,  but  all  attempts  to  catch  them  with  a  net 
proved  futile.  A  great  many  fish  were,  however, 
caught  in  the  sea  by  fishing  from  the  rocks.  Of 
these  a  species  of  "cavalli"  weighed  in  some  cases 
as  many  as  twelve  pounds.  Fishing  here  pre- 
sented a  somewhat  unusual  difficulty,  for  sharks 
swarmed  in  incredible  numbers,  and  it  was  a 
difficult  task  to  avoid  hooking  them  instead  of 
more  serviceable  game ;  indeed,  so  numerous 
were  the  sharks  that,  on  our  return  to  the  ship, 
we  found  that  during  our  absence  no  less  than 
twenty  had  been  caught,  all  of  them  at  no  greater 
distance  than  two  hundred  yards  from  the  shore. 

As  to  the  other  inhabitants  of  the  rocks,  Darwin 
mentions  the  following  :  A  pupiparous  fly  (living 
as  a  parasite  on  the  booby),  a  beetle  (Quedius), 
a,  tick,  a  small  brown  moth  belonging  to  a  genus 
which  feeds  on  feathers,  and  a  woodlouse. 
Moseley  says  :  "  We  found  two  species  of  spiders 
....  and,  in  addition  to  the  insects  noted  by 
Darwin,  the  larva  of  a  moth,  apparently  a 
Tortrix,  and  a  small  dipter  ....  but  could  not 
find  either  the  beetle  or  woodlouse." 

We  searched  carefully  and  obtained  specimens 
of  the  feather-feeding  moth,  a  tiny  beetle,  and  a 
small  cricket,  but  failed  to  find  either  the  wood- 
louse  or  the  spider.  The  pupiparous  fly  was, 
however,  noticed  on  the  booby. 

The  heat  on  Saint  Paul's  Rocks  was  intense, 


SHARKS  7 

the  sun,  beating  down  on  the  bare  rock,  made  the 
place  like  an  oven,  and  the  only  shade  was  that 
thrown  from  Booby  Hill  towards  evening. 

Shortly  before  sunset  we  went  on  board,  fully 
determined  to  land  the  next  morning  on  another 
part  of  the  rocks.  Getting  off  was,  we  found,  a 
much  more  difficult  business  than  landing,  but 
at  last  it  was  safely  accomplished.  Several  fishes 
and  one  bird  were  dropped  into  the  water  during 
the  process  of  embarkation,  and  they  were  im- 
mediately taken  by  sharks,  so  it  was  just  as  well 
that  none  of  our  party  slipped  into  the  water. 
Perhaps  a  shark  is  not  so  dangerous  to  human 
beings  as  it  is  usually  supposed  to  be.  That 
there  are  some  sharks  which  will  attack  a  man 
in  the  water  is,  of  course,  certain,  but  I  think 
that  there  are  not  very  many  that  will  do  so. 

During  two  visits  made  to  Saint  Paul's  Rocks 

we  tried  to  ascertain  the  nature  of  the  food  of 

these    sharks.     We    cut    open    and    examined    at 

least  thirty  of  them,  but  in  only  one  did  we  find 

the    remains    of    food — a    half-digested    fish.     Of 

what,   then,   does  their  food  consist  ?     It  seems 

incredible   that   they   can  feed  entirely  on  fishes, 

as   anyone   will   realise   who   has   seen   the   slow, 

almost  lazy,  way  in  which  they  take  their  prey. 

Judo-ino;   from   the   enormous   number   of   sharks 

round  Saint  Paul's  Rocks,  there  should  be  a  great 

supply  of  food.     Of  course  it  is  possible  that  they 

can  exist  for  a  length  of  time  without  food.     That 

c  2 


8  VOYAGES   OF  A  NATURALIST 

they  go  elsewhere  for  their  food  is  not  likely, 
as  these  rocks  are  far  away  from  any  other  land. 

During  our  second  visit  a  shark,  which  had  been 
shot  with  a  rifle,  sank,  and  as  all  its  companions, 
of  which  there  were  a  great  number  round  the  ship 
at  the  time,  followed  it  down,  and  on  reappearing 
refused  to  look  at  our  baits,  I  imagine  that  they 
devoured  it. 

During  the  night  of  17th  December  we  steamed 
slowly  away  from  the  rocks,  but  at  daylight  we 
returned,  and,  lowering  a  boat,  again  landed. 
This  time  we  went  ashore  on  one  of  the  rocks  at 
the  further  end  of  the  bay,  which  is  formed  by 
the  semi-circular  nature  of  the  group. 

The  weather  being  even  finer  and  the  sea 
smoother  than  on  the  previous  day,  we  landed 
without  difficulty,  and  at  once  climbed  to  the 
highest  peak  of  this  rock,  which  is  60  feet  in 
altitude,  and  the  second  highest  of  the  group. 

Here  I  was  delighted  to  find  the  nests  of  the 
smaller  noddy  tern,  which  I  have  mentioned  as 
having  been  seen  on  the  previous  day.  This 
bird  lays  its  egg  in  a  most  curiously  constructed 
nest.  A  mass  of  fine  seaweed  is  cemented  to  a 
small  jutting  ledge  of  rock,  the  cement  being  formed 
of  the  droppings  of  the  birds.  We  found 
altogether  four  of  these  nests,  each  of  which  con- 
tained a  single  egg.  A  few  of  the  larger  noddies 
were  also  breeding  here,  but  these,  as  on  Booby 
Hill,  had  laid  their  eggs  on  the  bare  rock,  without 


ss 


00 

_ 
O 

x 

Ph 

Eh' 

fa 
o 

Eh 
X 

o 

K 

H 

a 

EH 


o 

00 


A  SECOND  VISIT  9 

making  any  attempt  at  a  nest.  Moseley,  in  describ- 
ing these  bracket-like  nests,  suggests  that  it  is 
only  the  strongest  birds  that  take  possession  of 
the  favourable  points  of  the  rock  on  which  they 
are  placed,  although  he  adds  a  footnote  to  the 
effect  that  at  the  time  of  his  visit  he  did  not  realize 
that  two  species  of  noddies  inhabit  Saint  Paul's 
Rocks.  It  is,  however,  quite  obvious  that  it 
is  not  the  strongest  birds,  but  only  the  smaller 
noddies,  which  occupy  these  ledges,  since  the 
larger  noddy  was  in  no  instance  found  nesting  upon 
them. 

This  day,  while  we  were  on  the  rocks,  a  ship 
passed  by,  close  in.  It  is  only  occasionally  that 
ships  sight  these  rocks,  and  then  only  to  determine 
their  exact  position.  No  one,  it  is  almost  certain, 
had  landed  on  Saint  Paul's  Rocks  since  the  visit 
of  the  "  Challenger "  until  we  were  there  just 
twenty-nine  years  later. 

At  4.30  p.m.  on  the  18th  December  we  sailed 
away,  bound  for  Fernando  de  Noronha,  and  as  I 
stood  on  deck  and  watched  these  interesting  little 
islands  fading  away  in  the  distance,  I  little  thought 
that  in  three  years'  time  it  would  be  my  fortune 
to  see  them  again. 

It  was  on  my  third  voyage  in  1905,  while  on  the 
way  to  Brazil,  that  Lord  Crawford  suggested  that 
we  should  renew  our  acquaintance  with  these 
little-known  islands.  Shaping  our  course  ac- 
cordingly, we  sighted  the  rocks  on  2nd  December, 


10         VOYAGES   OF  A  NATURALIST 

and,  after  a  few  minutes'  steaming,  drew  up  close 
to  our  former  landing  place. 

The  weather  was,  unfortunately,  by  no  means 
so  kind  on  this  occasion  as  on  our  former  visit. 
A  strong  wind  was  blowing,  and  the  surf  was  break- 
ing with  great  fury  on  the  foot  of  Booby  Hill. 
It  might  have  been  possible  to  land,  but  we  de- 
cided that,  under  the  conditions  prevailing, 
it  was  too  risky  to  venture  close  to  the  rocks, 
therefore  we  were  forced  to  content  ourselves 
with  a  distant  view  of  the  boobies. 

Some  time  was,  however,  spent  over  shark 
fishing,  and  we  had  hopes  that  the  weather  might 
improve.  A  number  of  sharks  were  caught,  and 
in  this  way  we  spent  the  greater  part  of  a  day. 
As  the  sea  was  still  high  at  sunset,  Lord 
Crawford  decided  that  it  was  not  worth  while  to 
remain  longer,  so  we  sailed  for  Bahia,  Brazil. 

During  this  visit  to  Saint  Paul's  Rocks  we 
noticed  that  the  birds  were  present  in  about  the 
same  numbers  as  before.  Boobies  of  all  ages  were 
flying  round  the  ship  the  whole  time  we  were 
there,  and  many  noddies  were  also  seen. 


CHAPTER    II. 

FERNANDO    DE    NORONHA. 

On  20th  December,  1902,  the  island  of  Fernando 
de  Noronha  was  sighted,  and  at  4  p.m.  we  dropped 
anchor  off  the  settlement. 

On  the  island  is  a  Brazilian  convict  settlement, 
and  permission  to  land  is  by  no  means  easy  to 
obtain.  The  "  Challenger "  Expedition  was  not 
allowed  to  make  collections  there,  and  Mr.  Ridley, 
who  visited  the  island  in  1887,  was,  previously  to 
our  visit,  the  only  naturalist  who  had  collected 
with  any  thoroughness.  Of  the  three  species  of 
land-birds  which  he  obtained,  two  proved  to  be 
new  to  science. 

It  was  therefore  a  matter  of  great  satisfaction 
that,  by  the  courtesy  of  the  Governor  of  the 
island,  we  were  allowed  to  land  and  make  natural 
history  collections,  and  not  only  that,  but  were 
also  generously  provided  with  guides  and 
horses. 

The  most  remarkable  physical  feature  of 
Fernando  de  Noronha  is  a  gigantic  column  of 
rock  standing  erect  on  the  highest  peak.     This 


12         VOYAGES   OF  A  NATURALIST 

column  appears  to  be  a  smooth  mass  of  rock, 
and  looks  as  if  a  slight  push  would  send  it  head- 
long into  the  sea.  Another  marked  feature,  which 
is  visible  at  a  considerable  distance,  is  an  opening 
through  the  sea-cliff  at  the  south-western  extremity 
of  the  island.  This  boring  has  been  made  by  the 
sea,  and  is  known  as  the  "  hole  in  the  wall." 

Just  opposite  our  anchorage,  and  close  to 
the  settlement,  there  was  also  a  magnificent 
"  blowhole  "  in  the  cliff,  through  which  the  air 
was  driven,  by  the  rise  and  fall  of  the  sea,  with  a 
loud  roar  every  few  seconds. 

The  island  slopes  gradually  upwards  from  the 
sea,  and  its  general  appearance  from  a  little  distance 
is  green  and  fertile.  When  we  landed  we  found 
that  the  cause  of  this  apparent  fertility  was  a 
thick  growth  of  fig  trees,  which  covered  most  of 
the  island.  Maize  is,  however,  grown  at  certain 
seasons  of  the  year,  and  in  a  letter  received  by 
Doctor  Macdonald  some  months  after  our  visit, 
one  of  the  Englishmen  living  on  the  island  describes 
it  as  looking  very  green  and  fresh,  owing  to  the 
abundance  of  the  maize  crop. 

As  soon  as  a  boat  had  been  lowered  we  started 
for  the  shore.  The  surf  was  breaking  with  such 
fury  on  both  the  charted  landing  places  that  we 
were  forced  to  abandon  the  idea  of  getting  in  at 
these  spots  ;  but  we  found  that,  by  backing  the 
boat  to  a  jutting  mass  of  rock,  we  could,  with  a 
little  difficulty,  scramble  ashore. 


A  CONVICT  SETTLEMENT  13 

The  Governor,  accompanied  by  two  English- 
men who  manage  the  telegraph  and  Lloyd's 
signal  station,  had  come  down  to  meet  us,  and, 
thus  accompanied,  we  proceeded  to  the  settle- 
ment, where  arrangements  were  made  for  a  collect- 
ing expedition  on  the  following  day. 

While  we  were  at  the  Governor's  house  a  bugle 
was  sounded  to  summon  the  convicts.  There 
were  about  200  of  them,  all  under  long  sentences, 
most  of  them  having  been  convicted  of  murder. 
One  man,  who  was  told  off  as  a  guide  to  our  party, 
was  said  to  have  committed  seven  murders,  and 
as  he  owned  to  five  of  them,  I  have  no  doubt  that 
we  were  correctly  informed. 

After  their  names  had  been  called,  the  convicts 
dispersed  for  the  night,  about  fifty  being  locked 
up  in  the  gaol,  and  the  rest  going  off  to  their  own 
houses.  Most  of  these  men  have  wives  and 
families,  and,  as  far  as  we  could  judge,  their 
lives  were  not  hard.  They  have  to  work  three 
hours  a  day  for  the  State,  but  the  rest  of  the  day 
they  can  spend  as  they  like,  though  all  have  to 
appear  when  the  bugle  is  sounded  in  front  of  the 
Governor's  House. 

Shortly  after  the  convicts  had  dispersed  we 
started  for  the  landing  place.  At  its  best  this  is 
a  difficult  place  from  which  to  embark  without 
getting  wet,  and  it  was  seldom  that  we  landed 
there  or  got  away  without  getting  soaked  by  the 
waves. 


14         VOYAGES   OF  A  NATURALIST 

The  next  morning  we  landed  early,  and, 
walking  to  the  settlement,  were  met  by  our  English 
friends,  who  had  procured  ponies  for  us  on  which 
to  cross  the  island.  During  our  ride  I  saw  a  pair 
of  white  terns  (Gygis  sp.),  the  most  beautiful 
of  all  the  tropical  sea-birds.  Later  on  we  saw 
many  of  these  terns  in  the  various  islands  we 
visited,  and,  whether  hovering  over  the  deep  blue 
sea  of  the  South  Pacific,  or  sailing  round  the  palms 
of  a  coral  island  in  the  Indian  Ocean,  they  seem 
equally  at  home  ;  wherever  they  were  seen  the 
snow-white  of  their  plumage  and  the  deep  dark 
blue  of  their  eyes  made  them  ever  memorable. 

At  the  base  of  the  column  on  the  peak  we  made 
our  first  acquaintance  with  frigate  birds,*  which 
were  sitting  in  numbers  on  some  bushes ;  their 
scarlet  pouches  were  extended,  and  looked  in  the 
distance  like  large  red  blossoms.  It  is  only  in 
the  breeding  season  that  frigate  birds  develop 
this  curious  ornament.  When  closely  examined 
it  is  seen  that  the  pouch  is  formed  by  a  bare  patch 
of  skin  on  the  throat,  which  can  be  expanded  by 
the  bird  at  will.  At  times  a  great  bladder  as  large 
as  a  football  is  thus  formed.  When  the  bird  is 
taken  in  the  hand  and  carefully  examined,  the 
whole  of  the  body  appears  to  be  inflated.  On 
skinning  the  bird  it  is  at  once  seen  that  the  whole 
body  is  enveloped  with  a  mass  of  air  cells.  The 
pouch  is  only  an  exaggerated  form  of  such  an  air 

*  Fregata  aquila. 


THE   FRIGATE   BIRD'S   POUCH         15 

cell,  and,  being  larger  than  those  on  the  rest  of 
the  body,  is  more  noticeable. 

In  the  breeding  season  the  pouch  is  constantly 
being  inflated,  and,  as  a  consequence,  the  skin  of 
the  throat  becomes  stretched  to  such  a  degree 
that  when  not  inflated  it  hangs  down  in  a  loose 
fold  below  the  bill  of  the  bird.  It  is  only  the 
males  that  are  able  to  inflate  these  pouches  in  this 
way,  the  female  having  a  non-inflatable  patch  of 
bare  skin  of  a  duller  colour  on  the  throat.  We 
afterwards  found  that  by  inserting  a  bicycle 
pump  into  the  larynx  of  a  freshly-killed  male 
frigate  bird  and  pumping  air  into  the  throat, 
the  whole  of  the  body,  as  well  as  the  throat, 
becomes  inflated. 

Along  the  shore  we  saw  a  species  of  the  tropic, 
or  bo' sun,  bird.  This  proved  to  be  Phaethon 
Upturns,  and  two  fine  specimens  were  obtained 
by  Lord  Crawford.  Several  of  them  were  flying 
along  the  face  of  the  cliff.  The  name  "  bo-sun  " 
is  said  to  have  been  given  to  this  bird  on  account 
of  its  cry,  which  is  supposed  to  resemble  the 
pipe  of  a  boatswain's  whistle.  It  must  be 
confessed,  however,  that  the  only  cry  we  heard 
it  utter  was  a  harsh  scream  not  unlike  that  of  a 
tern. 

A  dove  known  as  Zenaida  auriculata,  which 
was  originally,  without  doubt,  introduced  from 
the  mainland  of  South  America,  was  extraordinarily 
abundant  on  this  island.     They  were  very  tame 


16         VOYAGES   OF  A  NATURALIST 

and  fearless,  but  were  not  nesting  at  the  time  of 
our  visit.     Their  note  is  a  loud  rattling  "  coo." 

Insects  were  not  very  numerous — bees,  dragon- 
flies,  beetles  and  crickets  being  the  most  notice- 
able, while  a  little  blue  butterfly  was  frequently 
seen  fluttering  along  at  our  feet  in  the  pathways 
through  the  groves  of  fig  trees. 

In  the  houses  we  collected  a  number  of 
mosquitoes,  apparently  of  one  species  only.  It 
seems  that  it  is  only  in  the  houses  that  mosquitoes 
are  troublesome,  as,  during  the  whole  of  the  time 
we  were  on  the  island,  we  were  not  attacked  by 
these  pests  out-of-doors,  and  it  was  only  when  we 
entered  a  house  that  they  became  a  nuisance. 

We  went  to  the  furthest  extremity  of  the  island 
in  a  north-west  direction  from  the  settlement. 
Here  we  found  that  the  low  fig  trees,  which  seem 
to  be  the  principal  trees  of  the  island,  were  growing 
in  greater  abundance  than  near  the  settlement. 

In  these  trees  numbers  of  small  birds,  which 
in  general  appearance  much  resembled  reed- 
warblers,  were  flitting  in  and  out  among  the  leaves 
in  search  of  insects.  These  birds  proved  to  be  all 
of  the  species  called  Vireo  gracilirostris.  Their 
loud,  but  by  no  means  unpleasant,  song  somewhat 
resembled  that  of  a  pied  wagtail,  so  familiar  as  a 
British  bird. 

This  part  of  the  island  was  steep  and  precipitous. 
We  followed  a  path  which  took  us  down  to  the 
seashore  about  one  hundred  feet  below,  and  here 


FRIGATE    BIRDS    ON    GLORIOSO    ISLAM). 

(See  also  ( lhapter  X.) 


11 


0.1 


BRILLIANT  FISHES  17 

we  noticed  numbers  of  sooty  terns,*  which  were 
flying  in  a  perpetual  stream  along  the  coast, 
just  above  the  breaking  waves.  These  birds  were 
not  nesting  at  the  time  of  our  visit,  but  we  were 
told  that  they  bred  in  great  numbers  on  one  of  the 
smaller  islets,  which  lies  about  half  a  mile  off  the 
settlement.  A  few  tropic-birds,  which  were  flying 
high  overhead,  appeared  from  their  manner  to 
have  nests,  which  were  probably  situated  in  the 
most  inaccessible  parts  of  the  cliff. 

The  tide  was  low,  and  we  were  able  to  walk 
some  distance  along  the  shore,  A  long  ledge  of 
rock  was  pointed  out  to  us  by  one  of  our  friends 
as  an  excellent  place  for  fishing,  and  in  many 
shallow  pools  we  saw  numbers  of»  brilliantly 
coloured  fishes ;  some  of  these  were  blue  on  the 
back  and  yellow  beneath.  We  made  repeated 
attempts  to  capture  them,  but  to  no  purpose. 

It  is  impossible  to  make  a  collection  of  the  whole 
fauna  of  an  island  during  a  visit  of  two  or  three 
days,  as  we  soon  realized  ;  consequently  I  spent 
most  of  my  time  searching  for  the  three  species  of 
land-birds  which  inhabit  Fernando  de  Noronha. 
Specimens  of  the  dove  and  the  warbler,  which 
have  already  been  mentioned,  were  collected 
during  the  morning.  As  soon  as  we  returned 
from  our  excursion  across  the  island  a  visit  was  paid 
to  the  Governor's  garden,  where,  owing  perhaps 
to  the  greater  abundance  of  trees,  birds  were  more 

*  Sterna  fuliginosa. 


18         VOYAGES   OF  A  NATURALIST 

numerous,    and    the   third   species   of    land-bird, 
a  flycatcher,"'  was  met  with. 

In  this  garden,  which  was  nicely  laid  out  and 
enclosed  by  an  iron  fence,  were  many  large 
cocoanut  trees  bearing  a  quantity  of  fruit. 
There  were  also  some  sapodillas,  the  fruit  of  which 
was  ripe  at  this  time.  It  is  greatly  appreciated 
by  the  people  on  Fernando  de  Noronha,  and  we 
were  persuaded  to  taste  it.  Externally  it  somewhat 
resembles  a  small  round  potato  ;  the  flavour,  how- 
ever, is  too  much  like  that  of  the  mango,  the 
suggestion  of  turpentine  which  pervades  the  latter 
fruit  being  distinctly  noticeable  in  the  sapodilla. 

Doves  were  swarming  in  the  garden,  every  tree 
and  bush  being  apparently  tenanted  by  them, 
and  the  Governor  showed  us  a  cage  full  which  had 
recently  been  caught.  They  were,  he  told  us, 
excellent  to  eat. 

There  are  no  indigenous  mammals  on  Fernando 
de  Noronha,  but  ratsf  and  micej  have  been  im- 
ported or  have  escaped  from  ships.  I  did  not  get 
any  rats,  but  two  mice  which  we  shot  were  of  a 
pale  fawn  colour,  and  probably  differed  in  colour, 
at  all  events,  from  those  of  their  ancestors  which 
first  appeared  on  this  island.  One  of  the  outlying 
islets  is  called  "  Rat  Island,"  but  we  were  informed 
that  rats  were  no  more  numerous  there  than  on 
the  main  island. 

Close    to    the    place    where    we    embarked,    we 

*  Elainea  ridleyana.  f  Mus  rattus.  ±  Mus  musculus. 


CATAMARANS  19 

noticed  a  thick-stemmed  plant  covered  all  over 
with  small  spikes,  and  bearing  leaves  like  those 
of  the  geranium.  We  were  warned  by  our  friends 
that  this  plant,  when  touched,  gave  a  most  painful 
sting.  Moseley  mentions  that,  although  he  used 
the  greatest  care  when  securing  a  specimen,  he 
got  a  sting,  the  results  of  which  he  felt  for  several 
days  afterwards.  We  afterwards  saw  this  same 
plant  in  Brazil. 

During  the  second  day  of  our  stay  on  Fernando 
de  Noronha  a  steamer,  which  visits  the  island 
once  every  month,  arrived,  bearing  mails  for  the 
inhabitants.  The  advent  of  the  steamer  is  much 
looked  forward  to,  as  life  on  Fernando  de  Noronha 
for  a  European  is  dull  in  the  extreme. 

As  soon  as  the  boat  arrived  a  large  raft  was 
pushed  off  from  the  shore  and  anchored  outside 
of  the  surf.  The  raft  resembled  in  shape  a  large 
table,  the  legs  of  which  were  fixed  to  a  platform 
composed  of  a  number  of  logs  lashed  together. 
A  boat  was  sent  off  from  the  steamer  loaded  with 
packages  of  stores,  clothing,  letters,  and  other 
things,  and  these  were  put  on  to  the  raft,  from 
which  they  were  landed  in  native  catamarans. 

The  catamarans,  which  are  built  on  the  same 
principle  as  the  large  raft,  are  of  sufficient  size 
to  carry  one  person  with  comfort  besides  the 
native  oarsman.  They  are  especially  adapted 
for  landing  through  surf,  and  they  ride  over 
the  breaking    waves    with   wonderful    buoyancy. 


20         VOYAGES   OF  A  NATURALIST 

We  once  landed  in  a  catamaran,  and  all  of  us  got 
ashore  with  no  more  than  wet  feet.  In  Brazil 
we  frequently  landed  through  surf  in  the  same 
way,  though  the  catamarans  there  are  larger  and 
are  propelled  by  two  natives. 

Our  time  ashore  on  this  second  day  was  limited, 
and  we  did  not  get  very  far  beyond  the  settlement. 
Major  Wilbraham  and  I  walked  for  some  distance 
along  the  shore,  and  saw  the  same  species  of  birds 
as  at  Saint  Paul's  Rocks,  but  we  noticed  that 
the  turnstone  appeared  to  be  quite  numerous. 

There  are,  I  believe,  two  species  of  lizards 
on  the  island,  but  we  only  saw  one  of  them.  This 
was  Mabuia  punctata,  and  it  seemed  to  be  a  most 
abundant  species  on  every  part  of  the  island. 

As  we  had  many  other  interesting  places  to  see, 
our  stay  on  Fernando  de  Noronha  was  of  necessity 
very  short,  and  after  two  days  we  set  sail  for 
Bahia,  in  Brazil.  It  is  probable  that  in  a  few 
years'  time  Fernando  de  Noronha  will  cease  to 
exist  as  a  convict  settlement.  We  were  informed 
that  as  capital  punishment  had  taken  the  place  of 
exportation  for  life  in  Brazil,  no  more  convicts 
were  to  be  sent  there. 


tl 


< 

— 
< 

< 

< 

— 


CHAPTER    III. 

ITAPARICA,    BAHIA. 

During  the  three  cruises  of  the  "  Valhalla," 
we  made  two  visits  to  Bahia.  On  the  first  occasion 
we  landed  on  26th  December,  1902,  Christmas 
Day  having  been  spent  in  sight  of  the  coast  of 
Brazil,  while  on  the  second  we  dropped  anchor 
in  the  Bay  of  All  Saints  on  10th  December,  1905. 

Some  six  miles  from  the  town  lies  Itaparica,  a 
large  island  inhabited  by  about  30,000  people, 
and  it  was  here  that  most  of  our  time  (a  fortnight 
on  each  occasion)  was  spent.  During  our  first 
visit  some  time  was  occupied  in  finding  the  most 
suitable  places  for  landing  on  this  island,  and  also 
in  searching  for  the  best  spots  for  collecting  birds, 
butterflies,  and  other  specimens.  What  we  learnt 
on  this  occasion,  however,  proved  of  the  greatest 
assistance  during  our  second  visit,  as  we  were  then 
able  to  find  the  passage  through  the  reef  with 
little  difficulty,  and  go  at  once  to  our  old  collecting 
grounds. 

Before  describing  our  doings  at  Bahia,  I  must 
refer  in  detail  to   an    important  incident  which 


22         VOYAGES   OF  A  NATURALIST 

occurred  on  the  high  seas  during  our  second  voyage 
thither. 

On  the  7th  December,   1905,  when  in  latitude 
7°  14'  S.,  longitude  34°  25'  W.,  and  about  fourteen 
miles  from  the  coast  of  Brazil  near  Para,  a  creature 
of  most  extraordinary  form  and  proportions  was 
sighted  by  two  of  us.     At  the  time  we  were  under 
sail  only,   and  were  slowly  making  our  way  to 
Bahia.     It  was  at  about  10  o'clock  in  the  morning, 
and  I  was  leaning  on  the  rail  of  the  poop  deck, 
when  a  large  fin  suddenly  appeared  close  to  the 
ship  at  a  distance  of  about  fifty  yards.     This  fin 
resembled  that  of  no  fish  I  had  previously  seen, 
and  I  pointed  it  out  immediately  to  Mr.  E.  G.  B. 
Meade- Waldo,  who  was  on  deck  with  me  at  the 
time,    and    we    watched    it    together    for    several 
minutes.     As  we  passed  slowly  by,  a  long  eel-like 
neck   surmounted   by  a  head,  shaped   somewhat 
like  that  of  a  turtle,  rose  out  of  the  water  in  front 
of  the  fin.     This  creature  remained  in  sight  for  a 
few  minutes,  but  we  soon  drew  ahead  of  it,  and  it 
became  lost  to  view,  owing  to  the  ripple  of  the 
water.     Owing  to  the  fact  that  we  were  under  sail 
at  the  time,  it  was  not  possible  to  go  about  and 
make  a  closer  inspection,  and  with  great  regret 
we  had  to  be  content  with  the  view  we  had  had  of 
this  remarkable  monster. 

A  full  account  of  it  was  given  at  a  meeting  of 
the  Zoological  Society  of  London,  on  19th  June, 
1906,  and  I  quote  below  from  the  report  which  was 


N 
< 

m 

fa 
o 

Fh 

o 

D 

H 

H 
H 

fa 
fa 
O 

« 
o 

K 
H 
P 


n 


w 

i 

H 

05 

i 


3 

fa 

o 

W 
o 

« 

CO 


H 

w 

o 

H 

CQ 

P 

I--A 

J? 

•< 

•3 

?=J 

O 

o 

Q 

o 

* 

w 

i 

-S$ 

H 

•fci 

0 

"fc 

w 

CO 

o 


o 

J-l 


24         VOYAGES   OF  A  NATURALIST 

printed    in    the    "  Proceedings "   of    that   Society 
(10th  October,  1906,  p.  721)  :— 

"At  10.15  a.m.,  on  Thursday,  7th  December, 
1905,  when  in  lat.  7°  14'  S.,  long.  34°  25'  W.,  in  a 
depth  of  from  322  to  1,340  fathoms,  Meade- Waldo 
and  I  saw  a  most  extraordinary  creature  about 
100  yards  from  the  ship,  and  moving  in  the  same 
direction,  but  very  much  slower  than  we  were 
going.  At  first  all  that  we  could  see  was  a  dorsal 
fin,  about  four  feet  long,  sticking  up  about  two  feet 
from  the  water  ;  this  fin  was  of  a  brownish-black 
colour,  and  much  resembled  a  gigantic  piece  of 
ribbon-seaweed.  Below  the  water  we  could  in- 
distinctly see  a  very  large  brownish-black  patch, 
but  could  not  make  out  the  shape  of  the  creature. 
Every  now  and  then  the  fin  entirely  disappeared 
below  the  water.  Suddenly  an  eel-like  neck, 
about  six  feet  long  and  of  the  thickness  of  a  man's 
thigh,  having  a  head  shaped  like  that  of  a  turtle, 
appeared  in  front  of  the  fin.  This  head  and 
neck,  which  were  of  the  same  colour  above  as  the 
fin,  but  of  a  silvery-white  below,  lashed  up  the 
water  with  a  curious  wriggling  movement.  After 
this  it  was  so  far  astern  of  us  that  we  could  make 
out  nothing  else. 

"  During  the  next  fourteen  hours  we  went  about 
twice,  and  at  about  2  a.m.  the  following  day 
(8th  December),  in  lat.  7°  19'  S.,  long.  34°  04'  W., 
the  first  and  third  mates,  Mr.  Simmonds  and  Mr. 
Harley,  who  were  on  the  bridge  at  the  time,  saw 


THE   GREAT   SEA-SERPENT  25 

a  great  commotion  in  the  water.  At  first  they 
thought  it  was  a  rock  a- wash  about  100  to  150 
yards  away  on  the  port  side,  just  aft  of  the  bridge, 
but  they  soon  made  out  that  it  was  something 
moving  and  going  slightly  faster  than  the  ship, 
which  at  that  time  was  doing  about  8|-  knots. 
Mr.  Simmonds  hailed  the  deck,  and  one  of  the  crew, 
who  was  on  the  look-out,  saw  it  too.  Although 
there  was  a  bright  moon  at  the  time,  they  could 
not  make  out  anything  of  the  creature  itself, 
owing  to  the  amount  of  wash  it  was  making,  but 
they  say  that  from  the  commotion  in  the  water 
it  looked  as  if  a  submarine  was  going  along  just 
below  the  surface.  They  both  say  most  em- 
phatically that  it  was  not  a  whale,  and  that  it  was 
not  blowing,  nor  have  they  ever  seen  anything 
like  it  before.  After  they  had  watched  it  for  several 
minutes,  it  '  sounded  '  off  the  port  bow,  and  they 
saw  no  more  of  it." 

This  creature  was  an  example,  I  consider,  of 
what  has  been  so  often  reported,  for  want  of  a 
better  name,  as  the  "  great  sea-serpent."  I  feel 
sure,  however,  that  it  was  not  a  reptile  that  we 
saw,  but  a  mammal.  It  is,  of  course,  impossible 
to  be  certain  of  this,  but  the  general  appearance  of 
the  creature,  especially  the  soft,  almost  rubber- 
like fin,  gave  one  this  impression.  It  is  often 
said  that,  if  there  were  such  a  monster,  remains  of 
it  would  have  been  found  long  ago,  but  this  is  not 
necessarily    so.        Supposing    the    "  sea-serpent ' 


26         VOYAGES   OF  A  NATURALIST 

lives  in  deep  holes,  such  as  there  were  in  the  spot 

where  we  saw  our  "  monster,"  then  there  would  be 

little  chance  of  remains  being  washed  ashore,  and 

the   amount   of   deep-sea  dredging  that  has   yet 

been  done  is  very  small,  so  that  it  is  not  surprising 

that  no  parts  of  this  creature   have  been  obtained 

in  that  way. 

That  it  is  not  more  often  reported  is  not  to  be 

wondered  at,  when  one  realizes  how  often  it  is 

that  a  ship  may  sail  for  days  together  without 

sighting  another  ship,  even  in  seas  where  there  is 

considerable  traffic.     Also  it  must  be  remembered 

that  such  ridicule  is  generally  bestowed  on  the 

reports  of  sea-monsters  that  many  persons  hesitate 

to  describe  what  they  have  seen.  I  know  myself  of 

several  instances  of  unknown  sea-monsters  having 

been  seen  by  reliable  witnesses,  who,  to  avoid  the 

inevitable  "  chaff,"  would  not  publicly  state  their 

experiences. 

*  *  *  * 

The  town  of  Bahia  has  a  striking  and  picturesque 
appearance  from  the  harbour,  white  houses 
peeping  out  here  and  there  from  luxuriant  vege- 
tation. But  "  distance  lends  enchantment  to 
the  view,"  and  when  on  shore  the  narrow 
and  filthy  streets,  and  the  general  untidiness 
of  the  whole  place,  quickly  dispel  the  illusion  of 
cleanliness. 

During  my  two  visits  to  Bahia  I  spent  as  little 
time  as  possible  in  the  town.     A  run  of  some  forty 


A    BRAZILIAN  FOREST  27 

minutes  in  our  steam  launch  took  us  across  to 
Itaparica,  where,  after  passing  through  a  passage 
in  the  reef,  we  landed  in  a  small  "  Berthon " 
boat.  A  great  part  of  the  island  has  been  cleared, 
and  it  required  over  an  hour's  walk  to  reach  the 
nearest  patch  of  virgin  forest.  The  luxuriance 
of  the  vegetation  in  a  Brazilian  forest  is  truly 
wonderful ;  even  at  mid-day  in  the  thickest  part 
of  the  forest  one  might  imagine  it  was  twilight, 
owing  to  the  density  of  the  foliage.  Brightly 
coloured  birds  and  butterflies  are  met  with  at 
every  step,  and  it  would  seem  that  in  every  patch 
of  forest  there  are  different  species  of  birds,  while 
every  hour  of  the  day  brings  forth  new  forms 
of  butterflies. 

It  was  on  this  island  that  we  first  saw  humming- 
birds, a  large  blue  species*  being  the  most 
abundant.  We  were  rather  surprised  to  notice 
how  frequently  these  birds  perch.  I  had  always 
accepted  it  as  a  general  belief  that  humming-birds 
seldom  settled,  but  were  nearly  always  on  the  wing. 
Since  this,  my  first  acquaintance  with  these  ex- 
quisite little  birds,  I  have  had  the  good  fortune 
to  meet  with  examples  of  many  other  species  of 
humming-birds  in  South  America  and  the  West 
Indies,  and  have  noted  that  they  are  as  often  at 
rest  on  the  trees  as  hovering  round  the  flowers  in 
search  of  food.  All  the  specimens  obtained  were 
carefully  examined  during  the  process  of  skinning, 

*  Eupetomena  macrura. 


28         VOYAGES   OF  A  NATURALIST 

and  in  every  instance  their  gizzards  contained  the 
remains  of  insects. 

During  our  second  visit  to  Brazil  we  camped 
out  for  four  nights  ] on  Itaparica.  Our  tent  was 
pitched  near  one  of  the  patches  of  virgin  forest, 
and  at  no  great  distance  from  a  small  lake,  on 
the  margins  of  which  were  numbers  of  jacanas,* 
a  bird  resembling  a  water-hen  in  shape,  but 
provided  with  toes  of  such  great  length,  that  it 
can  walk  with  ease  over  the  floating  leaves  of  the 
water-plants. 

In  the  lagoon  caimans  or  alligators  were  plentiful, 
and  during  the  day  several  were  always  to  be  found 
either  basking  on  the  trunks  of  trees,  which  had 
fallen  near  the  water,  or  lying  in  the  water  itself, 
with  only  their  eyes  and  nostrils  above  the 
surface. 

The  near  proximity  of  water  to  our  camp  was 
convenient,  but  at  nightfall  we  realized  that  we 
had  made  a  great  mistake,  for  the  mosquitoes 
swarmed  in  such  numbers  that  sleep  was  im- 
possible. A  fire  had  been  lighted  previously, 
and  arranged  in  such  a  way  that  the  smoke  blew 
through  the  tent,  but  the  mosquitoes  swarmed  in 
notwithstanding,  and  after  spending  two  nights  of 
discomfort,  we  obtained  mosquito  nets  and  moved 
the  tent  to  a  greater  distance  from  the  water. 
After  this  we  most  of  us  were  able  to  get  a  couple 
of  nights'   immunity  from  these  pests.     Two  of 

*  Parra  jacana. 


OS 


Q 
< 

CO 

I— I 

«i 
O 

I— I 


s 


ANIMALS   OF  THE   FOREST  29 

my  companions,  however,  went  out  moth-catching 
at  night  and  omitted  to  fold  up  their  nets  before 
they  started,  the  consequence  being  that  on  their 
return  the  nets  were  full  of  mosquitoes,  and  a  few 
weeks  later  they  both  suffered  from  a  bad  attack 
of  malarial  fever. 

In  spite  of  mosquitoes  by  night  and  grass-ticks 
by  day,  we  all  agreed  that  a  short  stay  in  the 
solitude  of  a  Brazilian  forest  was  a  most  delightful 
experience. 

The  first  two  nights  there  was  sufficient  moonlight 
to  make  shooting  possible,  and  I  spent  a  great 
part  of  the  night  in  walking  about  round  the  camp. 
Several  foxes  were  seen,  and  one  of  these  I  shot. 
The  island  abounds  with  foxes,  and  there  are  also 
a  fair  number  of  wild  cats,  but  although  several 
of  the  latter  were  seen,  we  did  not  succeed  in 
shooting  any.  Every  night  I  set  a  number  of 
traps  for  small  mammals,  and,  though  I  managed 
to  get  a  few  specimens,  I  found  there  were  several 
difficulties  to  be  overcome.  In  the  first  place  the 
bait  is  almost  at  once  devoured  by  ants,  and  this 
necessitates  a  constant  series  of  visits  to  the  traps. 
Then  again  the  traps  are  continually  sprung  by 
animals  which  are  too  large  for  them  to  hold — 
such  as  opossums  and  foxes.  Eventually  I  found 
that  the  only  way  to  get  any  specimens  of  rats 
or  mice  was  to  set  my  traps  just  before  nightfall, 
and  then  visit  them  at  frequent  intervals  during  the 
night,  and  in  this  way  I  managed  to  secure  a  few. 


30         VOYAGES   OF  A  NATURALIST 

On  several  occasions  we  saw  troops  of  marmosets 
travelling  with  extraordinary  speed  from  tree  to 
tree  through  the  forest.  From  our  tent  a  clearing 
of  several  acres,  with  here  and  there  a  small  clump 
of  mango  trees,  in  which  were  numerous  species 
of  birds,  extended  to  the  lake. 

About  the  camp  itself  there  were  always  numbers 
of  vultures  of  two  species.*  They  showed  not  the 
least  fear  of  us,  and  would  descend  almost  at  our 
feet  to  pick  up  scraps  thrown  out  to  them.  The 
Brazilians  protect  these  birds,  and  the  penalty 
for  killing  one  is  a  heavy  fine.  Another  very  com- 
mon bird  of  prey  is  the  caracara,  a  pair  of  which 
are  to  be  seen  in  every  patch  of  forest.  We  came 
across  a  pair  of  the  pale  grey  variety  of  this 
species,  and  a  very  beautiful  sight  it  was  to  see 
these  birds  circling  round  over  the  tree-tops.  In 
appearance  they  reminded  one  somewhat  of  a 
buzzard  when  seen  from  a  distance,  but  the  tail  is 
longer.  A  large  hawkf  was  also  often  to  be  seen 
sitting  on  the  dead  palm  trees,  and  three  were  shot 
for  the  collection,  while  on  several  occasions  a 
large  eagle  was  noticed  sailing  overhead,  but  never 
within  gunshot.  At  night  the  cries  of  two  kinds 
of  owls  were  noticeable,  and  these  proved  to  be  a 
small  scops-eared  owlj  and  a  large  wood-owl ;  the 
latter,  though  seen,  was  not  obtained.  Numbers 
of  night-jars  of  two  species  inhabited  the  forest 

*  Cathartes  aura  and  C.  atratus.         f  Aslurina  nattereri. 

J  Scops  braziliensis. 


BIRDS     OF    THE     FOREST  31 

and  clearings  near  our  tent.  The  cries  of  these 
birds,  quite  unlike  the  loud  reeling  note  made  by 
the  well-known  species  which  we  see  in  England, 
were  loud  liquid  calls,  which  were  only  uttered, 
so  far  as  I  could  ascertain,  when  the  bird  was  on 
the  ground. 

During  the  day  a  scarlet  tanager  was  continually 
seen  in  the  trees  and  bushes  near  our  tent,  and 
another  bird,  most  noticeable  by  reason  of  its 
numbers,  was  a  small  swallow.*  This  little  brown- 
backed  bird  invariably  appeared  in  great  numbers 
directly  after  a  shower  of  rain. 

A  shower  of  rain  had  a  remarkable  effect  on 
the  life  in  the  clearing,  for  immediately  afterwards 
there  appeared  immense  swarms  of  flying  ants. 
As  soon  as  these  ants  arrived,  they  were  followed 
by  a  great  number  of  birds  of  all  kinds — 
flycatchers  (Elainea),  tanagers,  oven-birds,  and 
woodpeckers  appeared,  while  the  little  brown- 
backed  swallow  came  in  great  numbers.  The  ants 
were  at  a  disadvantage,  and  were  not  safe  even 
when  they  had  reached  the  ground,  for  here  the 
woodpeckers  followed  them  and  swept  them  up 
with  their  long  tongues. 

I  imagine  that  all  these  birds  came  from  the 
neighbouring  forests,  as  previous  to  the  showers 
of  rain  not  a  bird  was  to  be  seen  in  the  clearing. 
Another  instance  of  birds  appearing  at  certain 
places  only  when  there    are  insects,  was    to    be 

*  Stelgidopteryx. 


32         VOYAGES   OF  A  NATURALIST 

seen  round  the  lagoon,  which  a  small  spine-tailed 
swift*  visited  regularly  in  the  evening  when  there 
were  swarms  of  small  flies,  while  at  other  times 
of  the  day,  when  flies  were  not  numerous,  not  a 
single  swift  was  observed  there. 

It  would  be  tedious  to  mention  individually  all 
the  birds  seen  during  these  visits  to  Itaparica,  but 
there  are  two  other  species  to  which  I  must  draw 
attention — one,  because  it  is  one  of  the  most 
noticeable  of  Brazilian  birds,  and  the  other,  be- 
cause of  its  scarcity,  as  far  as  specimens  in 
museums  are  concerned. 

The  first  belongs  to  the  family  of  tyrant-fly- 
catchers, which  is  numerously  represented  in 
Brazil.  Several  species  were  met  with  by  us, 
but  by  far  the  most  common  was  Tyrannus 
melancholicus — a  bird  of  about  the  size  of  a  thrush 
with  a  yellow  breast,  grey  back,  and  a  partially 
concealed  golden-orange  crest.  It  is  to  be  seen 
in  almost  every  tree,  and  is  further  remarkable 
for  the  monotonous  cry  which  it  utters  continually. 

The  other  bird  to  which  I  would  refer  is  another 
member  of  the  family  of  tyrants.  This  bird — 
Myiarchus  pelzelni — is  apparently  scarce  in 
collections,  though  why  this  should  be  it  is  difficult 
to  say.  It  was  quite  common  in  the  mango  trees 
near  our  camp,  and  several  were  shot  and  skinned. 
Perhaps,  however,  Itaparica  is  particularly  suited 
to  its  requirements,  and  it  may  be  rare  in  other 

*  Chaetura  iumosa. 


A    SWAMP  33 

parts.  I  think,  however,  that  most  likely  it  is 
confused  with  another  bird  of  the  same  genus, 
viz.,  M.  ferox,  which  is  most  abundant  in  Brazil, 
and  closely  resembles  it  when  seen  at  a  distance. 

Every  morning,  about  half  an  hour  before  dawn, 
we  left  our  tent  and  walked  through  the  woods 
to  a  large  swamp  about  a  mile  away,  where  we 
had  some  fairly  good  shooting.  A  large  flock 
of  teal*  was  sometimes  feeding  on  the  mud  sur- 
rounding a  large  pool  of  water,  and  a  few  snipef 
were  bagged,  but,  unlike  snipe  in  general,  they 
offered  the  easiest  of  shots.  They  behaved  much 
like  the  jack  snipe,  rarely  flying  more  than  a  few 
yards  at  a  time,  and  always  allowing  of  a  close 
approach.  The  most  numerous  birds  were,  how- 
ever, the  jacanas,  which  were  in  enormous  numbers, 
and  as  soon  as  we  appeared  on  the  spot  they  rose 
in  large  flocks  and  circled  round  us  high  overhead. 

Many  delightful  hours  in  the  early  morning  were 
spent  in  this  way  among  the  numerous  different 
forms  of  bird  and  insect  life.  Daybreak  in  the 
tropics  is  undoubtedly  the  best  time  out  of  the 
twenty-four  hours,  for  then  the  air  is  cool  and  in- 
vigorating— a  great  contrast  to  the  rest  of  the  day, 
when  the  heat  becomes  almost  unbearable.  The 
hottest  part  of  the  morning  we  usually  spent 
in  the  thick  forest,  where,  under  the  deep  shade 
of  the  trees,  it  was  possible  to  collect  specimens 
without  feeling  the  effects  of  the  heat. 

*  Nettion  braziliensis.  f  Gallinago  delicata. 


34         VOYAGES   OF  A   NATURALIST 

After  some  experience  I  have  found  that  the 
best,  in  fact  the  only,  time  to  do  really  good  work 
in  the  way  of  collecting  in  the  tropics,  is  a  few  hours 
after  daybreak,  and  again  some  two  hours  before 
dark.  Only  then  can  one  work  with  comfort, 
but,  what  is  more  important,  the  birds  at  these 
times  appear  to  be  more  numerous  and  more 
easily  approached.  Towards  mid-day  every  sign 
of  animal  life  seems  to  disappear,  and  there  is  no 
doubt  that  at  that  hour  mammals  and  birds  hide 
away  in  the  comparative  cool  of  the  thickest  part 
of  the  forest. 

Altogether  these  few  days  in  camp  on  Itaparica 
proved  to  be  most  interesting,  and  although  we 
suffered  to  a  great  extent  from  mosquitoes  and 
grass-ticks,  from  the  latter  especially,  we  were  well 
pleased  with  our  results. 

The  ticks  were  a  source  of  great  annoyance, 
and,  in  spite  of  all  we  could  do  to  prevent  them, 
they  swarmed  on  our  clothing  and  buried  them- 
selves in  our  skins.  When  once  fixed  in  the  skin 
it  is  a  very  difficult  matter  to  remove  them,  as 
they  quickly  bury  their  heads,  and  if  any  force 
is  used  in  removing  them,  their  heads  break  off 
and  remain  in  the  flesh,  where  they  often  cause  a 
bad  wound. 

The  part  of  the  island  in  which  we  were  camped 
did  not  appear  to  be  thickly  populated.  Along 
the  shore  there  were  a  number  of  small  houses 
tenanted  mostly  by  fishermen,  but  in  one  or  two 


FETES     AT     BAHIA  35 

of  the  larger  of  these  houses  there  were  a  few  of 
the  better-class  Brazilians.  These  were  traders 
from  Bahia  who  rent  these  houses  for  the  summer, 
and  one  of  them,  who  procured  porters  for  us, 
told  us  that  he  took  a  house  on  the  island  every 
year  during  the  hot  weather,  as  it  was  then  far 
more  healthy  than  at  Bahia. 

Occasionally  a  case  of  "  beri-beri  "  makes  its 
appearance  among  the  natives  in  Bahia.  All 
sufferers  from  this  dreadful  disease  are  at  once  sent 
across  to  Itaparica,  and  we  were  informed  that 
they  frequently  recover  when  this  is  done,  but  if 
they  remain  in  Bahia  they  usually  die. 

The  population  of  Bahia  and  the  surrounding 
country  is  of  all  nationalities,  though  the  greater 
number  appear  to  be  negroes. 

All  these  people  are  of  the  Roman  Catholic 
religion,  and  they  celebrate  their  Saints'  days  by 
a  great  display  of  fireworks.  During  the  two 
visits  of  the  "  Valhalla "  there  were  a  number 
of  these  displays,  and  the  continual  banging  of 
crackers  at  all  hours  of  the  day  and  night  was 
infinitely  less  amusing  to  us  than  to  the  Brazilians. 

On  the  occasion  of  our  first  visit,  a  great  pro- 
cession of  boats  filled  with  priest  and  choristers 
started  from  the  shore  and  visited  most  of  the  ships 
in  the  harbour.  When  they  arrived  at  a  Brazilian 
ship  they  fired  off  a  number  of  crackers  which  they 
had  with  them,  and  one  of  these  ships,  a  Brazilian 
man-of-war,   replied  with  a  salute  of  guns.     On 


36         VOYAGES   OF  A  NATURALIST 

every  Saint's  day  a  procession  takes  place, 
generally  on  land,  but  on  special  occasions,  as  on 
this  one,  which  was  the  day  after  Christmas  Day, 
the  ships  in  the  harbour  are  visited. 


SOUTH    TRINIDAD    ISLAND,    NEAR   THE    LANDING    PLACE. 


[36.] 


CHAPTER    IV. 


SOUTH    TRINIDAD. 


At  6  o'clock  on  the  morning  of  the  3rd  January, 
1905,  the  island  of  South  Trinidad  was  sighted. 

This  island  is  situated  in  the  South  Atlantic 
Ocean  off  the  coast  of  Brazil,  lat.  20°  23'  S., 
long.  29°  43'  W.  It  is  volcanic,  and  of  the  same 
formation  as  the  coast  of  Rio  de  Janeiro. 

South  Trinidad  had  been  visited  by  naturalists 
three  times  previously.  In  1868  the  Italian 
corvette  "  Magenta  "  came  to  the  island,  and  two 
species  of  petrels  were  obtained  and  described  as 
new  to  science  by  Dr.  Giglioli.* 

The  second  expedition  was  made  in  August, 
1875,  by  Lord  Crawford  (then  Lord  Lindsay), 
who,  when  on  the  way  to  Mauritius  to  observe  the 
transit  of  Venus,  landed  at  South  Trinidad  and 
made  a  small  collection  of  birds,  f 

Thirdly,  on  13th  September,  1901,  the  naturalists 
of  the  "  Discovery,"  when  bound  for  the  Antarctic 
regions,    landed    there    and    made    a    collection. 

*  "Ibis,"  1869,  pp.  62-60. 

t  "Proceedings  Zoological  Society,"  March  2nd,  1880,  p.  161. 

E 


38         VOYAGES   OF  A  NATURALIST 

Amongst  the  birds  obtained  by  the  last-named 
expedition  were  several  specimens  of  a  petrel, 
which  Dr.  Bowdler  Sharpe  described  as  a  new 
species.* 

As  we  gradually  drew  near  to  the  island,  the 
"  Ninepin,"  a  huge  upright  column  of  rock,  came 
into  view.  This  rock  is  several  hundred  feet  in 
height,  and  in  shape  is  much  like  an  enormous 
tree-trunk.  It  was  at  one  time  undoubtedly  of  a 
much  large  diameter  than  now,  long  exposure  to 
the  weather  having  worn  its  surface  away  to  such 
an  extent  that  only  the  hard  central  core  remains 
at  the  present  time. 

When  we  were  within  a  mile  or  two  of  the  island, 
we  could  see  that  the  greater  part  of  it  was  covered 
with  grass,  while  against  the  sky-line  at  the  ex- 
treme summit  a  mass  of  trees  could  be  distinguished. 
Extending  from  the  summit  to  the  base  were  many 
fissures,  which  formed  deep  valleys,  and  these 
were  thickly  overgrown  with  tree-ferns. 

Sea-birds,  chiefly  large  petrels,  appeared  in 
numbers,  and  circled  round  the  ship,  while  a  good 
many  gannets  settled  in  the  rigging. 

A  strong  northerly  gale  was  blowing,  and  Captain 
Caws  had  little  hopes  of  the  sea  being  smooth 
enough  to  lower  a  boat.  As  we  drew  under  the 
lee  of  the  island,  however,  the  sea  proved  perfectly 
calm,  and  but  little  surf  was  beating  on  the 
shore. 

*  "Bulletin  Brit.  Om.  Club,"  XII.,  p.  49  (February,  1902). 


TREE-FERNS    ON    SOUTH   TRINIDAD    ISLAND. 


[39.] 


LANDING  ON   SOUTH  TRINIDAD       39 

A  large  amount  of  treasure  hidden  in  former 
days  by  pirates  is  said  to  be  buried  on  South 
Trinidad,  and  Mr.  E.  F.  Knight  visited  the  island 
on  two  occasions  for  the  purpose  of  searching  for  it. 

We  kept  a  careful  look-out  for  the  "  Cascade  " 
and  the  "  Pier,"  mentioned  by  Mr.  Knight  in  his 
"  Cruise  of  the  Alert."  The  "  Cascade  "  was  soon 
sighted,  and  proved  to  be  a  small  trickle  of  water 
which  had  its  source  among  the  groves  of  tree-ferns 
near  the  summit  of  the  island,  and  ran  down 
a  deep  valley  into  the  sea  at  a  point  about  200 
yards  from  the  jutting  promontory  of  black  rock 
which  has  been  named  so  aptly  the  "  Pier." 

A  boat  having  been  lowered  we  started  for  the 
shore.  On  getting  near  in  we  met  with  several 
large  turtles,  which  were  swimming  about  close 
to  the  rocks.  These  turtles  visit  South  Trinidad 
for  the  purpose  of  depositing  their  eggs,  and 
during  our  two  days'  visit  we  saw  many  of  them 
swimming  about,  but  none  were  on  the  beach, 
and  it  is  probable  that  we  were  too  early  in  the 
year  to  find  their  eggs. 

The  boat  was  backed  up  to  the  natural  "  pier," 

and  with  one  of  the  seamen  I  scrambled  on  to  the 

rocks.     At  first  it  seemed  doubtful  whether  the 

"  pier  "  was  connected  with  the  shore,  but  we  soon 

found  that  it  was  not  difficult  to  climb  over  the 

huge  boulders  forming  the  "  pier,"  and  thus  reach 

the  strip  of  sand  which  fringes  this  part  of  the 

island. 

e  2 


40         VOYAGES   OF  A  NATURALIST 

Directly  I  had  landed  I  was  mobbed  by  a 
screaming  crowd  of  white  terns  and  noddies,  which 
rose  from  their  nesting-places  on  the  rocks.  So 
close  to  me  did  these  birds  fly,  that  I  was  able  to 
touch  them  with  the  barrels  of  my  gun. 

Between  the  "  Cascade "  and  "  Pier "  the 
coastline  is  slightly  indented  and  fringed  with 
a  narrow  strip  of  sand.  Beyond  the  sand  a  mass 
of  rocks  had  to  be  climbed  before  we  could  reach 
a  plateau,  which  could  be  seen  about  200  feet  from 
the  water's  edge.  After  passing  the  rocky  base 
of  the  hill,  we  found  the  rest  of  the  way  com- 
paratively easy.  The  ground,  which  was  covered 
with  long  wiry  grass,  was  very  treacherous,  and 
slid  away  underfoot  at  every  step. 

Half-way  up  the  slope  the  carpenter  of  the  ship 
planted  a  board  on  which  "  Valhalla  "  was  carved. 
This  board  was  very  thick  and  heavy,  and  will 
probably  last  for  many  years.  We  found  the 
remains  of  several  such  boards  on  the  island,  but 
the  names  they  originally  bore  were  all  illegible. 
We  found  also  some  letters  painted  in  white 
on  a  huge  rock  on  the  plateau,  but  owing  to  long 
exposure  to  the  weather  this  was  also  illegible. 

This  rock  was  covered  with  noddy  terns  and 
their  eggs.  The  birds,  which  were  of  the  same 
species  as  the  large  noddy  met  with  on  Saint 
Paul's  Rocks,  were  very  tame,  and  several  photo- 
graphs of  them  were  taken  at  close  quarters. 

On  the  plateau  are  great  numbers  of  fallen  trees, 


NODDY   TERN    AT    THE    NEST,    SOUTH   TRINIDAD    ISLAND. 


[41.] 


VEGETATION   OF  THE   ISLAND        41 

apparently  of  a  species  of  acacia,  which  from  all 
appearances  have  been  dead  for  many  years, 
though  why  they  died  it  is  impossible  to  say. 
They  show  no  signs  of  having  been  destroyed 
by  fire.  The  whole  of  the  island  is  covered  with 
these  dead  trees  ;  some  standing  with  their  bare 
branches  spread  out  as  in  life,  and  others  lying 
in  all  positions.  In  some  places  so  thickly  is  the 
ground  strewn  with  them  that  it  is  difficult  to  force 
one's  way  through.  When  South  Trinidad  was 
first  discovered  it  was  thickly  wooded,  but  no 
record  seems  forthcoming  as  to  when  and  why 
the  trees  died.  It  mav  have  been  that  some 
volcanic  disturbance  destroyed  all  the  vegetation, 
but  this  seems  unlikely,  because  on  the  summit  of 
the  island  there  flourish  trees  and  tree-ferns 
which  appear  to  be  of  a  great  age. 

At  one  time  a  number  of  goats  inhabited  the 
island,  but  for  many  years  these  have  disappeared, 
though  the  reason  for  this  is  also  unknown.  There 
is  at  the  present  time  sufficient  green  food  to 
support  any  number  of  goats,  for,  besides  the  grass, 
which  covers  the  greater  part,  there  are  quantities 
of  beans  growing  in  masses  on  the  fallen  trees  on 
the  windward  side. 

As  soon  as  we  began  to  ascend  to  the  plateau 
numbers  of  petrels  appeared  flying  overhead ; 
these  were  of  two  species,  the  most  numerous 
being  the  (Estrelata  wilsoni  of  Sharpe.  About 
the  size  of  a  pigeon,  this  bird  has  a  dark  slate- 


42         VOYAGES   OF  A  NATURALIST 

coloured  back  and  head,  with  white,  or  in  some 
individuals  grey,  underparts.  These  birds  were 
just  commencing  to  breed  in  the  holes  and  crannies 
in  the  rocks.  The  other  petrel  (CEstrelata  trini- 
tatis),  which  is  dark  brown  all  over,  with  black 
legs  and  feet,  was  less  numerous,  but  higher  up  the 
ravine  a  few  were  tending  their  well-grown  young, 
which  were  sitting  in  hollows  in  the  rocks  and  under 
overhanging  ledges.  The  young  birds  were  covered 
with  long  thick  brownish-grey  down,  and  resembled 
big  "  powder-puffs."  They  were  extremely  fat, 
and  when  handled  they  ejected  a  greenish  fluid 
from  their  tube-like  nostrils.  The  old  birds 
circled  overhead  in  great  numbers  and  screamed 
at  us  angrily. 

Occasionally  a  long  bubbling  note,  not  unlike 
the  call  of  a  female  cuckoo,  was  heard.  This  note 
was  only  uttered  by  the  Wilson's  petrels.  The 
plumage  of  the  birds  of  this  species  showed  two 
distinct  varieties  or  "  phases."  The  majority 
had  pure  white  breasts,  but  many  others  had  these 
parts  of  a  smoky-grey  colour  :  these  may  have 
been  younger  birds.  I  caught  many  pairs  of 
Wilson's  petrels  at  their  nesting-places,  and  in 
every  case  the  birds  had  white  breasts,  and 
although  I  handled  a  good  many  petrels  (a  hundred 
at  least)  on  South  Trinidad,  I  never  found  a  light- 
breasted  bird  in  company  with  a  dark-breasted 
one.  It  may  well  be,  therefore,  that  the  dark- 
breasted  ones  are  birds  not  fully  adult.     All  these 


P 
< 


oc 


p 

O 


«  e 

p  "s 
o  5 


P  53 


P 

<! 

P 

CZ2 

hi 
P 
P 


p 

w 

P 
O 

O 

P 
P 

P 

P 


P 
O 

P 
P 
P 
<! 


LAND-CRABS  43 

petrels,  whether  white  or  grey-breasted,  had  the 
legs  and  the  bases  of  the  toes  flesh-coloured, 
the  rest  of  the  feet  and  webs  black. 

Very  few  eggs  of  these  petrels  were  found. 
Wilson's  petrels  had  barely  begun  to  lay,  while 
the  eggs  of  the  other  species  had  almost  all  hatched 
out.  The  eggs  of  the  Wilson's  petrels  which  we 
found  were  pure  white,  and  about  the  size  of  a 
small  hen's  egg. 

After  collecting  a  number  of  these  petrels  for 
specimens,  I  climbed  higher  up  the  ravine.  It 
was  a  very  warm  and  tiring  business.  The  water 
had  worn  the  rocky  bed  until  it  had  formed  a 
deep  valley.  In  some  places  in  the  bed  of  the 
stream  there  was  a  sheer  drop  of  twelve  or  fourteen 
feet  from  one  rock  to  another.  Followed  by  the 
ship's  carpenter  I  went  laboriously  on,  carefully 
searching  every  nook  and  cranny  for  the  nests 
of  petrels.  t  In  some  places  we  found  deep  caves, 
hollowed  out  by  the  stream  probably  during  heavy 
rainfalls.  These  caves  were  dripping  with  moisture 
and  were  full  of  land-crabs,  which  scuttled  away 
at  our  approach,  their  legs  making  a  peculiar 
rattling  noise  on  the  rocky  floor.  They  also  made 
a  continuous  snapping  sound  with  their  pincers, 
which  they  waved  about  in  a  threatening  manner. 
The  land-crabs  of  Trinidad  have  been  described 
as  ferocious  and  of  huge  size  ;  but  all  those  we 
saw  were  small  and  most  inoffensive,  their  one  idea 
being  to  hurry  away  from  us  and  to  hide  in  the 


44         VOYAGES   OF  A  NATURALIST 

nearest  available  hole.  They  were  all  of  a  pale 
saffron  colour,  and  the  largest  we  were  able  to 
catch  was  not  more  than  four  inches  across  the 
carapace. 

The  higher  up  the  ravine  we  climbed,  the  more 
abundant  the  dead  trees  became.  In  all  of  them, 
as  well  as  on  the  rocks  which  were  scattered  about 
on  the  sides  of  the  valley,  white  terns  were  nesting 
in  great  numbers.  I  knocked  over  several  with  a 
stick,  and  at  once  noticed  that  they  belonged  to  a 
different  species  to  those  obtained  in  the  South 
Pacific  during  our  first  voyage.  The  bill  of  these 
Trinidad  birds  was  wholly  black,  while  that  of 
the  Pacific  and  Indian  Ocean  birds  has  a  base  of 
a  hyacinth-blue  colour.  There  are  also  other  less 
noticeable  differences  between  the  white  terns  of 
South  Trinidad  and  those  of  the  Pacific  Ocean. 

On  our  return  to  England,  and  after  a  thorough 
examination  and  comparison,  I  had  the  pleasure 
of  describing  as  a  new  species  this  lovely  little 
tern  of  South  Trinidad,  and  naming  it  after  Lord 
Crawford  (Gygis  crawfordi).*  There  was  only  one 
other  specimen  of  this  bird  from  South  Trinidad 
in  the  British  Museum,  and  this  example  had  been 
collected  by  Lord  Crawford  in  1875  during  his 
first  visit  to  the  island.  This  skin  had  remained 
undescribed,  owing  to  the  fact  that  the  bills  of 
both  forms  become  totally  black  in  the  dried 
skins,   the  light  blue  of  the  Pacific  and  Indian 

*  "Bulletin  Brit.  Orn.  Club,"  XVI.,  p.   102. 


LORD  CRAWFORD'S  TERN  45 

Ocean  birds  turning  black  within  two  days  after 
the  bird  has  been  skinned. 

Gygis  crawfordi  lays  a  single  egg,  either  on  a 
narrow  ledge  of  rock  or  else  on  the  branch  of  a 
dead  tree.  No  nest  is  made,  the  egg  being  laid 
in  a  cleft  or  in  a  small  hollow,  and  some  of  those 
we  found  were  placed  in  such  a  shallow  depression 
on  the  bare  branch  of  some  dead  tree  that  a  slight 
push  was  sufficient  to  dislodge  them. 

The  way  these  eggs  are  balanced  is  extraordinary, 
but  the  tenacious  hold  of  the  young  bird  in  a 
similarly  insecure  position  is  perhaps  more  aston- 
ishing. Several  times  I  drove  a  tern  suddenly 
from  its  nest  for  the  purpose  of  seeing  if  the  young 
bird  could  retain  its  position.  Although  the  old 
bird  in  every  case  left  the  nest  in  such  a  hurry  as 
to  upset  the  balance  of  the  young  one,  the  latter 
clung  on  and  pulled  itself  back  in  a  few  seconds 
by  means  of  its  sharp  claws  and  bill. 

It  was  well  for  the  birds  that  they  could  retain 
their  hold  so  cleverly,  for  the  ground  underneath 
the  trees  was  covered  with  land-crabs,  which  would 
have  quickly  devoured  any  unfortunate  young 
bird  falling  from  its  nest. 

During  the  whole  of  the  time  we  spent  amongst 
the  colonies  of  these  white  terns  we  were  continually 
mobbed  by  the  old  birds,  which  tried  to  divert  our 
attention  from  the  eggs  and  young.  They  were  not 
aggressive  in  any  way,  but  fluttered  within  a  few 
inches  of  our  faces,  uttering  all  the  while  a  soft 


46         VOYAGES   OF  A  NATURALIST 

croak.  On  several  occasions  they  settled  on  our 
hats,  so  fearless  were  they,  or  was  it  in  ignorance 
of  the  nature  of  man  ? 

I  stopped  opposite  a  fallen  tree,  on  which  a  pair 
was  nesting,  for  the  purpose  of  photographing 
them  and  their  nest.  The  birds  sat  quite  still 
while  I  put  up  my  half-plate  tripod  camera, 
and  were  not  at  all  alarmed  at  the  flapping 
focussing  cloth.  All  seemed  easy,  but  before  I 
could  expose  a  plate  I  was  surrounded  by  a  flutter- 
ing croaking  swarm  of  birds,  and  I  had  to  keep 
driving  them  off  as  they  hovered  in  front  of  my 
camera. 

The  number  of  these  birds  on  South  Trinidad 
is  incalculable.  The  entire  plumage  is  of  an  ivory 
whiteness,  and  they  flash  in  the  sunlight  like 
flakes  of  snow.  From  the  sea-shore  to  the  extreme 
summit  of  the  island  they  were  sitting  in  swarms 
on  every  rock  and  dead  tree,  while  the  air  seemed 
full  of  them.  After  leaving  Trinidad,  too,  while 
steaming  southward,  we  passed  flock  after  flock. 

The  eggs  are  most  handsome.  About  the  size 
of  a  bantam's,  and  large  for  the  bird,  they  are 
heavily  blotched  and  streaked  with  yellowish  olive- 
brown  on  a  somewhat  lighter  ground  colour. 

We  found  young  birds  of  all  ages.  They  are 
covered  with  a  grey  down  at  first,  but  older  birds 
have  their  white  feathers  suffused  with  a  dirty 
yellow  colour.  On  leaving  the  nest  they  have 
black  quills  to  the  wings  and  tail-feathers,  but  the 


Q 

< 
x 

P 


w 

t> 

O 

CO 

fc 

O 

H 
O 
< 

Ph 

z 

x 

K 

CO 


00 

O 
< 


TAMENESS   OF  THE   BIRDS  47 

plumage  of  the  adult  is  entirely  white,  with  the 
exception  of  a  narrow  ring  of  black  feathers  en- 
circling the  eye.  The  bill,  as  I  have  already  noted, 
is  jet  black,  while  the  feet  are  pale  sea-blue,  the 
webs  joining  the  toes  being  milky  white.  Both 
old  and  young  have  the  middle  toe  furnished 
with  a  strong  and  sharp  claw,  which  is  specially 
useful  to  the  young  bird  when  it  is  in  danger  of 
falling  from  the  nesting  place. 

Several  pairs  of  gannets*,  a  smaller  bird  than 
our  well-known  solan  goose,  but  somewhat  simi- 
liarly  coloured  when  adult,  were  found  sitting 
on  their  nests  or  tending  their  young.  The  nests 
were  in  every  case  a  collection  of  sticks  placed 
in  a  suitable  position  on  the  fallen  trees.  We  found 
no  eggs,  but  the  young  were  in  all  stages  of  growth. 
The  newly-hatched  bird  is  covered  with  pure 
white  down,  but  it  has  a  black  bill,  and  a  patch  of 
bare  black  skin  surrounding  the  eyes  and  extend- 
ing down  the  neck  under  the  chin.  The  down 
on  the  forehead  stands  erect,  and  gives  the  bird 
a  most  comical  appearance. 

Photographs  were  obtained  of  these  birds 
without  any  difficulty,  and  most  of  the  old  gannets 
took  no  notice  at  all  of  our  presence.  In  fact, 
one  old  bird,  which  was  sitting  by  a  well-grown 
youngster,  took  so  little  interest  in  our  proceedings 
that  we  found  it  necessary  to  wake  it  up  in  order 
to  take  its  portrait. 

*  Sula  piscator. 


48         VOYAGES   OF  A  NATURALIST 

High  overhead  a  number  of  frigate  birds  were 
circling.  Every  now  and  again  one  would  plunge 
downwards  and  chase  a  gannet  which,  slowly 
flapping  up  from  the  sea,  was  bearing  a  mouthful 
of  food  to  its  young  on  the  hillside. 

These  frig-ate  birds,  of  which  there  are  two 
species  on  South  Trinidad,  get  their  food  chiefly 
by  robbing  the  gannets.  Woe  betide  the  gannet, 
as  it  slowly  wends  its  way  to  its  nest  and  young, 
if  it  is  spied  by  a  frigate  bird.  The  robber  at  once 
hurls  itself  on  its  victim,  and  the  gannet,  terrified 
at  the  attack  of  a  bird  so  much  larger  than  itself, 
drops  from  its  mouth  and  throat  all  the  fish  which 
it  has  been  at  such  pains  to  catch.  The  frigate 
bird  then  swoops  down  and,  catching  up  the  fallen 
fish  before  it  reaches  the  ground  or  sea,  makes  off 
and  swallows  the  stolen  food  at  leisure. 

Frigate  birds,  however,  do  not  always  rely 
on  this  method  of  getting  a  meal.  I  have  frequently 
seen  them  catching  fish  for  themselves,  and 
plunging  into  the  water  somewhat  after  the  manner 
of  a  tern.  I  have  also  seen  them  feeding  on  the 
remains  of  a  shark  which  had  been  killed  and 
thrown  overboard. 

The  commoner  of  the  two  frigate  birds  on  South 
Trinidad  is  the  greater  frigate,*  a  bird  of  large 
size,  larger  than  the  common  kite,  and  with  a  long 
forked  tail.  The  adult  male  is  a  glossy  greenish 
black,  the  feathers  are  of  a  lanceolate  shape,  and 

*  Fregata  aquila. 


X 


Z 

< 

X 


z 

— 

- 


H 
P 
O 
x 

z 

o 

o 


5* 

ft 

O 

o 
& 
p 
o 

A 

z 

< 

En 

hJ- 
P 
- 


FRIGATE    BIRDS  49 

under  the  chin  is  a  large  red  bag,  to  which  I 
alluded  in  a  former  chapter.  The  bill  is  long  and 
sharp,  and  the  upper  mandible  ends  with  a  large 
curved  hook,  a  most  formidable  weapon  of  offence 
and  defence.  The  females  and  young  have  no 
bag  on  the  throat,  and  have  the  underparts  white. 

The  other  species  was  the  lesser  frigate,*  which 
resembles  the  larger  except  for  its  much  smaller 
dimensions.  We  obtained  one  specimen,  and 
this  was  shot  from  the  deck  of  the  yacht  by 
Mr.  Lindsay.  The  lesser  frigate  bird  has  only 
once  previously  been  obtained  in  the  Atlantic. 
This  was  on  the  occasion  of  the  visit  of  the 
"  Discovery  "  to  South  Trinidad,  in  September, 
1901.  It  is,  however,  a  common  bird  in  the 
Pacific  and  Indian  Oceans. 

Apparently  neither  of  these  frigate  birds  was 
nesting  on  South  Trinidad  during  our  visit,  but  they 
may  breed  on  the  neighbouring  islets  of  Martin 
Vas,  in  the  immediate  vicinity  of  which  we  found 
them  numerous. 

My  great  hope  was  that  there  might  be  a  land- 
bird  on  South  Trinidad,  because  all  the  other 
South  Atlantic  islands,  with,  of  course,  the  excep- 
tion of  Saint  Paul's  Rocks,  on  which  there  are  no 
trees  or  vegetation  of  any  kind,  have  their  peculiar 
forms  of  land-birds.  During  the  first  day  we  were 
ashore,  I  kept  to  the  "  Cascade,"  knowing  that 
there  was  no  time  to  search  thoroughly  amongst 

*  F.  and. 


50         VOYAGES   OF  A  NATURALIST 

the  tree-ferns  and  other  vegetation  at  the  summit 
of  the  island.  I  wished,  moreover,  to  make  as 
complete  a  collection  as  possible  of  the  sea-birds, 
and  especially  of  the  petrels  peculiar  to  the 
islands.  In  this  I  was  successful,  as  specimens  of 
all  the  birds  previously  known  from  South  Trinidad, 
as  well  as  of  one  species — the  noddy  tern — new  to 
its  avifauna,  were  collected  during  that  afternoon. 

During  the  following  night  we  steamed  slowly 
away,  and  at  daylight  went  about,  returning  to 
our  former  landing  place.  At  9  o'clock  we  were 
ashore  again,  and  at  once  climbed  to  the  plateau. 
Mr.  Meade-Waldo  and  I  then  set  off  to  climb 
to  the  summit.  We  each  took  a  sailor  with  us  to 
carry  our  lunch,  cameras,  and  so  on,  but  soon  after 
we  had  begun  the  ascent  of  the  "  Cascade,"  one 
of  the  sailors  gave  out,  and  we  had  to  leave  him 
to  return  to  the  ship.  After  this  we  had  to  carry 
our  own  cameras,  and  soon  found  that  these, 
together  with  collecting  gun,  butterfly  net,  and 
other  things,  considerably  retarded  our  progress. 

After  leaving  the  plateau  we  decided  that  our 
best  way  to  reach  the  tree-ferns  was  to  follow  the 
"  Cascade  "  as  much  as  possible,  and  then  climb 
round  a  huge  crown-shaped  rock,  which  towered 
above  us.  Passing  up  the  rocky  bed  of  the 
"  Cascade,"  which  I  had  explored  the  previous 
day,  we  found  that  beyond  it  the  bed  of  the  stream 
was  somewhat  more  open.  Masses  of  ferns  were 
growing  close  to  the  water,  and  in  these  my  com- 


kT    " 


THE    "CROWN         ROCK,    SOUTH    TRINIDAD     ISLAND. 


[50    ; 


WE   CLIMB   TO   THE   SUMMIT  51 

panion  caught  a  number  of  moths.  The  sides  of 
the  valley  were  here  very  steep  and  covered  with 
grass,  but  we  soon  discovered  that  the  ground  was 
remarkably  brittle. 

We  kept  to  the  bed  of  the  stream  until  the 
"  Crown "  rock  was  reached.  The  stream  here 
was  full  of  fallen  trees,  every  one  of  them  tenanted 
by  a  pair  or  more  of  white  terns.  The  trees  were 
lying  at  all  angles,  several  of  them  completely 
blocked  our  passage,  while  the  sides  of  the  valley 
were  literally  covered  with  dead  branches,  which 
lay  partly  or  wholly  overgrown  by  the  ferns  and 
grass,  so  that  our  progress  was  extremely  slow 
and  tedious.  Every  now  and  again  a  moth 
fluttered  out  from  under  our  feet,  and  many  were 
captured. 

A  little  further  on  the  bed  of  the  stream  was  dry 
and  full  of  boulders  of  all  sizes,  round  which  we 
had  to  make  a  wide  detour.  At  last  we  reached 
the  '  Crown  "  rock,  where  a  halt  was  made  for 
luncheon. 

After  a  too  short  half -hour's  rest  we  started 
our  climb  again,  and  soon  found  that  we  still  had 
the  most  difficult  part  of  our  journey  in  front, 
for  after  we  had  skirted  the  "  Crown  "  rock  we 
came  to  a  narrow  ridge  of  crumbling  ground. 
covered  with  grass  but  giving  no  safe  foothold. 
On  each  side  of  us  the  ground  sloped  down 
precipitously  for  several  hundred  feet,  and  a  slip 
would  have  been  disastrous.     For  some  distance 


52         VOYAGES   OF  A  NATURALIST 

we  proceeded  in  slow  fashion,  planting  our  feet 
firmly  in  the  crumbling  earth,  not  daring  to  hold 
on  by  the  long  grass,  which  would  have  torn 
away  at  once,  till  at  length  a  broader  stretch  of 
land  opened  in  front  of  us.  The  ground  was  still 
very  brittle,  but  it  offered  a  good  foothold.  In 
front  of  us,  at  a  distance  of  a  few  hundred  feet, 
we  could  see  the  top  of  the  island  covered  with 
low  bushes  resembling  lauristinus,  amongst  which 
was  a  clump  of  trees  bearing  shining  leaves.  In 
these  trees  numbers  of  gannets  were  sitting  on 
their  nests,  and  they  seemed  to  be  considerably 
astonished  at  seeing  us  approaching  their  home. 
We  quickly  scrambled  to  the  trees,  and  a  few 
minutes  later  the  summit  of  South  Trinidad  was 
gained. 

I  shall  never  forget  the  magnificent  view  which 
now  lay  revealed.  Behind  us  was  the  "  Cascade,'" 
on  each  side  deep  valleys  filled  with  tree-ferns, 
while  to  our  front  the  whole  of  the  windward  side 
of  the  island  was  exposed  to  view.  Immediately 
below  a  precipice  fell  sheer  down  for  several 
hundreds  of  feet,  and  then  the  land  gradually 
sloped  away  to  the  green  undulating  country 
which  borders  the  windward  side  of  South 
Trinidad.  In  the  distance,  and  close  to  the  water's 
edge,  the  remains  of  a  Portuguese  convict 
settlement  was  to  be  seen.  There  appeared  to  be 
little  of  it  standing,  but  the  foundations  of  the 
houses,  deserted  for  many  years  past,  could  be 


< 
H 
Ph 

Eh 

H 

w 

— 

w 

H 

w 

Eh 


O 

M 

o 

Q 


EH 

w 

O 

02 


A  SPLENDID   VIEW  53 

clearly  distinguished.  To  our  immediate  right 
was  a  peak  of  about  the  same  height  as  that  upon 
which  we  were  standing.  The  ground  had  slipped 
away  from  it  to  such  an  extent  that  all  vegetation 
had  been  destroyed,  and  only  the  deep  red-coloured 
earth  was  to  be  seen.  Further  to  the  right 
towered  the  "  Sugarloaf,"  boldly  outlined  against 
the  deep  blue  sea.  It  was  full  of  crannies  and 
ledges,  in  which  petrels  were  nesting  in  vast 
numbers,  As  soon  as  we  appeared  above  the  sky- 
line, these  birds  left  their  nests  and  flew  backwards 
and  forwards  in  immense  and  continually  in- 
creasing numbers,  until  the  air  was  full  of  a 
screaming  multitude  of  birds.  Below,  above  and 
on  all  sides  of  us  these  birds  wheeled  and  shrieked, 
until  the  clamour  became  almost  deafening. 

Beyond  the  "  Sugarloaf  "  we  could  see  "  Noah's 
Ark,"  a  mass  of  rock  rising  straight  up  from  the 
sea,  and  shaped  like  the  familiar  toy  so  dear  to 
children.  This  rock  was  likewise  covered  with 
petrels,  and  they  also  joined  the  tumult.  At  the 
foot  of  "  Noah's  Ark "  the  pirate's  treasure  is 
supposed  to  be  buried.  Whether  there  is  really 
any  treasure  is  doubtful,  but  if  there  is,  it  is 
probable  that  it  will  never  be  found,  as,  owing 
to  the  brittle  character  of  the  soil,  the  land 
is  continually  slipping,  so  that  by  this  time  the 
treasure  must  be  buried  deep,  beyond  all  hope  of 
recovery. 

Far  away,  and  almost  on  the  horizon,  the  rocky 


54         VOYAGES   OF  A  NATURALIST 

islets  of  Martin  Vas,  on  which  no  one  is  yet  known 
to  have  landed,  were  discernible. 

It  was  next  to  impossible  to  make  our  way 
down  to  the  windward  side  of  the  island ; 
moreover,  it  was  getting  late  in  the  afternoon, 
so  we  decided  that  the  best  thing  to  do  was  to 
descend  to  the  "  Pier  "  by  the  same  way  we  had 
come.  But  instead  of  taking  the  "  Cascade " 
valley,  we  began  to  descend  by  another  deep 
valley  close  to  it.  The  surface  of  the  ground 
here  was  even  more  brittle  than  in  the  "  Cascade  " 
valley,  and  the  descent  was  very  steep.  My 
companion  and  a  sailor  started  first  and  safely 
reached  the  first  of  the  tree-ferns.  Seeing  that 
they  were  safely  down  I  started,  but  the  ground 
was  now  considerably  broken  up  by  their  feet, 
and  I  found  that  it  was  extremely  difficult  to  get 
a  foothold  in  the  powdery  red-coloured  earth, 
which  slipped  away  from  under  me  like  sand. 
Suddenly,  and  without  any  warning,  the  whole  of 
the  ground  gave  way,  and,  enveloped  in  a  cloud  of 
choking  dust,  I  felt  myself  rushing  down  the 
incline,  and,  before  I  could  realise  what  had 
happened,  I  was  standing,  or  rather  sitting,  close 
to  my  companions.  My  first  thought  was  for  the 
camera  and  slides  which,  together  with  my  gun, 
had  been  slung  on  my  back.  Most  fortunately 
these  were  uninjured,  and,  as  I  afterwards  found, 
none  of  the  plates  had  suffered  in  any  way, 
although  the  camera-case  was  full  of  dust. 


A  VALLEY   OF   TREE-FERNS  55 

After  this  the  way  became  a  little  easier.  The 
bed  of  the  valley  was  dry,  but  it  had  evidently 
been  hollowed  out  by  water,  for  the  rocks  showed 
considerable  wear  from  trickling  water.  Possibly 
it  is  only  in  the  rainy  season  that  there  is  any 
water  in  this  valley,  for  at  the  time  of  our  visit 
the  rocks  were  covered  with  a  thick  tangle  of  grass. 
Amongst  the  grass  and  climbing  over  some  of  the 
fallen  trees,  a  few  of  which  were  to  be  seen  in  this 
valley,  was  a  species  of  climbing  bean.  This  bean 
was  in  flower,  and  is  doubtless  the  same  as  that 
mentioned  by  Mr.  Knight  as  growing  thickly  on 
the  windward  side  of  the  island. 

Mention  may  here  be  made  of  some  mice  which 
we  saw  in  considerable  numbers,  both  in  this 
and  in  the  "  Cascade  "  valley — to  what  species 
they  belonged  we  were  unable  to  determine. 
They  were  small  and  of  a  greyish  colour.  We 
both  thought  that  they  looked  like  a  small  vole, 
but  they  were  extremely  quick  in  their  movements, 
and  the  grass  was  so  thick  and  high  that  we  were 
unable  to  shoot  any  specimens. 

The  sides  of  this  valley  were  thickly  grown 
with  tree-ferns,  and  to  these  we  now  turned  our 
attention.  The  ferns  were  from  twelve  to  twenty- 
five  feet  in  height.  Their  stems  were  quite  bare, 
but  at  the  top  a  number  of  fern-like  fronds  grew 
at  right-angles  to  the  stem.  The  tree-ferns  on 
South    Trinidad    grow    very   close    together,    and 

owing  to  this  fact  and  to  the  ground  being  strewn 

f2 


56         VOYAGES   OF  A   NATURALIST 

with  boulders  of  all  sizes,  over  which  the  grass 
had  sprung  up  in  great  luxuriance,  walking  through 
a  forest  of  these  ferns  was  a  tedious  business. 

Every  now  and  again  I  was  thrown  into  a 
state  of  excitement  on  hearing  a  shrill  twit- 
tering sound  just  above  my  head.  Visions  of 
a  land-bird  were  always  in  my  mind,  but 
time  after  time  I  was  disappointed  to  find 
that  the  twitterings  were  caused  by  white  terns 
which  were  nesting  on  the  tops  of  the  decaying 
trunks  of  dead  tree-ferns.  Finally  we  came  to  the 
reluctant  conclusion  that  there  is  no  land-bird 
of  any  kind  on  South  Trinidad.  We  had  carefully 
searched  the  tallest  trees  on  the  summit,  and 
there,  as  in  the  tree-ferns,  we  found  no  signs  of 
such  a  bird. 

On  the  trunk  of  one  of  the  tree-ferns,  Mr.  Meade- 
Waldo  found  an  orchid,  which  he  sent  home  to 
England,  but  apart  from  this  and  the  bean  there 
was  no  other  plant  in  this  valley  which  we  had 
not  found  in  that  of  the  "  Cascade." 

Instead  of  taking  us  down  to  the  shore,  as  we 
had  fully  expected,  we  found  that  the  valley  was 
a  mere  cul-de-sac,  and  ended  with  a  steep 
precipice  of  several  hundreds  of  feet  in  height. 

It  was  by  this  time  nearly  four  o'clock  in  the 
afternoon,  and  we  had  arranged  to  be  at  the 
landing  place  at  five,  and  here  we  were  nearly 
two  thousand  feet  above  the  sea,  and  the  yacht 
looking    a    mere    speck    far    below    us.      It    was 


Q 

< 

■"T" 

o 

fel 

53 

H* 
fi 

^ 

H 

<» 

*e 

W 

P 

S 

O 

CO 

K) 

H 

£5 

CO 

2* 

eg 

o 

5si 

fc 

rt 

r« 

s 

a. 

i 

8 

3*. 

H 

&5 

o 

H 

o 

P3 

H 

ft* 

-^-^ 

H 

W 

H 

A  DIFFICULT  CLIMB  57 

necessary,  therefore,  to  get  out  of  the  valley  in 
which  we  were  trapped  as  quickly  as  possible. 
To  climb  the  slide  we  came  down  was  an  impos- 
sibility, my  fall  earlier  in  the  afternoon  having 
completely  shut  that  way  off  from  us.  To  descend 
from  where  we  were  was  also  an  impossibility, 
owing  to  the  precipice.  The  only  way  open  to  us  was 
to  force  our  way  through  the  tree-ferns  and  gain 
the  ridge  and  climb  up  that  to  the  gannets'  nests. 

We  all  three  felt  that  we  had  had  enough 
climbing.  Water  there  was  none ;  all  our  drink 
had  been  consumed  earlier  in  the  afternoon. 
However,  we  had  to  get  out  somehow,  and  the 
sooner  the  better  ;  so  we  started  off,  and  at  length 
reached  the  ridge  up  which  we  slowly  made  our 
way.  Arrived  at  the  top  we  started  for  the 
'  Cascade  "  valley,  and  followed  the  same  track 
as  that  we  had  ascended  some  hours  previously. 

Going  down  this  track  was  much  more  un- 
pleasant than  coming  up.  On  our  right  was  a 
precipice,  while  the  outlook  on  our  left  was 
scarcely  less  formidable,  for  in  that  direction  the 
ground  fell  away  almost  sheer  for  at  least  three 
hundred  feet.  Our  path  was  a  narrow  ridge, 
just  wide  enough  to  give  a  foothold,  and  that  a 
most  insecure  one.  At  length,  however,  we  reached 
the  "  Crown  "  rock,  and  skirting  it  again  we  came 
in  sight  of  the  beginning  of  the  "  Cascade,"  the 
clear  water  of  which  was  so  tempting  that  the 
seaman  and  I  resolved  to  climb  down  to  it.     Never 


58         VOYAGES   OF  A  NATURALIST 

was  water  more  refreshing,  and  not  even  the 
presence  of  vast  numbers  of  land-crabs  was  suffi- 
cient to  deter  us  from  a  long  and  much-needed 
drink.  Then,  feeling  greatly  refreshed,  we  fol- 
lowed the  course  of  the  '  Cascade,'3  and  little  by 
little  made  our  way  down  towards  the  shore. 

In  many  places  the  "  Cascade  "  formed  waterfalls 
as  much  as  ten  or  twelve  feet  in  height,  and  these 
falls  were  not  easy  to  negotiate.  "  Jack,"  however, 
produced  a  piece  of  rope,  and  so  we  were  able  to 
lower  ourselves  down  from  rock  to  rock,  and 
finally  reached  the  shore  without  mishap. 

The  sailor  who  accompanied  us  on  this,  and 
afterwards  on  many  excursions  of  this  kind,  was 
the  coxswain  of  the  steam  launch,  and  volunteered 
to  carry  our  extra  baggage,  such  as  cameras  and 
so  on.  Throughout  this  voyage  he  gave  his 
services  in  this  way,  and  to  his  untiring  persever- 
ance and  willingness  we  are  greatly  indebted. 

We  reached  the  "  Pier "  about  six  o'clock  in 
the  evening,  and  for  my  part  I  was  most  thankful 
to  get  into  the  boat  and  rest.  Notwithstanding 
the  hard  work,  however,  I  had  never  spent  a  more 
delightful  or  interesting  time. 

During  the  three  voyages  that  it  has  been  my 
good  fortune  to  make  in  the  "  Valhalla  "  with 
Lord  Crawford,  many  interesting  and  beautiful 
islands  were  visited,  but  to  my  mind  none  of  these 
places  possesses  the  charm  of  this  small  uninhabited 
spot  in  the  South  Atlantic. 


CHAPTER    V. 


MARTIN  VAS. 


The  ship  was  hove  to  off  South  Trinidad  during 
the  following  night,  and  early  next  morning  we 
steamed  slowly  towards  the  rocky  islets  of  Martin 
Vas. 

Owing  to  the  insufficient  manner  in  which  the 
sea  surrounding  this  group  of  islands  has  been 
charted,  it  was  necessary  to  proceed  very 
cautiously.  Suddenly  the  water  became  very 
shallow,  and,  although  we  were  then  about  two 
miles  away  from  the  nearest  islet,  it  was  necessary 
to  go  full  speed  astern.  While  we  were  backing 
in  this  way  a  large  rock,  covered  by  some  six 
feet  of  water,  was  seen  within  a  few  yards  of  the 
ship.  This  rock  is  not  marked  on  the  chart,  and 
we  thus  had  a  very  narrow  escape  from  an  enforced 
residence  on  South  Trinidad. 

At  length  a  passage  was  found  for  the  ship, 
and  we  drew  in  to  within  about  half  a  mile  of  the 
main  islet.  We  then  set  out  in  boats  and  rowed 
towards  the  shore. 

Martin    Vas    consists    of   four   rocks,    the    two 


60         VOYAGES   OF  A  NATURALIST 

largest  being  connected  together  by  a  narrow- 
strip  of  land  which  is  only  noticeable  at  low 
water. 

It  does  not  seem  to  have  been  previously 
mentioned  that  when  approached  from  the  south- 
east, three  of  these  islets  bear  a  striking  resemblance 
to  the  outline  of  South  Trinidad,  though  on  a 
much  smaller  scale.  The  largest  of  them  is  about 
300  feet  in  height,  and  its  sides  are  precipitous  ; 
but  the  summit  appears  to  form  a  plateau.  If 
the  ground  of  this  island  is  as  brittle  as  that  of 
South  Trinidad,  I  should  imagine  that  it  would  be 
nearly  impossible  to  climb  to  the  plateau.  No 
one,  however,  has,  so  far  as  I  can  ascertain,  landed 
on  Martin  Vas. 

It  has  been  said  that  the  heavy  surf  makes  it 
impossible  to  land.  At  the  time  of  our  visit, 
however,  the  weather  was  exceptionally  fine 
and  the  sea  quite  smooth,  and  had  we  been  able 
to  spare  the  time,  we  could  without  any  doubt  have 
got  ashore  on  the  largest  of  the  islets. 

As  we  approached  numbers  of  the  greater 
frigate  bird  appeared  and  circled  overhead.  Many 
sooty  terns*  also  came  off  from  the  main  islet, 
and  these  in  company  with  the  common  noddy 
seemed  to  be  the  commonest  birds  inhabiting 
the  group.  A  few  Wilson's  and  Trinidad  petrels 
were  observed,  but  all  these  were  flying  over  the 
sea,    either   in   the   direction   of,    or   away   from, 

*  Sterna  fuliginosa. 


ffl 


If    i 


EC 

< 

> 


- 


O 


H 


■* 


BIRDS  ROUND   THE   ISLETS  61 

Trinidad.  None  of  them  seemed  to  be  nesting 
on  Martin  Vas. 

An  example  of  the  smaller  noddy  tern*  was 
seen  amongst  the  common  noddy  and  sooty  terns, 
and  a  large  white-breasted  shearwaterf  passed 
my  boat.  Several  pairs  of  gannets,  of  the  same 
species  as  that  found  on  South  Trinidad,  were  also 
seen,  but  they  did  not  appear  to  have  nests  on 
Martin  Vas. 

The  sooty  tern  does  not  seem  to  have  been 
recorded  from  Martin  Vas  or  South  Trinidad 
before,  though  it  probably  is  quite  common  there. 
To  authenticate  our  identification  a  specimen  was 
obtained,  and  this  was  the  only  bird  we  shot  during 
the  morning. 

I  do  not  think  that  the  islets  of  Martin  Vas 
are  inhabited  by  any  birds  of  great  interest,  and 
probably  South  Trinidad  offers  more  suitable 
nesting  places. 

The  sea  round  these  islets  is  inhabited  by 
numerous  sharks,  almost  as  many  being  seen  here 
as  at  Saint  Paul's  Rocks.  Many  were  caught  from 
the  ship  while  we  were  away  in  the  boats,  but 
they  were  not  of  any  great  size,  their  average 
length  being  about  six  feet. 

Shortly  after  mid-day  we  returned  to  the  yacht, 
which  at  once  got  under  steam  and  left  for 
Tristan  da  Cunha. 

During  the  two  days  spent  on  South  Trinidad 

*  Micranous  leucocapilliis.  f  Puffinus  gravis  ? 


62         VOYAGES   OF  A  NATURALIST 

and  Martin  Vas  a  large  collection  of  birds  was  made. 
They  were  kept  in  the  refrigerator  until  I  could 
finish  skinning  them,  a  task  which  occupied  several 
days. 

The  series  of  skins  of  the  petrels  is  very  interest- 
ing, and  seems  to  show  that  Wilson's  petrel,  which 
was  described  as  a  new  species  from  examples 
brought  home  by  the  "  Discovery,"  is  in  reality 
the  same  as  (Estrelata  arminjoniana,  described 
many  years  ago  by  Professor  Giglioli.  Owing, 
however,  to  the  specimens  brought  home  by  the 
naturalists  of  the  "  Discovery  "  being  in  freshly 
moulted  plumage,  they  appeared  to  belong  to  a 
different  and  undescribed  species. 


CHAPTER    VI. 


TRISTAN    DA    CUNHA. 


Owing  to  the  very  fine  weather  and  light  winds 
the  passage  from  Trinidad  and  Martin  Vas  to 
Tristan  da  Cunha  occupied  twelve  days. 

Tristan  da  Cunha  is  the  largest  of  a  group  of 
three  islands,  all  of  which  are  within  sight  of  one 
another  ;  but  Nightingale  Island  and  Inaccessible 
Island,  the  other  two  of  the  group,  are  insignificant 
in  size  and  appearance  compared  with  Tristan  da 
Cunha,  the  peak  of  which  rises  over  8,000  feet 
above  the  sea. 

Gough  Island,  which  is  situated  about  two 
hundred  miles  to  the  south  and  slightly  east  of 
Tristan  da  Cunha,  should  probably  be  included 
in  this  group,  owing  to  its  somewhat  similar 
avifauna. 

A  large  number  of  sea-birds,  including  several 
species  of  albatroses,  as  well  as  petrels,  breed  on 
Tristan  da  Cunha  and  the  two  smaller  islands  in 
the  immediate  neighbourhood. 

Long  before  the  islands  were  sighted  sea-birds 
became  very  numerous.     Two  species  of  petrels 


64         VOYAGES   OF  A  NATURALIST 

which  we  saw  at  no  great  distance  from  Tristan 
da  Cunha  deserve  special  mention,  because  up 
to  the  present  time  no  one  has  succeeded  in  dis- 
covering where  they  breed. 

One  of  these  is  the  great  shearwater,*  a  well- 
known  visitor  to  British  seas,  and  I  think  the  only 
"  British "  bird  whose  eggs  are  now  unknown. 
These  birds  were  seen  in  some  abundance  in  the 
neighbourhood  of  these  islands,  and  in  nearly  every 
case  there  were  two  individuals,  doubtless  male 
and  female,  together.  A  few  weeks  later  I  ex- 
amined a  skin  of  the  great  shearwater  in  the  Cape 
Town  Museum,  which  had  been  caught  on  Inac- 
cessible Island,  and  there  would  seem  to  be  little 
doubt  that  this  bird  breeds  on  one  of  these  three 
islands. 

The  other  petrel  which  was  encountered,  not 
only  before  we  reached  Tristan  da  Cunha  but  also 
between  that  island  and  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope, 
was  (Estrelata  incerta,  of  which  very  few  specimens 
have  ever  been  obtained.  It  is  about  the  size 
of  a  large  pigeon,  and  of  a  dull  brown  on  the  back 
with  yellowish-brown,  almost  golden,  neck,  and 
white  underparts.  The  three  skins  in  the  British 
Museum  were  all  obtained  in  the  South  Atlantic 
near  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope,  and  possibly  this 
bird  also  nests  on  one  of  these  three  islands. 

As  the  yacht  gradually  drew  nearer  to  the 
islands  the  number  of  albatroses  increased.     The 

*  Puffinus  gravis. 


Q 

Q 

Ei 


A  MAIL   FOR   THE  ISLANDERS        65 

yellow-nosed  albatros*  was  by  far  the  commonest 
of  the  three  species  seen  here.  This  bird  somewhat 
resembles  a  very  large  black-backed  gull,  the  head, 
however,  is  washed  with  smoky-grey,  and  a  bright 
yellowish-orange  streak  extends  along  the  whole 
length  of  the  bill.  The  great  albatrosf  was  in 
smaller  numbers,  and  most  of  them  left  the  vicinity 
of  the  ship  when  within  a  few  miles  of  the  island. 
Every  now  and  then  a  sooty  albatros,J  easily 
recognisable  by  its  sooty-brown  colour,  was 
observed. 

The  people  on  shore  soon  sighted  the  ship, 
and,  when  we  were  within  a  mile  of  the  settlement, 
two  boats  put  out,  and  a  few  minutes  later  the 
islanders  scrambled  aboard. 

Lord  Crawford  had  brought  a  mail  from  England, 
and  some  time  was  spent  in  sorting  the  various 
letters  and  packages.  By  the  time  this  was 
finished  it  was  too  late  to  go  on  shore  that  day, 
and  all  we  could  do  was  to  spend  an  hour  in  a 
boat  between  the  ship  and  the  island. 

I  had  a  talk  with  several  of  the  islanders  about 
the  birds,  and  especially  the  three  species  of  land- 
birds,  which  have  been  described  from  Tristan 
da  Cunha.  I  succeeded  in  getting  a  certain 
amount  of  information,  but  how  much  of  it  was 
correct  I  cannot  say. 

I  was  told  that  there  is  now  only  one  land-bird. 
This  is  a  thrush  called  Nesochicla  eremita,  which 

*  Diomedea  chlororhyncha.  f  D.  exulans.  %  D-  fuliginosa. 


66         VOYAGES  OF   A  NATURALIST 

in  colour  and  size  much  resembles  a  young  black- 
bird in  nestling  plumage.  The  Tristan  finch,* 
about  the  size  of  a  sparrow  and  of  a  greenish  colour, 
appears  to  be  extinct  on  Tristan  da  Cunha,  though 
we  were  told  that  it  is  still  common  on  Inaccessible 
Island.  Tristan  da  Cunha  is  overrun  with  rats, 
and  they  are  probably  responsible  for  the  ex- 
tinction of  the  finch. 

I  also  made  enquiries  as  to  whether  the  flight- 
less moorhenf  still  existed  on  the  main  island, 
but  none  of  the  islanders  had  any  knowledge  of 
the  bird.  They,  however,  told  me  that  a  bird 
like  a  "  little  black  chicken  "  with  long  legs  is 
quite  common  on  Inaccessible.  There  is  little 
doubt  that  this  rail,  of  which  I  believe  no  specimens 
have  yet  been  obtained,  is  a  different  species  to 
that  which  was  formerly  found  on  Tristan  da 
Cunha.  Moseley  statesj  that  the  rail  of  Inacces- 
sible Island  was  described  to  him  by  two  men 
who  had  been  living  on  that  island  as  "  much 
smaller  "  than  Porphyriomis  nesiotis,  and  differing 
from  it  in  "  having  finer  legs  and  a  longer  beak." 

The  name  "Inaccessible,"  it  should  be  mentioned, 
was  given  to  the  island  on  account  of  the  inac- 
cessibility of  its  peak.  The  island  itself,  being 
fringed  with  a  thick  growth  of  kelp  weed,  is  not 
difficult  to  land  upon,  as  the  weed  prevents  the 
surf  from  breaking  on  the  shore. 

*  Nesospiza  acunhae.  f  Porphyriomis  nesiotis. 

X  "Notes  by  a  Naturalist,"  1892,  p.  105. 


A  NEW  DIVING   PETREL  67 

We  rowed  to  within  half  a  mile  of  the  shore  of 
Tristan  da  Cunha,  near  the  settlement.  The  sea 
was  perfectly  smooth,  and  had  it  been  earlier  in 
the  afternoon  we  should  have  landed.  The  settle- 
ment is  composed  of  about  sixteen  stone  houses, 
and  is  situated  at  the  foot  of  the  peaks  where  the 
grass-covered  ground  slopes  gradually  down  to 
the  sea.  Great  numbers  of  cattle  were  feeding 
on  this  grass  land.  The  islanders  sell  them  to 
passing  ships,  and  we  ordered  two  bullocks,  but 
owing  to  the  stormy  weather  which  set  in  that 
night  we  were  unable  to  hold  any  further  com- 
munication with  the  shore. 

During  the  evening  I  made  a  small  collection 
of  sea-birds.  Two  fine  examples  of  the  yellow- 
nosed  albatros  were  shot,  also  some  terns.*  The 
latter,  which  are  much  like  our  common  tern, 
were  very  numerous,  and,  judging  by  the  number 
of  young  birds  which  were  only  just  able  to  fly, 
there  must  be  a  considerable  nesting  colony. 

The  most  interesting  birds  which  we  saw, 
however,  were  some  diving  petrels,  which  proved 
to  belong  to  a  hitherto  undescribed  species,  f 
Superficially  these  petrels  resemble  the  diving 
petrel  of  the  Straits  of  Magellan,  but  they  are 
somewhat  smaller  and  have  a  much  greater  power 
of  flight.  On  several  occasions  I  saw  them  rise 
off  the  water  and  fly  away  out  of  sight,  whereas 

*  Sterna  vittata. 

f  Pelecanoides  dacunhae  Nicoll,  "Bull.  B.O.C,"  XVI.,  p.  103. 


68         VOYAGES   OF   A  NATURALIST 

those  found  in  the  Magellan  Straits  drop  into  the 
water  after  a  flight  of  about  fifty  to  one  hundred 
yards.  The  Tristan  da  Cunha  diving  petrels 
are  constantly  exposed  to  rough  weather  and  break- 
ing waves,  and  in  consequence  have  to  take  wing 
continually  to  avoid  being  drowned,  and  this  fact 
may  account  for  their  greater  powers  of  flight. 

They  were  met  with  soon  after  we  left  the 
yacht,  and  became  more  numerous  as  we  ap- 
proached the  land.  Half  a  mile  from  the  shore 
they  were  on  all  sides  of  us,  and  appeared  con- 
tinually close  to  the  boat,  when  instead  of  diving 
they  at  once  took  to  flight,  and  passed  away  at  a 
great  speed. 

The  peak  was  covered  by  a  mass  of  dense 
clouds,  through  which  there  appeared  every  now 
and  then  a  yellow-nosed  albatros  sailing  down 
from  its  nesting  place  to  the  sea.  We  were  informed 
that  a  great  many  of  these  birds  as  well  as  sooty 
albatroses  breed  inside  the  crater  at  the  top  of  the 
peak,  and  that  the  great  albatros  does  not  nest 
on  the  main  island,  but  only  on  Inaccessible. 

We  made  arrangements  with  one  of  the  natives 
to  visit  the  peak  the  next  day,  and  had  great  hopes 
of  making  some  interesting  additions  to  our  col- 
lection of  petrels.  Alas,  early  next  morning  the 
sea  had  risen  to  such  an  extent  that  landing  was 
quite  out  of  the  question.  We  lay  to  off  the  island 
for  three  days,  but  the  gale  increased  in  fury 
instead  of  abating,  and  as  our  stock  of  coal  was 


CLOUDS   AND   MIST  69 

getting  very  low,  we  were  forced  to  leave  and  shape 
our  course  for  Cape  Town. 

The  steward  bought  from  the  natives  of  Tristan 
da  Cunha  a  quantity  of  small  red  berries  which, 
when  stewed,  were  much  like  cranberries  in  flavour. 
This  fruit,  which  we  were  told  formed  the  prin- 
cipal food  of  the  thrush-like  bird,  is  probably  the 
Nertera  depressa  mentioned  by  Moseley  {ibid., 
p.  99). 

While  the  ship  was  hove  to  a  great  many  birds 
were  seen,  Antarctic  skuas  and  sooty  albatroses 
being  the  most  conspicuous.  They  were  too  know- 
ing or  else  too  well  fed  to  be  caught  on  a  hook, 
although  much  time  was  spent  in  fishing  for  them. 
We  also  saw  two  very  large  porpoises,  which  were 
nearly  pure  white  ;  they  played  about  for  several 
hours  round  the  bows  of  the  ship. 

During  the  three  days  of  waiting  the  weather 
was  so  thick  that,  although  we  were  repeatedly 
within  a  mile  of  Tristan  da  Cunha,  we  only  twice 
saw  the  peak,  which  suddenly  appeared  from 
amongst  the  clouds  and  remained  visible  for 
several  minutes,  the  rest  of  the  island  being  com- 
pletely buried  in  clouds  and  mist. 


G 


CHAPTER    VII. 


DASSEN   ISLAND. 


Seven  days  after  leaving  Tristan  da  Cunha  we 
sighted  Table  Mountain,  and  a  few  hours  later 
the  anchor  was  dropped  in  Table  Bay. 

During  the  week  at  sea  between  the  Tristan 
Islands  and  the  Cape  we  had  a  strong  west  wind 
which  was  most  favourable  for  sailing,  and  one 
day's  run  under  these  conditions  was  275  miles. 

During  our  second  day  at  sea,  when  nearly 
400  miles  from  Tristan  da  Cunha,  an  Antarctic 
skua  and  many  terns*  were  met  with.  These 
birds  must  wander  many  hundreds  of  miles  from 
land,  and,  as  they  were  not  likely  to  have  been 
migrating,  it  is  probable  that  they  follow  shoals 
of  small  fish,  and  thus  in  time  get  into  mid-ocean 
and  far  from  land.  Great  numbers  of  petrels 
and  albatroses  were  also  seen,  and,  indeed,  birds 
were  more  numerous  in  this  part  of  the  South 
Atlantic  than  elsewhere  in  the  oceans  that  we 
visited.  Petrels  of  several  species  were  frequent, 
either  singly  or  in  large  flocks,  while  yellow-nosed 

*  Sterna  vittata. 


TABLE   BAY  71 

albatroses  followed  us  until  we  were  within  sight 
of  Table  Mountain,  when  they  disappeared,  and 
their  place  was  taken  by  the  "  Cape  hen."* 

Table  Mountain  was  quite  clear  and  free  of 
clouds,  and  the  sea  was  a  flat  calm  as  we  turned 
into  Table  Bay.  When  we  anchored  in  the  Bay, 
at  some  distance  from  Cape  Town,  we  found  that 
cormorants  were  swarming  in  incredible  numbers 
right  up  to  the  shipping. 

During  our  stay  at  Cape  Town  the  "  Valhalla  " 
was  dry-docked  for  scraping  and  painting,  and 
this  necessitated  our  leaving  the  ship  and  taking 
rooms  in  an  hotel.  Eleven  days  were  spent  here, 
and  we  made  several  most  interesting  excursions 
in  company  with  Mr.  W.  L.  Sclater,  who  was  at 
that  time  the  director  of  the  Cape  Town  Museum. 
Under  his  guidance  we  climbed  Table  Mountain, 
but  by  far  the  most  interesting  experience  was 
a  trip  to  Dassen  Island. 

This  island  is  situated  about  35  miles  from 
Cape  Town  and  is  of  great  importance,  not  only 
on  account  of  its  fine  lighthouse,  but  also  owing 
to  its  being  a  Government  "  bird-preserve." 

Cormorants'  guano  and  penguins'  eggs  are 
collected  on  the  island  in  great  quantities  and 
shipped  to  Cape  Town. 

Having  obtained  special  permission  to  visit  the 
island  we  left  Cape  Town  on  February  3rd  in  the 
Government  tug  "Magnet,"  which  was  carrying  the 

*  Majaqueus  cequinoctialis. 

g2 


72         VOYAGES   OF  A  NATURALIST 

mails  there.  Soon  after  leaving  Cape  Town  we 
passed  close  to  Robben  Island,  which  is  set  apart 
as  a  leper  station.  Many  penguins  were  seen 
during  the  passage,  and  numbers  of  Cape  hens 
followed  the  launch.  Occasionally  sooty  and 
black-browed  albatroses  flew  by,  but  no  specimens 
were  obtained  as  we  had  no  guns  with  us,  on 
account  of  the  strict  regulations  enforced  on  Dassen 
Island,  where  the  firing  of  guns  is  prohibited  for 
fear  of  disturbing  the  nesting  birds. 

As  we  drew  close  to  the  island,  after  a  few 
hours'  passage,  we  came  in  view  of  enormous 
numbers  of  penguins  sitting  in  rows  upon  the 
shore,  while  the  sea  in  the  immediate  neighbour- 
hood was  crowded  with  them.  I  had  never  before 
seen  so  many  birds  together,  but  even  this  was 
nothing  to  what  we  were  to  witness  the  next 
day.  As  soon  as  we  landed  we  were  met  by  one 
of  the  lighthouse-keepers,  as  well  as  by  one  of  the 
men  whose  duty  it  is  to  see  that  the  birds  are 
undisturbed. 

Dassen  Island  is  in  no  place  more  than  a  few 
feet  above  the  level  of  the  sea ;  it  is  entirely 
uncultivated,  and  almost  completely  covered  with 
a  low  growing  ice-plant.  On  the  windward  side 
the  shore  is  rocky,  but  in  no  place  steep,  while 
on  the  leeward  side  it  is  sandy.  The  rest  of  the 
island  is  covered  with  a  deep  layer  of  sand 
in  which  the  penguins  dig  holes  for  their  nests 
at  the  roots  of  the  ice-plants. 


»      —      T 


'/ 


cc 


ft 
< 

GO 


GO 
CO 

ft 


E-t 

CO 

H 
ft 
H 

O 


ft 
ft 


co 
go 
< 

W 
o 

<! 

1-3 


PENGUINS   AND  THEIR   BURROWS     73 

As  soon  as  we  had  superintended  the  landing 
of  the  baggage,  of  which  our  cameras  formed  an 
important  part,  we  set  off  for  the  lighthouse, 
which  is  on  the  windward  side  of  the  island,  under 
the  guidance  of  one  of  the  assistant  light-keepers. 

A  narrow  path  leading  from  the  landing-place 
to  the  lighthouse  is  the  only  track  in  which  one 
may  walk  when  the  birds  are  nesting. 

On  each  side  of  the  track  were  numbers  of 
penguins,  both  adult  and  young  birds,  while  in 
many  cases  we  saw  old  birds  digging  out  their 
burrows,  at  the  end  of  which  their  two  eggs  are 
laid.  They  appear  to  use  their  feet  only  for 
digging.  Lying  flat  on  their  breasts  they  throw 
the  sand  out  behind  them  with  their  strong 
webbed  feet,  and  all  over  the  island  as  far  as  the 
eye  could  reach  showers  of  sand  were  shooting 
up  into  the  air. 

Our  guide  informed  us  that  we  were  too  early 
for  the  height  of  the  nesting  season,  only  a  few 
penguins  being  at  this  time  on  the  island.  He 
added  that  the  number  of  breeding  penguins  on 
this  small  island,  little  more  than  a  mile  square, 
was  estimated  at  nine  millions,  a  truly  astonishing 
number  ;  but  as  the  birds  on  shore  at  the  time 
of  our  visit  were  described  as  "  very  few  '  I  can 
well  believe  that  the  total  estimate  is  not  ex- 
aggerated. 

By  the  time  we  reached  the  lighthouse  it  was 
nearly  dark,   and  the  light  was  already  shining 


74         VOYAGES    OF    A   NATURALIST 

from  the  iron  tower.  Mr.  Bennett,  the  light-keeper, 
was  most  kind  and  obliging,  and  at  once  told  us 
that  he  would  be  delighted  to  put  us  up  for  the 
night  in  his  house.  Moreover,  he  showed  us  over 
the  lighthouse,  which  is  one  of  the  most  important 
at  the  Cape.  It  is  about  160  feet  in  height,  and 
is  built  entirely  of  iron.  The  light  is  revolving 
and  white,  and  about  4J  gallons  of  oil  are  burnt 
every  night.  Mr.  Bennett  told  me  that  very  few 
birds  ever  strike  the  glass  of  the  lighthouse, 
and  this  is  not  surprising,  as  Dassen  Island  is  too 
far  south  for  migrating  passerine  birds. 

Outside  the  windows  of  my  room  was  a  small 
colony  of  about  twenty  penguins  which,  through- 
out the  night,  kept  up  a  continual  "  braying."  The 
name,  "Jackass  Penguin,"  has  been  given  most 
appropriately  to  this  bird,  for  their  cry  is  a  perfect 
imitation  of  the  bray  of  an  ass.  The  birds  near 
the  house  were  answered  by  the  rest  of  the 
penguins  on  the  island,  and  a  most  extraordinar}^ 
noise  was  the  result,  a  constant  "  braying " 
resounding  from  all  parts  of  the  island. 

Early  next  morning  we  met  outside  the  light- 
house and  examined  some  of  the  penguins' 
nesting  holes,  many  of  which  contained  eggs  and 
sitting  birds.  No  nest  is  made,  but  the  two  eggs, 
which  are  white,  with  a  shell  of  coarse  texture, 
are  deposited  in  a  hollow  scooped  out  at  the  foot 
of  the  ice-plants,  or  in  a  natural  depression  in  the 
ground.     The  female  sits   very  close,   and  when 


i— ( 

CO 

CO 

Q 

CO 

»— i 
P 
O 

CO 
CO 

<1 

M 

O 

«i 

1-3 


A  MOST  WONDERFUL    SIGHT  75 

disturbed  crouches  down  and  rolls  her  head  from 
side  to  side,  occasionally  making  a  short  rush  at 
the  intruder,  and  all  the  while  she  utters  a 
grunting  noise.  As  a  rule  the  male  stands  close 
to  the  nest ;  occasionally,  however,  he  leaves  his 
mate  and  walks  down  to  the  sea  in  search  of  food 
for  her  and  himself. 

Dassen  Island  must  offer  a  most  wonderful  sight 
when  all  the  birds  are  ashore,  as  even  at  the  time 
of  our  visit  there  were  at  least  one  pair  of  birds 
to  every  square  yard. 

Mr.  Almada,  the  "  watcher,"  informed  us  that 
most  of  the  birds  on  shore  at  this  time  were 
moulting.  They  come  up  from  the  sea  coated  with 
fat  and  remain  on  shore  for  the  period  of  the  moult, 
which  takes  about  a  month,  and  during  this  time 
they  never  enter  the  sea  for  food,  but  appear  to 
live  on  their  accumulated  fat.  When  the  moult  is 
complete,  the  penguins  go  to  sea  again  for  another 
month  and  again  become  enormously  fat.  They 
then  land  again  and  commence  to  breed,  and  as 
soon  as  the  young  are  completely  feathered, 
all  of  them  leave  the  island  and  spend  some  time 
at  sea  before  the  next  breeding  season  commences. 
All  the  year  round  there  are  a  few  pairs  nesting 
on  the  island.  These  may  possibly  be  early  bred 
young  of  the  previous  year,  or  old  birds  which 
for  some  reason  have  had  their  moult  retarded. 

The  eggs  are  collected  and  sent  to  Cape  Town 
for  sale,  where  they  fetch  about  ten  shillings  per 


76         VOYAGES   OF  A  NATURALIST 

hundred.  Penguins  do  not  make  guano  to  the 
same  extent  as  do  the  cormorants,  and  their 
nesting  places  are  "  scraped '  once  only  every 
year. 

After  breakfast  we  set  out  for  the  sandy  shore, 
where  most  of  the  penguins  were  gathered  together. 
It  was  a  truly  remarkable  sight.  As  far  as  the 
eye  could  see  was  an  unending  mass  of  penguins. 
Thousands  upon  thousands  of  the  comical-looking 
birds  were  sitting  close  together  along  the  sandy 
shore,  while  many  more  were  arriving  from  the 
sea  and  walking  solemnly  up  to  join  their  com- 
panions. All  were  either  in  full  moult  or  just 
beginning  to  cast  their  feathers.  The  moult  of 
these  birds  is  somewhat  peculiar.  The  feathers  of 
the  back  come  off  in  large  patches  beginning 
from  the  tail,  and  the  birds  are  then  bare  except 
for  a  coating  of  soft  down  amongst  which  the  new 
feathers  make  their  appearance.  The  sand  was 
thickly  covered  with  feathers,  while  amongst  the 
rocks  and  ice-plants  were  "  drifts '  of  them 
several  inches  in  depth. 

We  photographed  the  penguins  as  they  sat 
on  the  shore,  and  they  showed  little  fear  of  us. 
We  walked  amongst  them  without  causing  them 
much  alarm,  and  they  would  not  go  into  the  sea 
unless  they  were  very  hard  pressed,  and  then  they 
remained  but  a  very  short  time  in  the  water. 

There  were  a  few  voung  ones  on  the  island,  and 
one  which  I  took  alive  with  the  intention  of  making 


Q 

««! 

02 

i— i 

H 
CO 
CO 

<J 

O 

co 

— 

O 
fin 

CO 
CO 

« 
O 


CORMORANTS  IN  VAST  NUMBERS      77 

a  "  skin "  of  it,  became  so  tame  and  friendly 
that  I  had  not  the  heart  to  kill  it.  It  subsequently 
became  a  great  pet  and  was  brought  safely  home. 
Young  penguins  are  at  first  covered  with  a  dark 
greenish-brown  down,  and  the  feathers  when  they 
begin  to  grow  make  their  appearance  first  just 
above  the  tail,  the  head  and  neck  being  the  last 
to  be  feathered. 

After  spending  some  time  with  the  penguins 
we  walked  over  to  another  part  of  the  island  where 
the  cormorants  were  nesting.  Three,  if  not  four, 
species  of  cormorants  nest  on  Dassen  Island,  but 
of  these  the  commonest  is  the  Cape  cormorant,* 
which  was  breeding  in  vast  numbers.  A  few  pairs 
of  the  darker  coloured  P.  neglectus  were  nesting, 
but  they  appeared  to  be  rare.  The  Cape  cor- 
morant is  the  principal  guano -producing  bird  on 
the  island.  In  appearance  this  bird  somewhat 
resembles  our  shag,  but  is  smaller.  They  had 
young  at  the  time  of  our  visit,  and  all  of  these  were 
ready  to  fly.  The  stench  in  this  part  of  the  island 
was  almost  unbearable  at  first,  but  after  a  time 
we  became  accustomed  to  it,  and  did  not  notice  it. 

Several  photographs  were  taken  of  the  cor- 
morants, but  they  were  not  so  tame  as  the  penguins, 
and  if  one  approached  to  within  a  few  yards  of  the 
colony,  all  the  old  birds  and  most  of  the  young 
took  to  flight  with  an  outburst  of  screaming. 

Hovering    over    the    colony    were    numbers    of 

*  Phalacrocorax  capensis. 


78         VOYAGES   OF   A  NATURALIST 

black-backed  gulls,*  a  bird  much  like  our  lesser 
black-backed  gull  in  shape  and  coloration.  These 
birds,  we  were  told,  are  most  destructive  to  the 
cormorants,  as  they  devour  the  eggs  and  newly- 
hatched  young  as  soon  as  the  old  birds  leave  the 
nests  uncovered. 

Here  also  were  a  great  number  of  sacred  ibises, f 
which  had  built  their  nests  in  colonies  amongst 
those  of  the  cormorants.  So  close  together  were  the 
nests  of  these  ibises  that  they  appeared  to  be  one 
mass  of  rubbish  with  numerous  depressions,  in 
each  of  which  were  eggs  or  young,  but  mostly 
young.  The  ibises  rose  in  a  cloud  and  flew  away 
at  our  approach.  A  great  number  of  young  ones, 
however,  were  unable  to  fly,  and  two  were  caught 
alive  and  taken  back  to  the  ship,  where  they  were 
safely  reared,  and  they  are  now  in  the  London 
Zoological  Gardens.  When  newly-hatched  these 
ibises  are  covered  with  grey  and  black  down.  The 
head  and  neck  of  the  adult  are  covered  with  jet 
black  skin  bare  of  feathers,  but  this  baldness  is 
not  attained  until  the  bird  is  two  years  old.  Prior 
to  that  the  head  and  neck  are  clothed  with  black 
feathers  ;  those  of  the  throat  and  foreneck  are, 
however,  moulted  after  a  few  weeks,  and  are  re- 
placed by  new  white  feathers,  which  are  the  last 
to  be  shed  before  the  bird  arrives  at  its  fully 
adult  plumage. 

We  were  somewhat  surprised  to  see  the  sacred 

*  Larus  dominicanus.  f  Ibis  aethiopica. 


■jpi 


GO 


Q 
< 

i— i 

w 

CO 

CO 

Q 

H 

<1 

Q 
P 

o 

-J 
« 

w 


CO 
CO 

I— I 

- 


P. 
« 
< 

CO 

W 

H 


CO 

H 

O 

»— i 

« 

O 

w 

Ph 


SACRED    IBISES  79 

ibis  here,  as  there  is  no  regular  supply  of  fresh 
water  on  the  island,  but  we  were  told  that  they 
usually  came  to  the  water  troughs  which  are  put 
round  the  lighthouse  for  the  fowls  belonging  to 
the  keeper.  The  principal  food  of  this  bird  on 
Dassen  Island  appears  to  be  the  intestines  of  the 
young  cormorants,  and  all  the  young  ibises  which 
we  caught  ejected  a  mass  of  entrails.  Owing  to 
their  predilection  for  this  food,  these  beautiful 
birds  are  considered  as  vermin,  and  are  slaughtered 
on  every  possible  occasion  by  the  inhabitants. 
A  great  many  of  the  young  escape,  however, 
owing  to  the  nests  being  placed  close  to  those  of 
the  cormorants,  near  which  no  one  is  allowed  to 

go- 
Besides  the  birds  already  mentioned  there  was 

seen  close  to  the  lighthouse  a  pair  of  ringed  plovers,* 

from  whose  actions  it  became  evident  that  there 

were  young  in  the  vicinity,   and  after  a  careful 

search  we  found  one  in  downy  plumage.     These 

birds  are  not  unlike  the  Kentish  plover  in  size 

and  general  appearance,  but  they  are  somewhat 

darker   and    have     no    black    collar ;     moreover, 

the    breast    of    the    adult    is    of    a    buff    colour. 

Several  pairs  of  them  were   seen  on  the  island. 

This  species  is  found  over  the  whole  of  Africa, 

from  the  Cape  to  Egypt. 

A  pair  of  black  oyster-catchersf  were  evidently 

about  to  breed.     There  was  also  a  large  flock  of 

*  sEgialitis  pecuaria.  f  Haematopus  moquini. 


80         VOYAGES   OF  A  NATURALIST 

sanderlings  in  full  winter  plumage  on  the  shore, 
and  in  their  company  were  several  turnstones, 
— both  very  common  visitors  to  England  in  spring 
and  autumn.  Occasionally  a  few  small  parties 
of  ruffs  and  reeves,*  another  well-known  British 
bird,  were  met  with.  Flying  about  round  the 
lighthouse  were  several  swallows  of  our  familiar 
speciesf  and  a  pair  of  wagtails  of  one  of  the  Cape 
species,  J  which  is  not  unlike  our  pied  wagtail,  were 
about  to  nest  on  the  light-keeper's  house. 

Giant  petrels  were  swimming  in  the  sea  close 
to  the  shore  on  the  windward  side,  and  they 
probably  fed  on  the  young  cormorants  and 
penguins,  especially  those  that  were  weak  and 
sickly. 

As  we  had  to  get  on  board  the  tug  at  mid-day, 
our  time  ashore  was  limited,  but  we  managed  to 
cover  a  good  deal  of  ground  and  saw  most  of  the 
principal  nesting  places. 

On  our  way  back  to  Cape  Town  we  saw  little 
of  interest,  with  the  exception  of  a  noddy  tern,§ 
which  has  not  previously  been  recorded  from  the 
Cape  of  Good  Hope. 

The  day  before  we  sailed  away  from  Cape  Town 
a  ribbon  fish  (Regalecus)  of  about  seven  feet  in 
length  was  caught  by  some  fishermen  in  Table  Bay. 
It  was  brought  on  board,  and  Lord  Crawford 
purchased   it   for   the   British   Museum.     It   was 

*  Machetes  pugnax.  f  Hirundo  rustica. 

%  Motacilla  capensis.  §  Anons  stolidus. 


o 

00 


LEV*"-       ifc      >^°*^$5?i' 


w  > 


EifeP'. 


V 

i      i 


1  s 


«i   £S 


J  : 


4  ,'-tl 


-<  i  .'.^^Si 


i 


n  m 


-*a  '• .,:  ■"      ••%- 

■:!  i    r    *  ,4v 

<  V  H     ? 

; ;  V "'; 

If  to  'J 

i    I        <l    I  4 

■•.';f    I 


.?Ai 


i'» 


o^-V 


- 

< 
- 
X 


CO 

CO 

ft 

O 

X 

ft 

O 


x 

CO 

< 

M 

< 


A  RIBBON  FISH  81 

somewhat  damaged  about  the  head,  and  the  bril- 
liant scarlet  dorsal  fin  was  unfortunately  rather 
broken.  We  put  it  in  the  freezing  room  and  so 
brought  it  to  England. 


CHAPTER    VIII. 

MOZAMBIQUE    CHANNEL   AND    COMORO    ISLANDS. 

We  sailed  from  Cape  Town  on  February  8th, 
1906,  and  proceeded  to  Durban,  where  a  day  was 
spent  in  coaling. 

After  leaving  Durban  Lord  Crawford  intended 
to  land  on  Europa  Island,  which  has  only  once 
been  visited  by  a  naturalist ;  but  this  idea  had 
to  be  abandoned,  owing  to  the  extremely  bad 
weather  encountered  throughout  the  Mozambique 
Channel. 

Two  days  after  we  left  Durban,  a  gale  got  up, 
and  in  two  more  days  this  developed  into  a  cyclone, 
which  blew  with  unabated  fury  for  twenty-four 
hours.  It  started  about  nine  o'clock  at  night ; 
rain  fell  in  torrents,  and  for  several  hours  we  all 
stood  on  deck  holding  on  to  the  rigging  of  the 
mizzen-mast.  The  sea  was  terrible,  and  enormous 
waves  towered  above  the  ship.  The  "  Valhalla  " 
was  hove  to,  and  rode  out  the  gale  in  splendid 
fashion. 

Distinguished  above  the  roaring  of  the  wind  and 
the  tumult  of  the  breaking  waves  we  could  hear  the 


A  CYCLONE  83 

wild  cries  of  whimbrels  and  great  numbers  of  other 
wading  birds,  and  terns  could  be  seen  flying  round 
the  ship.  At  early  dawn  a  tern  was  blown  against 
the  rigging  so  fiercely  that  one  of  its  wings  was 
completely  ripped  away. 

In  the  morning  the  sea  was  still  as  high  as  during 
the  previous  night,  and  as  far  as  the  eye 
could  see  enormous  quantities  of  birds — terns, 
whimbrels,  little  stints,  curlew-sandpipers — were 
flying  round  the  ship  in  flocks,  though  none  came 
aboard.  Later  in  the  day  common  swallows* 
appeared,  as  also  did  a  large  harrier.  The  swallows 
came  on  board  at  dusk  and  crowded  together  on  the 
top  of  the  deck  house.  A  night jar|  was  also  caught 
on  deck.  Throughout  the  day  we  remained 
hove  to,  and  it  was  impossible  to  ascertain  our 
position  owing  to  the  thick  mist  which  hung  over 
the  sea.  We  knew  that  somewhere  on  our  star- 
board side  there  was  a  small  coral  island,  Bassas 
da  India,  while  to  port  was  the  coast  of  Africa. 
Suddenly,  however,  about  two  o'clock  in  the 
afternoon,  the  wind  dropped,  and,  the  fog  lifting 
for  a  few  minutes,  we  obtained  a  glimpse  of  the 
Mozambique  coast.  After  this  we  got  under  steam 
again,  and  continued  on  our  course  for  the  Comoro 
Islands. 

Two  hours  later  an  open  boat  was  sighted, 
and  we  steamed  for  it.  It  proved  to  be  a  fishing 
boat  full  of  natives,  who  had  been  blown  out  from 

*  Hi r undo  rustica.  f  Caprimulgus  unwini. 


84  VOYAGES   OF   A  NATURALIST 

the  Mozambique  coast  the  night  before.  Their 
sail  was  torn  to  pieces,  and  they  had  no  food  or 
water.  Our  lifeboat  was  lowered  at  once  in 
charge  of  the  second  mate,  and  we  provided  the 
natives  with  biscuits,  water,  a  sail,  and  some 
rope. 

I  believe  that  boats  often  get  blown  away  from 
the  coast  in  the  Mozambique  Channel  in  this  way. 
Later  on,  when  we  were  in  the  Seychelle  Islands, 
we  heard  several  extraordinary  tales  of  boats  being 
blown  away  during  a  hurricane,  and  being  carried 
for  great  distances.     , 

At  daybreak  on  February  23rd,  Mayotte,  one 
of  the  Comoro  Islands,  was  sighted,  and  a  short 
time  afterwards  we  entered  the  harbour,  which  is 
studded  with  little  islands  thickly  covered  with 
vegetation. 

As  soon  as  we  anchored  off  the  town  black  kites* 
appeared.  These  birds  seem  to  be  very  common 
winter  visitors  to  the  Comoro  Islands,  as  well  as 
to  Madagascar  and  many  islands  to  the  west  of 
it.  Round  about  the  ship,  during  the  whole 
of  the  time  we  spent  at  Mayotte,  were  many  sharks, 
though  most  of  them  were  small  ones.  Several 
of  these  sharks  were  caught  with  a  tarpon  rod  and 
line,  and  gave  excellent  sport. 

Nearly  the  whole  of  the  original  vegetation  has 
been  cleared  on  Mayotte,  and  on  one  peak  only 
is    it    now  possible  to  see  the  virgin  forests  with 

*  Milvus  migrans. 


00 


I— I 

H 
H 
O 


o 
e 
i 
e 


cq 


B£I 


VJ 

H 

Ph 

o 

t3 

r_ 

«J 

r=H 

<s 

a 

£ 

8 

M 

V. 

G5 

Pa 

05 

© 

M        P 


^ 


MANGROVE   SWAMPS  85 

which  the  island  was  formerly  covered.  The  island 
was  cleared  for  the  cultivation  of  sugar  cane,  but 
this  industry  being  at  a  very  low  ebb  the  greater 
part  is  now  uncultivated,  and  is  becoming  covered 
with  a  thick  growth  of  acacia  trees.  At  one 
place  we  landed  at  a  wharf  which  formerly  belonged 
to  a  large  sugar  factory,  which  was  still  standing 
with  the  machinery  for  crushing  the  cane,  although 
it  had  been  abandoned  for  several  years. 

The  shore  on  the  leeward  side  is  bordered  with 
mangrove  swamps,  which  are  covered  by  the  sea 
at  high  tide.  The  mud  in  these  swamps  makes  a 
fine  feeding  ground  for  wading  birds.  The  most 
remarkable  of  these  was  the  crab -plover,*  a  bird 
which  much  resembles  an  avocet  in  size  and 
coloration.  Its  bill,  however,  is  short  and  stout, 
and  very  different  from  the  avocet' s  slender 
upturned  bill.  These  crab -plovers  were  feeding 
in  considerable  numbers  on  the  shore  in  company 
with  curlews  and  whimbrels,  and  other  well-known 
British  wading  birds,  such  as  the  common  sand- 
piperf  and  greenshank.J 

Among  the  mangrove  trees  were  numbers  of 
little  kingfishers,  §  somewhat  smaller  than  the 
common  kingfisher  and  with  a  remarkable  mop-like 
crest,  composed  of  long  soft  feathers  which  hang 
down  over  the  eyes  and  back  of  the  head. 

The   country   close   to   the  town  is   cultivated, 


*  Dromas  ardeola.  f  Totanus  hypoleucus. 

%  Totanus  canescens.  §  Corythomis  cristata. 


H 


86         VOYAGES   OF  A  NATURALIST 

sugar  cane  and  maize  being  the  principal  crops, 
while  a  few  limes  are  also  grown.  Our  first  ex- 
cursion was  to  the  cultivated  country  close  to  the 
harbour,  where  several  interesting  birds  and  butter- 
flies were  obtained.  Among  the  former  should  be 
mentioned  the  white-eye,*  a  little  bird  of  about 
the  size  of  a  willow-wren,  but  of  a  deep  lemon- 
yellow  colour  on  the  breast,  and  with  pale  chestnut 
flanks.  The  eye  is  encircled  by  a  ring  of  white 
silky  feathers.  This  species  is  peculiar  to  Mayotte, 
and  is  one  of  the  commonest  birds  there.  They 
were  in  large  flocks,  especially  at  the  edge  of  the 
mangrove  swamps. 

Paradise  flycatchers  were  also  seen  in  plenty, 
and  one  of  these  birds  which  we  shot  proved  to 
belong  to  a  new  species,  f     A  beautiful  little  sun- 
bird  was  also  very  common  near  the  shore,  and 
two  species  of  red  weaver  birds  were  obtained. 
One    of    these,   Nesocanthis    eminentissima,  which 
is    peculiar    to    the    Comoro    Islands,    is    slightly 
larger  than  our  sparrow,  and  the  male  has  a  bright 
crimson   breast   during  the   breeding   season,  but 
when  not  in  breeding  plumage  it  is  dull  olive-brown, 
like  the  females  and  young.     The  other  weaver 
bird,    called    Foudia    madagascariensis,    is    of    a 
brilliant  scarlet,  the  back  being  spotted  with  black. 
It  is  probable  that  this  species,  in  common  with 
other      birds,     has      been       introduced       from 
Madagascar. 

*  Zosterops  mayottensis.  f  Terpsiphone  lindsayi. 


A  NEW    SWIFT  87 

The  grey-headed  love-bird*  is  not  uncommon 
on  the  cultivated  land  near  the  seashore.  This 
small  green  parroquet,  the  males  of  which  have  a 
grey  head  and  neck,  is  an  inhabitant  of  Madagascar, 
and  possibly  owes  its  presence  in  the  Comoros 
to  human  agency.  It  is  a  common  cage  bird, 
and  great  numbers  are  imported  from  Madagascar 
to  Europe. 

On  one  occasion  we  visited  a  small  island  situated 
in  the  middle  of  the  harbour.  This  island,  which 
is  marked  on  the  charts  as  "  Buzi,"  was  thickly 
covered  with  vegetation,  and  in  some  places  it 
was  impossible  to  force  a  way  through  the  prickly 
clumps  of  acacia  trees.  The  heat  was  intense, 
and  I  have  never  felt  the  sun  so  much  as  I  did 
on  Buzi. 

A  number  of  swifts  were  flying  over  the  island, 
and  after  I  had  waited  for  some  time  they  flew 
near  enough  to  be  secured.  These  birds,  which 
somewhat  resembled  our  common  swift,  proved  to 
belong  to  an  undescribed  species  which  I  have 
named  Cypselus  mayottensis.^ 

This  little  island  was  tenanted  by  a  large  colony 
of  fruit  bats. J  They  were,  however,  in  the  thick 
trees  on  the  inaccessible  side  of  the  island,  where 
it  rises  straight  up  from  the  sea.  Every  evening 
numbers  of  them  flew  across  to  the  main  island, 

*  Agapornis  cana. 

t  "Bulletin  Brit.  Orn.  Club,"  Vol.  XVI.,  p.  104,  June,  1906. 

|  Pteropu8  comoremis. 

H  2 


88  VOYAGES   OF   A  NATURALIST 

and  one  evening,  on  our  way  back  to  the  ship 
after  a  day's  collecting  in  the  mangrove  swamps, 
we  shot  one  as  it  flew  over  the  steam  launch. 
Its  fur  was  of  a  reddish  colour,  thick  and  soft. 
A  most  unpleasant  skunk-like  smell  clings  to  one's 
hands  after  touching  one  of  these  bats,  and  this 
is  especially  noticeable  when  the  animal  has  just 
been  shot.  On  several  occasions  I  saw  these  fruit 
bats  splash  into  the  salt-water  of  the  harbour, 
but  whether  they  were  drinking  or  washing  I 
do  not  know. 

During  our  visit  to  the  Comoros  we  steamed 
across  to  Anjouan  Island,  but  owing  to  the  heavy 
sea  and  strong  wind  we  were  unable  to  get  in  close, 
and  had  to  return  to  Mayotte.  This  was  much 
to  be  regretted,  as  the  fauna  of  Anjouan  is  some- 
what different  to  that  of  Mayotte. 

Our  last  day  was  spent  in  the  virgin  forest, 
on  one  of  the  highest  peaks  of  Mayotte.  My  special 
object  on  this  excursion  was  to  get  examples  of 
the  peculiar  fruit-pigeon,*  which  is  only  to  be  found 
on  the  wooded  peaks.  We  saw,  altogether,  four 
examples  of  this  remarkable  bird,  and  I  shot  two 
adults.  In  appearance  it  is  short  and  thickset, 
the  entire  plumage  is  deep  blue,  with  the  ex- 
ception of  the  head,  neck,  and  upper  breast, 
which  are  grey  tinged  with  yellow.  The  feathers 
of  the  fore  neck  and  upper  breast  are  elongated 
and  lanceolate  in  form,  while  round  the  eye  is  a 

*  Alectroenas  sganzini. 


FOKET   DAMBRE,    MADAGASCAR. 


F89] 


VIRGIN  FOREST  89 

bare  patch  of  red  skin.  The  "  coo  "  of  the  Comoro 
fruit-pigeon  is  extraordinarily  deep  and  resonant. 
These  pigeons  were  very  tame,  and  took  no  notice 
whatever  of  our  presence.  There  is  no  doubt 
that  they  are  now  extremely  rare. 

A  native  guide  told  me  that  he  had  often  seen 
the  black  parrot*  in  this  same  forest-covered 
peak,  but  unfortunately  we  did  not  come  across 
it. 

The  Madagascar  weaver  bird  was  somewhat 
abundant  on  the  outskirts  of  the  forest,  and 
the  only  other  bird  seen  there  was  a  thrushf  of 
about  the  size  of  our  blackbird  ;  it  has  an  orange- 
coloured  bill,  but  the  plumage  is  greyish  and  the 
crown  of  the  head  black.  It  is  a  very  noisy  bird, 
its  loud  chattering  call-note  at  once  betrays  its 
presence. 

This  patch  of  virgin  forest  extends  from  about 
1000  feet  above  sea-level  nearly  to  the  summit 
of  the  peak,  and  is  composed  of  tall  trees  under 
which  dense  masses  of  creepers  and  ferns  grow  in 
luxuriance.  Numerous  streams  of  pure  fresh  water 
intersect  the  narrow  pathway  through  the  forest, 
and  owing  to  this  and  to  the  deep  shade  given  by 
the  trees,  the  air  was  quite  refreshing,  and  in  strik- 

*  Two  species  of  these  parrots  are  found  in  the  Comoros,  Coracopsia 
comorensis  and  C.  sibilans,  though  neither  have  apparently  been 
previously  recorded  from  Mayotte.  My  informant  gave  me  such 
a  clear  description  of  a  black  parrot,  however,  that  there  is  no  doubt 
that  one  of  the  above  species  is  found  on  Mayotte. 

|  Ixocincla  madagascariensis. 


90         VOYAGES   OF  A  NATURALIST 

ing  contrast  to  that  of  the  lower  parts  of  the 
island. 

On  the  edge  of  the  forest  we  found  a  large 
colony  of  fruit  bats,  which  were  hanging  from  the 
upper  branches  of  the  trees.  They  became  very 
restless  as  soon  as  we  approached,  many  taking 
to  flight  with  shrill  cries.  Others  climbed  about 
from  branch  to  branch,  using  the  long  claw  on  their 
wings  as  well  as  their  feet,  and  hanging  head  down- 
wards. 

In  the  depth  of  the  forest  we  came  on  a  small 
party  of  lemurs,*  which  were  feeding  on  the  fruit 
of  a  densely  foliaged  tree.  I  shot  one  for  identi- 
fication, but  was  unwilling  to  sacrifice  more  of 
these  charming  little  creatures,  which  showed  not 
the  slightest  fear,  but  merely  looked  down  at  us 
with  their  great  black  eyes,  and  uttered  continually 
their  characteristic  grunting  noise. 

While  walking  quietly  along  under  the  trees 
on  the  look-out  for  pigeons  I  surprised  a  family 
party  of  tenrecs,  which  were  rooting  amongst  the 
dead  leaves  for  insects.  These  creatures  are  much 
like  large  hedgehogs  in  appearance,  but  their 
spines  are  much  softer  ;  moreover,  they  have  the 
same  disagreeable  stench  as  the  fruit  bats,  and 
those  I  brought  on  board  were  not  favourably 
received  by  my  companions.  In  spite  of  its  un- 
pleasant smell  the  tenrec  is  used  as  an  article  of 
food  in  Madagascar,   and  is  greatly  appreciated 

*  Lemur  mayottensis. 


o 

CI 


o 

< 


O 

w 


E-t 


A  WALKING   FISH  91 

by  the  natives.  Possibly  it  has  been  introduced 
into  the  Comoro  Islands  from  Madagascar  on 
account  of  its  edible  qualities.  The  natives  of  the 
Comoro  Islands  also  hold  the  lemur  in  great  esteem 
as  a  delicacy,  and  they  declare  it  to  be,  when  young, 
quite  as  good  eating  as  chicken. 

Lower  down  the  hill,  amongst  the  sugar  cane 
and  other  cultivated  crops,  were  several  species  of 
birds,  but  most  of  these  were  without  any  doubt 
introductions,  and  as  such  were  not  worthy  of 
notice.  Numbers  of  small  swifts*  were  flying  round 
the  cocoanut  palms  near  our  landing  place.  Owing 
to  its  rapid  flight  this  swift  is  very  difficult  to  shoot? 
so  that  only  one  specimen  was  obtained.  This 
one  fell  on  a  patch  of  bare  ground  which  was 
honeycombed  by  the  burrows  of  land-crabs  ;  before 
I  could  pick  it  up  a  crab,  starting  forward  and 
seizing  it,  dragged  it  underground,  and  only  with 
great  difficulty  was  I  able  to  open  up  the  burrow 
and  rescue  the  bird. 

Green  bee-eaters*j*  were  seen  in  numbers  on  the 
low  ground  amongst  the  cultivation,  and  it  is 
interesting  to  note  that  this  species  ranges  from 
Madagascar  across  Africa  to  the  west  coast. 

Late  in  the  afternoon  we  walked  down  to  the 
mangrove  swamp  where  our  boat  was  waiting  for 
us.  Here  we  came  across  that  peculiar  fish,  the 
walking  goby.  J     It  was  in  great  numbers  on  the 

*  Tachornis  gracilis.  f  MeropB  super  ciliosus. 

X  Periophthalmus  koebreuteri. 


92         VOYAGES   OF   A   NATURALIST 

mud  of  the  mangrove  swamp,  where  it  spends  most 
of  its  time,  though  always  close  to  water.  We 
found  it  extremely  difficult  to  obtain  a  specimen. 
The  fish  stays  quite  still  until  one  attempts  to  catch 
it,  when  it  at  once  makes  off  across  the  water  with 
a  series  of  leaps,  to  reappear  at  some  distance  away 
on  the  mud  or  on  a  dead  branch  lying  on  the  water's 
edge.  Sometimes,  as  one  walks  through  the 
swamp,  numbers  of  these  fish  skip  away  in  all 
directions,  but  however  closely  they  are  pursued 
they  never  remain  long  in  the  water.  On  land  the 
pectoral  fins  are  used  as  legs,  and  the  fish  is  able 
to  walk  with  ease  over  the  soft  mud.  Species  of 
this  genus  are  found  throughout  the  tropics. 

Early  on  the  morning  of  March  3rd,  1906,  we 
left  Mayotte  and  steamed  away,  bound  for  Diego 
Suarez,  the  principal  port  of  Madagascar. 


CHAPTER    IX. 

LA   FORET    D'AMBRE,    MADAGASCAR. 

The  day  after  we  left  Mayotte,  Cape  Ambre  was 
sighted,  and  at  noon  we  entered  the  harbour  of 
Diego  Suarez,  the  principal  port  of  Madagascar. 
The  town  is  strongly  fortified  and  owing  to  a 
deep  indentation  of  the  coastline,  it  has  an  ideal 
harbour. 

The  governor  of  Diego  Suarez  was  exceedingly 
kind.  He  granted  us  a  permit  for  collecting 
during  our  stay,  and  also  supplied  us  with  free 
passes  for  the  "  train  "  from  the  town  to  Camp 
d' Ambre,  which  we  wished  to  visit  in  order  to  see 
the  great  forest  of  Ambre.  Moreover,  a  message 
was  sent  to  the  officer  in  charge  of  this  camp  to 
give  us  all  the  help  possible  during  our  stay  there. 
We  started  at  7  o'clock  in  the  morning  and  boarded 
the  "  train,"  which  was  in  reality  a  tram  consisting 
of  two  carriages  drawn  by  four  mules.  The  road 
was  a  steep  ascent,  and  we  were  three  hours  in 
reaching  the  camp,  which  is  2000  feet  above  sea- 
level.  The  first  part  of  the  road  led  through 
fields  of  long  grass,  in  which  were  great  numbers 


94         VOYAGES   OF  A  NATURALIST 

of  quails,  and  every  now  and  then  one  would  rise 
close  to  the  hoofs  of  the  mules.  Small  dark- 
coloured  larks — Mirafra  hova — which  were  even 
more  abundant,  rose  in  flocks  from  almost  under 
the  wheels  of  the  tram,  and  along  the  track 
in  front  of  us  swarms  of  these  little  birds  were 
running. 

After  a  few  miles  forest  took  the  place  of  pasture 
land,  and  for  a  considerable  distance  the  track 
lay  between  rows  of  tall  trees,  the  branches  of  which 
almost  met  overhead.  In  this  forest  we  saw  a 
flock  of  Guinea  fowls*  which,  being  surprised  at  a 
bend  in  the  track,  took  to  flight  close  ahead  of  the 
tram.  At  some  distance  from  the  camp  the  tram 
lines  came  to  an  end,  and  the  rest  of  the  journey 
had  to  be  performed  in  a  large  two-wheeled  waggon 
drawn  by  mules,  which  brought  us,  after  an  hour's 
hard  pulling,  to  our  destination.  We  were  met 
by  the  colonel  commanding  the  camp,  who  con- 
ducted us  to  the  hotel  where  rooms  had  been 
ordered.  Camp  d'Ambre  is  a  convalescent  station, 
and  all  soldiers  suffering  from  fever  are  sent  there 
to  recuperate.  The  camp  consists  of  barracks' 
officers'  quarters,  and  a  small,  but  clean  and  well- 
managed  hotel.  The  surroundings  are  very 
beautiful.  In  front  the  hill  slopes  abruptly,  allow- 
ing a  distant  view  of  Diego  Suarez.  On  both  sides 
the  country  is  covered  with  grass,  while  in  the  rear 
lies  the  Foret  d'Ambre — a  splendid   virgin  forest 

*  Numida  mitrata. 


FORET   d'aMBRE,    MADAGASCAR. 


[95] 


BLACK   PARROTS  95 

stretching  for  four  hundred  miles  into  the  interior 
of  Madagascar. 

As  soon  as  we  had  lunched  we  set  off,  under 
the  guidance  of  one  of  the  officers  who  was  a  keen 
entomologist,  to  explore  a  strip  of  forest  in  a  small 
valley  near  the  camp.  Every  valley  in  this 
neighbourhood  was  filled  with  luxuriant  vegetation, 
while  the  sides  and  summits  of  the  hills  were 
covered  with  good  pasture.  In  this  particular 
valley  a  path  led  from  the  camp  to  a  patch  of 
cultivated  ground,  which  was  abou£  half  an  hour's 
walk  below  us.  The  forest  was  full  of  birds,  but 
they  were  not  easy  to  see,  on  account  of  the  height 
of  the  trees  and  the  thick  foliage.  As  we  walked 
down,  I  saw  a  small  hawk,  much  like  a  sparrow- 
hawk,  sitting  on  a  branch  of  one  of  the  trees,  and, 
on  shooting  it,  I  found  it  was  Astur  franciscce, 
a  species  which  is  peculiar  to  Madagascar. 

As  we  entered  the  cultivation  at  the  bottom  of 
the  valley,  a  large  dark-coloured  bird  flew  overhead 
uttering  a  loud,  but  most  musical,  whistle.  This 
proved  to  be  one  of  the  Madagascar  "  black ' 
parrots — Coracopsis  vasa.  We  were  much  sur- 
prised at  the  extremely  rapid  flight  of  this  bird, 
as  it  dashed  over  us  with  outstretched  neck,  into 
the  forest.  The  following  day  we  had  a  good  view 
of  a  pair  of  these  parrots  sitting  in  the  top  of  a  tree 
close  to  the  camp,  and  we  also  became  acquainted 
with  a  smaller  species — G.  nigra.  These  parrots 
are,  we  were   informed,  quite   common   in   every 


96         VOYAGES   OF   A  NATURALIST 

strip  of  forest  in  the  neighbourhood  of  the  Camp 
d'Ambre. 

The  cultivated  ground  at  the  foot  of  the  valley 
was  only  a  few  acres  in  extent,  and  not  many  birds 
were  to  be  seen  there.  A  pair  of  wagtails,*  feeding 
in  a  small  stream  of  water,  and  a  stonechatf  were 
both  interesting  because  found  only  in  Madagascar; 
but  on  the  edge  of  the  cultivation  I  saw  a  bird  of 
more  general  interest — the  lark-heeled  cuckoo.  J 
The  foot  of  this  bird  is  most  remarkable.  The  two 
toes  which  point  forward  are  normal,  but  the  two 
which  project  backwards  are  of  a  peculiar  forma- 
tion, one  of  them  being  fitted  with  a  short  curved 
claw,  while  the  other  has  a  long  straight  spur, 
like  the  hind  claw  of  a  skylark.  This  species  also 
is  found  only  in  Madagascar,  where  it  appears  to 
be  abundant.  There  were  great  numbers  of 
weaver-birds  in  the  cultivated  ground,  and  they 
all  belonged  to  the  brilliantly  coloured  species 
(Foudia  madagascariensis),  which  we  had  met  with 
at  Mayotte. 

Early  in  the  afternoon  it  began  to  rain,  and  this 
developed  into  a  steady  downpour  which  continued 
for  the  rest  of  the  day.  We  were  soon  wet 
through,  and  in  this  condition  had  to  attend  a 
reception.  We  were  received  by  the  colonel 
commanding  the  camp,  and  his  staff,  and  were 
so  hospitably  entertained  that  it  was  long  after 

*  Motacilla  flaviventris.  f  Pratincola  sybilla. 

J  Centropus  toulou. 


FORET    D  AMBRE,    MADAGASCAR. 


W] 


BIRD-LIFE   IN   THE   FOREST  97 

midnight    before     we    got    back     to    our     hotel. 
However,   at  six  o'clock  next  morning  we  were 
ready  for  an  excursion  into  the  big  forest,  and, 
after  a  time,  our  friends,  who  were  to  accompany 
us,  arrived.     An  hour's  walk  brought  us  to  the 
forest,  and  on  entering  it  we  followed  for  several 
miles    a   broad    path,    which    was    made    by    the 
Foreign  Legion  many  years  ago,  and  extends  for 
twenty    miles.       The    forest    was     full    of    life ; 
brilliant  butterflies   fluttered  over  the   vegetation 
bordering   the   path,   and    numerous   birds  flitted 
through  the  trees.      The  vegetation  was  so  dense 
that  the  only  way   I  was  able  to  get  specimens 
at  all  was  by  shooting  those  which  came  into  the 
trees  overhanging  the  path.    Pigeons*  and  black 
parrots  appeared  to  be  numerous  ;  and  in  the  dense 
growth  of  bushes  near  the  path  there  were  reed- 
warblers  of   a  species  called  Bernieria  madagasca- 
riensis,    peculiar    to    Madagascar.     I    had    some 
difficulty   at   first   in   seeing   the   latter,    as   they 
rarely   showed   themselves,   and   the    call-note,    a 
deep   "  churr,"   was  quite  ventriloquial  in  effect. 
Flocks   of  white-eyesf   were   flying  from   tree  to 
tree,   searching  for  insects  ;    their  clear  calls  re- 
sounded from  all  sides,  but  owing  to  the  great 
height  of  the  trees  they  were  usually  out  of  range, 
and  I  only  obtained  one  example.     One  of  the 
most  striking  birds  was  the  grey-headed  love-bird,  % 

*  Alectroenas  madagascariensis.  f  Zosterops  madagascaricnsis. 

J  Agapornis  carta. 


98         VOYAGES   OF  A  NATURALIST 

well-known  as  a  cage-bird  in  Europe.  It  is  in- 
digenous to  Madagascar,  but  has  been  introduced 
into  the  Comoros  and  doubtless  other  islands.  The 
male  is  green  with  a  grey  head  and  neck,  while 
the  female  is  green  all  over  ;  both  have  a  black 
bar  across  the  tail.  They  were  always  in  pairs, 
and  their  flight  was  wonderfully  rapid. 

We  were  somewhat  disappointed  at  not  meeting 
with  lemurs  in  Madagascar.  After  having  seen 
so  many  in  the  Comoro  Islands  we  had  had  hopes 
of  finding  them  in  the  Foret  d' Ambre,  but  although 
several  hours  were  spent  there  we  saw  none  of 
these  beautiful  creatures.  The  only  mammal  we 
actually  met  with  was  the  tenrec,*  several  of  which 
were  caught  by  a  small  terrier  belonging  to  our 
guide.  In  one  place,  guided  by  the  barking 
of  the  dog,  I  found  a  family  party  of  these  strange- 
looking  "  hedgehogs  '  under  the  roots  of  a  fallen 
tree,  while,  in  an  open  tract  of  grass,  lying  near  the 
edge  of  the  forest,  the  dog  found  several  and  killed 
them  all,  in  spite  of  the  fearful  smell  which  they 
emitted  on  being  annoyed. 

Early  in  the  afternoon,  after  our  walk  in  this 
fascinating  forest,  we  returned  to  Diego  Suarez. 
We  descended  in  the  same  tram  as  that  used  for 
the  ascent  on  the  previous  day,  but  so  steep  was 
the  slope  that  the  tram  slid  down  of  its  own  accord, 
and  no  mules  were  required  until  shortly  before 
we  reached  the  town.     While  passing  through  a 

*  Centetes  ecaudatus. 


A   WILD    CAT  99 

strip  of  forest  we  had  a  good  view  of  a  fossa,*  a  fine 
cat  peculiar  to  Madagascar,  which  stood  in  the 
middle  of  the  track  and  gazed  at  the  car.  When 
we  had  approached  to  within  about  50  yards, 
however,  it  dashed  off  into  the  forest.  In  another 
place  we  rushed  through  a  party  of  guinea-fowls, 
old  and  young,  which  scattered  themselves  right 
and  left  to  avoid  the  tram. 

The  following  two  days  were  spent  in  collecting 
in  the  neighbourhood  of  the  harbour.  Here  were 
some  of  the  largest  sharks  I  have  ever  seen,  and 
every  morning  two  or  three  of  these  monsters 
were  swimming  idly  round  the  yacht,  but  they 
would  not  take  a  bait  of  any  kind.  They  were  in 
every  case  surrounded  by  a  shoal  of  sucking  fish. 

On  March  9th,  1906,  we  left  Madagascar  for 
Glorioso  Island. 

*  Cryptoprocta  ferox. 


CHAPTER    X. 


GLORIOSO     ISLAND. 


Glorioso,  or  File  Glorieuse,  which  we  sighted  on 
March  10th,  1906,  belongs  to  France,  and  is  at  the 
present  time  rented  by  a  Frenchman,  who  grows 
there  a  large  quantity  of  cocoanuts  for  export. 
It  comprises  besides  the  main  island,  which  is 
from  a  mile  and  a  half  to  two  miles  long  and  about 
a  mile  in  breadth,  a  small,  densely  wooded  islet,  the 
He  de  Lise,  separated  from  the  main  island  by 
about  three  miles  of  very  shallow  water.  Moreover, 
between  these  two  islands  is  a  third,  which  is 
little  more  than  a  large  rock  covered  with  grass, 
on  which  thousands  of  noddy  terns,*  as  well  as 
one  or  two  pairs  of  boobies, f  were  nesting  at  the 
time  of  our  visit. 

Glorioso  is  a  coral  island,  but  to  all  appearances 
not  of  so  ancient  a  formation  as  the  neighbouring 
islands  of  Assumption  and  Aldabra.  A  deep  layer 
of  sand  covers  most  of  it,  and  on  the  leeward  side 
this  has  drifted  into  a  fairly  high  ridge.  At  the 
time  of  our  visit,  the  greater  part  of  the  island  was 

*  Anous  stolidu8.  f  Sula  leucogastra. 


o 
© 


2. 
Z 

< 

r. 

—* 

O 

z 

— 

3 
- 


z 


z 
<! 


THE   ISLAND    INHABITED  101 

overgrown  with  trees  and  scrub,  which  in  some 
places  had  become  so  thick  as  to  be  impenetrable. 
Here  and  there  were  groves  of  cocoanut  trees, 
and  in  one  place  a  large  plantation  of  maize. 

Our  information  in  Madagascar  was  to  the  effect 
that  Glorioso  had  no  inhabitants,  so  that  when 
we  put  in  to  the  sandy  leeward  shore  we  set  off 
immediately  in  -different  directions  to  collect. 
It  was  with  some  surprise  that,  after  a  short  walk, 
I  came  upon  a  large  field  of  maize  in  which  two 
negroes  were  working.  They  at  once  came  to  me, 
and  informed  me  that  the  owner  of  the  island 
wished  to  see  me.  I  followed  them  to  a  small 
settlement,  almost  hidden  by  casuarina  trees. 
Over  one  of  the  houses  the  French  flag  was  flying. 
On  entering  the  house  I  was  met  by  the  pro- 
prietor, who  appeared  to  be  somewhat  indignant 
at  our  landing  on  his  territory  without  permission. 
When  matters  were  explained,  however,  he  became 
quite  friendly,  and  after  a  while  gave  us  permission 
to  collect  or  do  whatever  we  liked  on  his  property. 
He  informed  me  that  he  had  rented  Glorioso  for 
a  term  of  years  to  cultivate  all  the  spots  suitable 
for  cocoanuts.  The  palms  which  he  had  already 
planted  appeared  to  be  doing  well  indeed,  for, 
although  young,  they  had  already  borne  an  ex- 
cellent crop  of  nuts. 

There  are  five  resident  species  of  land-birds 
in  Glorioso :  all  except  one  of  these  are  identical 
with  Madagascan  species.     The  only  bird  which 

i 


102       VOYAGES   OF  A  NATURALIST 

has  been  described  as  peculiar  is  a  dove,*  but  since 
we  did  not  find  it,  although  we  walked  nearly  over 
the  whole  of  the  island  during  our  short  stay,  I 
fear  it  must  be  nearly,  if  not  quite,  extinct.  Great 
frigate  birds  were  most  conspicuous.  The  males  were 
flying  overhead,  their  scarlet  pouches  extended, 
while  the  females  were  sitting  upon  their  nests — 
mere  heaps  of  sticks  placed  near  the  top  of  tall 
trees — or  were  crowded  together  in  the  tree-tops 
in  company  with  gannets.f  Lord  Crawford 
shot  several  adult  frigate  birds  to  take  home 
in  spirit,  as  it  was  not  known  by  what  means 
this  bird  extends  its  pouch  during  the  breeding 
season. 

Of  the  land-birds  the  white-eye,  of  the  same 
species  as  that  seen  in  the  Foret  d' Ambre,  Madagas- 
car, was  the  most  abundant,  and  it  was  to  be  found 
in  great  numbers  all  over  the  island.  Now  and 
again  a  black  kite  J  was  observed  sailing  overhead. 
This  species  is,  as  far  as  we  could  ascertain,  only  a 
winter  visitor  to  Glorioso,  and  it  is  at  no  time 
abundant  there.  A  few  crows§  of  the  same 
species  as  that  found  in  the  Comoros  and  Mada- 
gascar are  residents.  It  is  somewhat  surprising 
that  there  is  no  rail  on  Glorioso,  as  on  both  Assump- 
tion and  Aldabra  there  are  forms  of  this  bird, 
distinct  but  nearly  allied  to  the  rail  of  Madagascar. 
We  made  particular  enquiries  of  the  proprietor 

*  Turtur  coppingeri.  f  Sula  piscator. 

%  Milvus  migrans.  §  Corvus  scapulatus. 


o 


Q 
< 

l— l 

O 

CO 

O 

i— i 

P3 

o 
o 


HAWK-MOTHS   AND   TURTLES       103 

on  this  subject,  but  he  assured  us  that  there  was 
no  bird  of  the  kind  there. 

Numbers  of  domestic  fowls  were  running  about 
in  a  more  or  less  wild  state.  They  did  not  show 
any  signs  of  reversion  to  their  ancestral  form  ; 
on  the  contrary,  those  we  met  with  were  of  all 
kinds  and  colours,  though  very  small ;  many  of 
them  took  to  flight  on  being  alarmed. 

Butterflies  and  moths  were  numerous,  and  a 
species  of  hawk-moth  was  hovering  round  the 
flowers  of  a  convolvulus  in  incredible  numbers. 
On  several  occasions  we  took  three  or  more  at 
one  sweep  of  the  net. 

There  seems  to  be  little  fresh  water  here  ;  as 
far  as  we  could  see  there  was  none  at  all  on  the 
leeward  side,  and  but  a  small  pool  near  the 
settlement,  though  I  believe  there  is  a  well  near 
the  house  of  the  proprietor.  This  scarcity  of 
fresh  water  may  account  for  the  rareness  of  the 
dove  before  mentioned,  as  pigeons  and  doves  are 
known  to  require  plenty  of  water.  I  presume 
that  the  fowls  visit  the  settlement  for  water ; 
at  all  events  they  were  more  numerous  near  the 
houses  than  elsewhere. 

Both  the  green  turtle*  and  the  hawksbillf  were 
abundant  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Glorioso,  the 
latter  being  the  more  valuable,  as  it  is  from  the 
shell  of  this  turtle  that  tortoise-shell  is  made.  The 
green  turtles  frequent  the  sandy  beach  to  deposit 

*  Chelone  mvdaa  (Linn.).  t  Chelone  imbricata  (Schweigg). 

i2 


104       VOYAGES   OF  A  NATURALIST 

their  eggs,  and  the  shore  was  covered  with  their 
tracks.  Two  large  ones  were  caught  during  our 
stay,  and  were  kept  alive  on  board  until  we  reached 
Aldabra,  when  they  were  given  to  the  overseer 
of  that  island. 

The  second  day  of  our  stay  off  Glorioso  was 
spent  on  the  neighbouring  He  de  Lise.  Landing 
first  on  Glorioso,  we  took  on  board  the  proprietor, 
who  volunteered  to  act  as  our  guide,  and  then  we 
started  on  a  three  mile  row  to  our  destination. 
On  the  way  we  visited  the  rocky  islet  previously 
mentioned  as  lying  between  the  two  islands. 
Here  was  a  large  colony  of  sea-birds.  Noddy 
terns  were  all  sitting  on  their  eggs,  most  of  which 
were  fresh.  The  eggs  were  laid  in  a  shallow 
depression  on  the  grass,  and  the  "  nests  "  were  so 
close  together  that  it  was  difficult  to  walk  without 
treading  on  the  eggs.  The  gannets  had  not  com- 
menced to  lay,  while  a  few  sooty  terns,*  which  were 
flying  overhead,  were  evidently  not  nesting. 

After  a  long  and  difficult  "  pull,"  owing  to  the 
quickly  falling  tide,  we  at  last  reached  He  de  Lise. 
In  spite  of  the  thick  growth  of  trees  and  bushes 
there  was  not  a  bird  of  any  kind  to  be  seen — no 
sign  of  a  land  or  sea-bird,  although,  judging  from 
the  dried  remains  of  sooty  terns  on  a  bare  portion 
of  the  islet,  I  fancy  that  there  must  be  a  large  colony 
nesting  there  at  some  period  of  the  year.  There  is 
a  roughly-built  shed  on  the  island,  and  close  by 

k    *  Sterna  fuliginosa. 


- 


< 

CO 

h^ 

O 

CO 

O 

o 

o 


FORMIDABLE   BOBBER-CRABS        105 

are  two  huge  iron  tanks  filled  with  rainwater, 
which  is  stored,  as  our  host  informed  us,  in  case  of 
a  ship  being  wrecked  there. 

The  most  interesting  event  of  our  excursion 
was  the  discovery  of  several  robber-crabs  (Birgus 
latro),  a  highly  specialized  form  of  hermit-crab 
of  huge  proportions.  It  is  a  most  formidable- 
looking  creature,  and,  unlike  the  hermit-crab, 
carries  no  shell,  but  has  the  tail  covered  with  a 
jointed  "  armour,"  like  that  of  the  lobster.  The 
robber-crab  is  of  a  reddish  colour,  though  m  some 
specimens  there  is  a  tinge  of  blue  both  on  the  head 
and  on  part  of  the  upper  surface  of  the  body. 
Its  food  is  said  to  consist  chiefly  of  cocoanuts, 
but  as  there  are  none  of  these  nuts  on  He  de  Lise 
it  feeds  on  maize,  of  which  it  devours  enormous 
quantities.  Curiously  enough,  although  plentiful 
on  He  de  Lise,  this  crab  is  not  found  on  Glorioso 
Island,  and  our  host  was  fearful  lest  it  should  by 
some  means  get  across  to  his  cocoanut  plantations. 
I  examined  several  heads  of  maize,  from  which 
the  seed  had  been  shorn  off  by  the  claws  of  this 
crab  ;  each  head  of  corn  had  the  appearance  of 
having  been  shaved  with  a  sharp  knife.  The 
robber-crab  is  nocturnal  here,  and  during  the  day 
hides  in  hollows  up  in  the  trees.  We  found  several, 
but  they  were  so  securely  ensconced  that  we  had 
to  hew  part  of  the  tree-trunks  with  an  axe  before 
we  could  get  at  them.  Their  strength  is  terrific. 
When  held  by  the   claws   they  twine  their  legs 


106       VOYAGES   OF  A  NATURALIST 

round  one's  hand  and  squeeze  with  a  vice-like 
grip.  The  huge  claws  are  of  prodigious  strength, 
and  one  of  our  sailors,  who  caught  a  small  specimen, 
had  a  piece  of  flesh  cut  clean  out  of  the  palm  of 
his  hand  by  a  single  nip.  The  two  crabs  which  we 
secured  were  enclosed  in  a  paraffin  tin  and  brought 
on  board.  Either  these,  or  two  others,  which  we 
afterwards  caught  on  Assumption  Island,  escaped 
from  the  tin  by  tearing  off  a  large  piece  near  the 
lid.  After  such  an  exhibition  of  strength,  one  can 
more  easily  credit  the  accounts  of  the  destruction 
done  to  cocoanuts  by  these  crabs. 

On  our  way  back  to  the  ship  we  fell  in  with 
numbers  of  both  kinds  of  turtles  and  several  large 
fishes,  probably  barracuda.  Leaving  our  host  at 
Glorioso  and  boarding  the  "  Valhalla,"  we  shortly 
afterwards  steamed  away,  bound  for  Assumption. 


CHAPTER    XI. 


ASSUMPTION   ISLAND. 


Early  on  the  morning  following  our  departure 
from  Glorioso,  Assumption  Island  was  sighted. 

Assumption,  like  Glorioso,  as  I  have  previously 
mentioned,  is  of  coral  formation,  but  apparently 
of  a  much  older  date.  It  is  about  two  miles  long 
by  a  mile  in  width,  at  the  broadest  part,  and  is 
less  thickly  wooded  than  Glorioso.  The  central 
part  is  almost  bare  of  vegetation,  the  only  growth 
being  a  few  low  bushes  (hibiscus),  and  a  thin  wiry 
grass  which  springs  from  the  cracks  and  fissures 
in  the  coral.  At  one  end  of  the  windward  side 
is  a  mass  of  drifted  sand,  about  60  feet  in  height, 
covered  with  low  straggling  bushes,  while  on  the 
leeward  side  there  are  a  few  casuarina  trees,  and 
in  one  spot  on  the  shore  three  cocoanut  palms. 

The  shore  is  composed  of  sand,  but  the  island 
itself  is  a  rock-like  mass  of  coral.  Close  to  the  shore 
are  some  deep  wells  containing  water,  but  whether 
salt  or  fresh  we  were  unable  to  ascertain.  These 
wells  are  perfectly  circular,  and  apparently  of 
natural  formation.    That  there  is  a  constant  supply 


108       VOYAGES   OF  A  NATURALIST 

of  fresh  water  is  proved  by  the  numbers  of  in- 
habitant land-birds,  but,  so  far  as  we  could  as- 
certain the  water-supply  is  entirely  dependent  on 
the  rainfall.  At  the  time  of  our  visit  there  was 
plenty  of  it,  every  depression  in  the  coral  being 
full  of  sweet,  clear  water. 

All  these  small  islands  to  the  north-west  of 
Madagascar  are  inhabited  by  a  few  species  of  land- 
birds,  and  most  of  them  have  their  peculiar  species. 
Previous  to  our  landing  on  it,  Assumption  had 
only  once  been  visited  by  a  naturalist — Dr.  W. 
L.  Abbott — who  landed  there  some  years  ago, 
but  I  believe  only  for  a  very  short  time.  We 
therefore  looked  forward  to  our  visit  with  pleasur- 
able anticipation,  and  we  were  not  disappointed, 
for,  apart  from  spending  a  most  enjoyable  time, 
we  were  successful  in  obtaining,  amongst  other 
interesting  things,  three  previously  undescribed 
birds. 

On  first  entering  the  belt  of  trees  and  low  bushes 
which  fringes  the  shore,  we  were  greeted  by  a  chorus 
of  squeals  and  grunts,  as  though  a  litter  of  pigs 
was  hidden  in  the  cover.  This  remarkable  noise 
proceeded  from  a  number  of  rails,*  birds  much 
like  our  water-rail  but  rather  more  stoutly  built, 
and  with  wine-red  breasts,  barred  on  the  flanks 
and  belly  with  black  and  white.  These  rails 
were  very  tame,  and  walked  about  close  to  us  in  a 
perfectly    unconcerned    manner.     We    never    saw 

*  Rallus  abbotti. 


00 

© 


- 

O 
O 

- 
2i 


DO 


X 


A  FLIGHTLESS   RAIL  109 

one  of  them  fly,  or  even  try  to  do  so  :  they  trusted 
entirely  to  their  legs  when  pursued.  In  several 
patches  of  bush  we  came  across  family  parties  of 
them,  and  although  the  young  were  mostly  full- 
grown  and  feathered,  we  saw  several  which  were 
still  covered  with  black  down.  They  were  found 
on  all  parts  of  the  island,  except  on  the  summit  of 
the  sandy  hill  on  the  windward  side.  While 
uttering  its  remarkable  note,  this  rail  stands  quite 
still  and  puffs  out  all  its  feathers  ;  from  what  I 
observed  I  should  say  that  the  skin  of  the  throat 
is  also  expanded.  The  notes  are  loud — a  strange 
mixture  of  squealing,  grunting  and  booming — 
and  during  its  song  the  bird  appears  to  be  gradually 
collapsing,  until  at  the  end  it  is  once  more  of 
normal  size.  I  have  heard  our  English  water -rail 
utter  a  somewhat  similar  noise  when  near  its  nest, 
but  its  cries  are  never  so  loud  as  those  of  the 
Assumption  rail.  We  caught  two  of  thern  alive 
and  brought  them  safely  to  England,  and  they  are 
at  the  time  I  write  living  in  the  London  Zoological 
Gardens. 

White-necked  crows  were  present  on  the  island 
in  small  numbers,  and  were  nesting  in  the  tallest 
trees,  but  I  have  no  doubt  that  this  species  has 
recently  wandered  hither  from  Madagascar  or  East 
Africa. 

Leaving  the  shore  we  found  more  open  country, 
and  came  across  some  large  turtle-doves  with  brown 
backs  and  claret-coloured  breasts.    These  doves,  of 


110       VOYAGES   OF  A  NATURALIST 

which  we  obtained  specimens,  proved  to  belong  to 
a  hitherto  undescribed  species,*  nearly  allied  to 
those  inhabiting  Aldabra  and  Glorioso  ;  they 
were  remarkably  tame,  and  could  almost  be  caught 
by  hand.  A  few  were  nesting  in  the  branches  of 
the  hibiscus  bushes,  and  one  nest  that  we  found 
contained  a  single  newly-hatched  bird.  Its  flight 
is  somewhat  heavy  and  laboured,  and  the  bird  is 
remarkably  unwilling  to  take  to  wing  at  all, 
spending  most  of  its  time  running  on  the  ground 
under  the  bushes,  often  in  company  with  the 
rails,  with  which  it  appears  to  be  on  excellent 
terms. 

We  had  not  proceeded  far  before  we  heard  the 
long  bubbling  note  of  a  lark-heeled  cuckoo,f 
and  soon  found  the  bird  sitting  in  a  thick  bush  near 
its  nest — a  large  domed  structure  built  of  dried 
grasses,  and  containing  two  perfectly  white  eggs. 
This  "  cuckoo,"  which  is,  by  the  way,  not  a  true 
cuckoo,  builds  its  own  nest  and  rears  its  own  young. 
The  Assumption  species  is  closely  allied  to  the 
one  I  have  mentioned  as  seen  in  the  Foret 
d'Ambre,  but  is  somewhat  larger.  Although  they 
were  extraordinarily  tame,  we  were  unable  to  catch 
any  of  them  alive,  as  they  rarely  left  the  thickest 
parts  of  the  bushes. 

The  tameness  of  several  of  the  birds  on  Assump- 

*  Turtur  assumptionis,  Nicoll,  "Bulletin  Brit.  Orn.  Club,"  Vol.  XVI., 
p.  105. 

f  Centropu8  assumptionis,  Nicoll,  "  Bulletin  Brit.    Orn.  Club,"  Vol. 
XVI.,  p.  105. 


TAMENESS   OF  THE   BIRDS  111 

tionwas  noteworthy.  At  first  thought  it  would  seem 
to  be  accounted  for  by  the  fact  that  the  island  is 
uninhabited  and  very  seldom  visited  ;  but  if  this 
be  the  reason,  one  would  expect  all  the  birds  to 
be  tame,  which  was  not  the  case.  Indeed,  a  small 
heron,  which  proved  to  be  a  perfectly  new  species,* 
was  so  wild  that,  although  we  saw  a  great  number, 
I  was  able  to  shoot  only  a  single  specimen.  Also 
the  only  small  land-bird,  a  tiny  sunbird,f  which 
is  found  nowhere  else,  was  by  no  means  tame. 
On  Saint  Paul's  Rocks,  as  I  have  mentioned  in  a 
previous  chapter,  one  species  of  noddy  tern  is 
quite  tame,  while  the  other  is  extremely  shy  and 
wild,  though  there  is  probably  no  island  in  the 
world  more  seldom  visited  by  man.  It  would  seem, 
then,  that  tameness  and  timidity  in  birds  are  to  a 
great  extent  specific  traits. 

Unfortunately,  rats  have  been  imported  by  some 
means  into  Assumption  and  are  now  very  abundant. 
There  is  little  doubt  that  they  devour  many  eggs 
of  the  rail  and  of  other  birds  which  nest  near  the 
ground,  and  should  the  rats  increase  to  any  extent, 
there  is  a  great  danger  of  these  interesting 
birds  becoming  extinct  in  the  near  future. 
All  the  rats  which  I  shot  were  of  a  very  pale 
coloration,  probably  due  to  the  nature  of  the 
ground. 

On  the  open  ground  near  the  foot  of  the  sandhill 

*  Butorides  crawfordi,  Nicoll,  "Bulletin  Brit.  Orn.  Club,"  Vol.  XVI., 
p.  105.  t  Cinnyris  abbotti,  Ridgway. 


112       VOYAGES   OF  A  NATURALIST 

we  came  upon  a  flock  of  some  twenty  goats. 
They  were  of  many  colours — black,  white,  grey,  and 
piebald — and  some  of  the  males  were  remarkably 
fine  animals.  They  were  excessively  wild,  and 
would  not  allow  us  to  approach  to  within  any 
reasonable  distance  of  them.  They  were  originally 
turned  out  to  provide  food  for  any  shipwrecked 
crew,  and,  as  it  so  happened,  we  ourselves  were  all 
but  shipwrecked  in  the  neighbourhood  of  this 
island  a  few  days  later. 

The  sea  round  Assumption  swarmed  with  fish, 
and  turtles  were  also  very  plentiful.  At  the  time 
of  our  visit  the  latter  were  in  great  numbers  close 
to  the  shore,  where  several  were  "  turned."  A 
number  of  "  nests  "  was  found  by  following  the 
turtle  tracks  in  the  sand.  Some  contained  fresh 
eggs,  others  were  on  the  point  of  hatching,  and 
several  newly-hatched  young  were  found. 

Robber-crabs  were  also  numerous,  and  appeared 
to  be  more  diurnal  in  habits  than  they  were  on 
Glorioso.  Many  were  seen  crawling  about  under 
the  bushes  which  fringe  the  shore.  There  were 
but  three  cocoanut  trees,  and  they  appeared  to 
to  have  little  if  any  fruit ;  neither  was  there 
any  maize,  so  I  imagine  the  crabs  feed  on  the 
young  sea-birds.  Indeed,  they  appeared  to  be 
omnivorous,  and  greedily  devoured  a  rat  which  I 
threw  to  them. 

We  landed  on  Assumption  twice,  getting  ashore 
about  eleven  o'clock  on  the  first  day,  and  spending 


-I 


x 

— 

O 

Eh 
- 

— 

EC 
«j 

O 


-*       ■ — 


Go   Ea 


< 


*G 

e 

Q    -2 
o 

H    £ 

O    3 
0 

r— 

— 
i 

M 

g 

I— i 

Pi 

fa 
o 

CO 

ft 


WE   LEAVE   ASSUMPTION  113 

about  three  hours  there  on  the  following  morning. 
Leaving  at  mid-day  on  March  13th,  1906,  we 
steamed  to  Aldabra,  sighting  it  an  hour  or  two 
later. 


CHAPTER    XII. 


ALDABRA     ISLAND. 


Very  soon  after  leaving  Assumption  we  sighted 
the  island  of  Aldabra.  I  had  previously  no  idea 
that  the  circumference  of  this  island  was  so 
great — at  the  lowest  computation  it  must  be 
one  hundred  miles. 

Aldabra  is  undoubtedly  a  huge  atoll  of  very 
ancient  formation.  The  coral  of  which  it  is  formed 
is,  like  that  of  Assumption,  of  a  deep  brown 
colour.  The  lagoon  enclosed  by  this  atoll  is  very 
large,  with  several  outlets  into  the  sea,  how  many, 
we  were  unable  to  estimate  in  the  time  at  our 
disposal.  The  principal  outlet  is  situated  on  the 
leeward  side,  and,  as  the  anchorage  is  marked 
on  the  charts  as  if  it  were  in  the  mouth  of  this 
passage,  we  steamed  up  and  dropped  anchor 
clear  of  the  tide  "  rip."  The  place,  however, 
proved  to  be  totally  unsafe,  owing  to  the  rush 
of  water  entering  the  lagoon.  Indeed,  the  tide 
came  in  with  such  violence  that  "  Valhalla " 
soon  dragged  her  anchor.  We  therefore  put  to 
sea   again,   cruising   off  the  leeward   side   of  the 


:^ 


ABBOTT  S    IBISES    OX    ALDABRA    ISLAND. 


[1141 


THE   GIANT   TORTOISE  115 

island  until  the  morning,  when  a  boat  was  sent 
from  the  shore  to  pilot  us  to  a  much  safer  and 
better  spot,  not  far  from  the  settlement. 

Aldabra  is  the  home  of  a  huge  tortoise,*  which 
was  at  one  time  fairly  abundant,  but  is  now  con- 
fined to  a  small  area  on  the  northern  side.  So 
difficult  is  it  to  get  to  this  locality  that  we  were 
unable  to  see  the  tortoises  in  their  wild  state. 
The  Hon.  Walter  Rothschild  rents  the  island  of 
Aldabra  from  the  British  Government  and 
protects  the  tortoises  as  well  as  a  peculiar  species 
of  ibis,  so  that  it  is  to  be  hoped  that  these 
interesting  creatures  may  long  hold  their  own. 

A  great  part  of  the  leeward  side  has  lately  been 
planted  with  cocoanuts,  which  are  now  growing 
on  nearly  every  patch  of  sand  above  high-water 
mark.  The  settlement  is  composed  of  a  few  wooden 
huts,  inhabited  by  negroes,  who,  under  the  super- 
vision of  an  overseer,  work  in  the  cocoanut 
plantations  and  at  turtle-catching  and  curing. 
Near  the  houses  grow  casuarina  trees,  with  their 
beautiful  feathery  foliage  ;  they  seem  to  be 
the  tallest  trees  on  the  island,  the  greater  part  of 
the  vegetation  being  a  thick  scrub,  relieved  oc- 
casionally by  groups  of  trees  of  a  species  of 
Ficus  and  a  few  pandani  or  screw-pines. 

In  several  parts  of  the  island  there  are  pools 
of  fresh  water,  but,  like  those  on  Assumption, 
they  seem  to  be  dependent  for  their  supply  on  the 

*  Testudo  elephantina. 


116       VOYAGES   OF  A  NATURALIST 

rainfall.  All  the  water  holes  near  the  settlement 
were  carefully  covered  over  with  branches,  to 
prevent  fouling  by  herons  and  other  wading  birds, 
which  are  to  be  found  in  great  numbers. 

Owing  to  the  very  shallow  water  between  our 
anchorage  and  the  land  we  were  only  able  to 
go  ashore  at  high  tide,  and  we  were  thus  somewhat 
handicapped  during  our  short  stay,  since  our  time 
for    collecting    was    necessarily    curtailed. 

Early  in  the  afternoon  of  our  first  day  we 
landed  on  the  sandy  beach,  where  we  were  met 
by  the  overseer,  who  conducted  us  to  the  settle- 
ment, about  half  a  mile  distant.  But  our  arrival 
was  followed  by  a  heavy  rain,  which  continued 
for  the  rest  of  the  day,  and  obliged  us  to  seek 
shelter  in  a  house.  I  was,  on  that  account,  unable 
to  do  more  than  watch  several  species  of  birds. 
The  commonest,  and  at  the  same  time  the  most 
brilliant,  was  a  weaver-bird,*  a  tame  and  familiar 
bird  which  fed  in  large  flocks  close  to  the  houses. 
It  has  a  brilliant  coloration,  the  whole  of  the 
breast  is  of  a  rich  scarlet,  the  abdomen  is  yellow, 
the  back  greenish  with  black  streaks,  and  the  rump 
is  again  scarlet.  A  flock  of  males  presented  a 
striking  sight  as  they  roamed  the  village  in  search 
of  food ;  all  were  in  full  breeding  plumage,  and 
several  pairs  were  nesting  in  the  casuarina  trees 
which  surround  the  settlement. 

Another  familiar  bird  in  Aldabra  is  the  sacred 

*  Nesacanthis  aldabranus. 


i— i 

< 

ffl 

<! 

0 

hJ 
<J 

fc 
o 

CO 

i— l 

M 

M 

co 

H 
H 
O 

PQ 

n 


NUMEROUS   BIRDS  117 

egret,*  an  interesting  species  with  two  distinct 
phases,  or  forms  of  plumage  irrespective  of  age 
or  sex.  Wholly  white,  or  entirely  blue,  examples 
are  equally  common,  while  one  specimen  which  I 
shot  was  mottled  with  white  and  blue-grey,  all 
the  feathers  being  parti-coloured.  These  egrets 
collect  in  great  numbers  round  the  pools  of  fresh- 
water near  the  settlement,  and  when  disturbed 
fly  but  a  little  way,  quickly  assembling  again  at 
the  same  spot.  One  can  realise  what  a  nuisance 
they  must  be  to  the  inhabitants,  so  soon  do  they 
foul  the  scanty  supply  of  fresh  water. 

A  small  kestrel  and  a  sunbird  were  also  fairly 
common  in  the  casuarina  trees ;  the  latter  is 
peculiar  to  Aldabra,  though  closely  allied  to  the 
sunbird  of  Assumption,  from  which  it  differs  only 
in  having  more  yellow  on  the  underparts. 

Doves,  |  also,  somewhat  similar  to  those  found 
on  Assumption,  were  fairly  numerous,  but  the 
Aldabra  rail  was  not  at  all  common,  and  I 
only  met  with  two,  both  of  which  I  obtained 
during  our  stay.  The  jet  black  males  and  grey 
females  of  a  drongo  shrikej  were  conspicuous 
inhabitants  of  the  bush  in  the  neighbourhood 
of  the  village,  but  they  were  exceedingly  shy  and 
difficult  to  approach. 

As  the  tide  rolled  in,  numbers  of  shore-birds 
left  the  sandy  beach  and  flew  over  into  the  lagoon, 

*  Demiegretta  sacra.  f  Turtur  aldabranas. 

%  Dicrurus  aldabranus. 

K 


118       VOYAGES   OF  A  NATURALIST 

where  they  remained  until  the  tide  began  to  ebb. 
The  commonest  and  most  striking  of  these  was 
the  crab-plover,*  which  appeared  in  enormous 
numbers.  A  few  sanderlings  were  running  about 
on  the  water's  edge,  and  so  many  other  birds  that 
to  mention  them  all  would  be  tedious.  The 
richness  of  Aldabra  in  peculiar  forms  will  be 
realised  by  the  fact  that  out  of  eighteen  species 
obtained  by  us  during  our  visit  ten  are  restricted 
to  this  island,  and  one  other  is  found  elsewhere 
only  in  Madagascar. 

We  had  been  looking  forward  to  seeing  giant 
tortoises  Lu  a  wild  state  during  our  stay,  but  in 
this  we  were  doomed  to  disappointment.  We 
found  that  it  would  take  at  least  two  days  to  visit 
the  locality  where  they  are  now  only  to  be  found, 
and  as  we  had  not  the  necessary  time  at  our 
disposal,  we  were  reluctantly  compelled  to  abandon 
our  hopes.  J 

Aldabra  is  also  famous  for  its  turtles  ;  large 
numbers  are  caught  annually,  their  flesh  being 
dried  for  export.  Trays,  shaped  like  huge  sieves, 
were  arranged  in  front  of  the  settlement,  and  in 
these  a  great  quantity  of  turtle-flesh  lay  exposed 
to  the  sun.  The  neighbourhood  of  the  curing  place 
was  not  at  all  pleasant,  for  although  the  drying 
flesh  did  not  smell  objectionably,  the  same  could 

*  Dromas  ardeola. 

f  This  tortoise  has  been  introduced  into  the  Seychelles,  where  it  is 
kept  in  a  semi-domestic  state,  and  later  on  we  saw  many  of  them  in  the 
tortoise  "farms"  in  that  group  of  islands. 


z 

< 


ffl 
< 


O 

02 
H 
72 

5 
i— i 

CQ 

*H 
E-" 
O 

- 
< 


A  GREAT   LAGOON  119 

not  be  said  for  the  deposits  near  by  of  other  parts 
of  the  turtles.  Close  to  one  of  the  houses  we  saw 
a  tame  frigate  bird — belonging  to  one  of  the  men 
employed  in  the  turtle  industry — which  was  in 
beautiful  condition  and  so  tame  that  it  could  be 
handled. 

We  were  most  anxious  to  see  the  Ibis  abbotti, 
a  striking  bird  much  like  the  well-known  sacred 
ibis,  and  also  closely  allied  to  the  Ibis  bernieri 
of  Madagascar,  but  differing  from  both  so  decidedly 
that  it  has  been  rightly  claimed  as  a  distinct 
species,  confined  to  Aldabra,  so  far  as  is  known. 
The  overseer  of  the  island  informed  us  that  the 
bird  was  seldom  seen  near  the  settlement,  and  that 
it  nested  some  thirty  miles  away  across  the  lagoon 
in  a  part  seldom  visited.  Accordingly  early  on 
the  second  morning  of  our  stay,  we  set  out  from 
the  yacht  in  the  steam  launch  for  this  ibis  colony, 
taking  on  board  the  overseer  and  a  pilot. 

The  lagoon,  which  is  enclosed  by  the  island  or 
islands  of  Aldabra,  is  very  shallow,  but  for  some 
twenty  miles  there  is  a  narrow  channel  of  suffi- 
cient depth  to  allow  a  boat,  drawing  several  feet 
of  water,  to  proceed.  This  lagoon  is  of  so  great  a 
size  that  during  our  passage  through  it  we  were 
frequently  almost  out  of  sight  of  land.  The  man 
we  had  taken  as  a  pilot  seemed  to  know  every 
part  of  it,  and  without  him  we  should  have  been 
unable  to  proceed  for  any  distance.     We  passed 

numerous  rocks,  the  bases  of  which  were  so  water- 

k  2 


120       VOYAGES   OF   A   NATURALIST 

worn  that  they  looked  like  enormous  mushrooms. 
They  were  inhabited  by  noddy  terns,  which  were 
sitting  on  their  eggs. 

After  three  hours'  steaming,  during  which  we 
saw  many  turtles  and  sharks,  we  came  into  very 
shallow  water.  The  tide  was  ebbing,  and  we  were 
forced  to  take  to  the  dinghy  which  we  had  been 
towing  astern.  A  row  of  about  an  hour  then 
brought  us  to  our  destination,  within  half  a  mile 
of  the  place  where  the  ibises  were  said  to  be 
nesting.  The  ground  here  was  of  the  same  forma- 
tion as  that  in  the  neighbourhood  of  the  settle- 
ment— a  mass  of  ancient  brown-coloured  coral 
covered  with  long  grass  and  clumps  of  bushes. 

After  a  very  few  minutes'  walk  we  came  on  a 
few  scattered  pairs  of  Abbott's  ibis  feeding  on  the 
margin  of  a  large  pool  of  rain-water.  I  soon  ob- 
tained a  couple  of  old  birds.  Their  necks,  like 
those  of  the  sacred  ibis,  were  bare  of  feathers, 
and  the  skin  was  black  and  wrinkled  ;  their  eyes 
were  of  a  pale  china-blue.  We  then  came  to  a 
more  open  piece  of  country,  covered  with  grass 
and  intersected  by  narrow  rivulets  of  water,  in 
one  of  which  were  two  young  ibises.  They  were 
ridiculously  tame,  and  allowed  of  such  a  near 
approach  that  several  photographs  of  them  were 
taken  without  any  difficulty. 

In  a  clump  of  fig  trees,  shortly  afterwards 
reached,  the  ibises  were  very  numerous  ;  many 
were   perched    in   the   trees,    while    many   more, 


RIVER   NEAR    PORT    VICTORIA,    MAHE,    SEYCHELLES. 
{Photographed  by  E.   G.   B.  Meade- Waldo.) 


[121] 


MARVELLOUSLY  TAME   IBISES       121 

chiefly  full-grown  young  birds,  were  walking  in  a 
pool  of  fresh  water  searching  for  food.  In  the 
middle  of  the  pool  several  were  sitting  together 
on  a  bare  rock.  They  appeared  to  be  tame  enough 
to  photograph  at  close  quarters,  so  I  at  once 
unpacked  my  tripod  camera  and  set  it  in  position, 
using  great  care  not  to  frighten  the  birds.  This 
precaution  was,  however,  needless,  for  they  were 
not  only  quite  fearless  but  so  inquisitive  that  they 
waded  across  the  pool,  and,  coming  close  up  to  the 
camera,  began  to  peck  at  the  tripod.  We  drove 
them  back  to  the  rocks,  but  before  a  plate  could 
be  exposed  they  were  back  again  inspecting  the 
legs  of  the  camera ;  it  was  only  by  repeated 
threats — a  novel  experience  for  them  and  for  us — 
that  we  could  keep  them  far  enough  away  to  enable 
us  to  get  a  series  of  photographs  in  proper  per- 
spective. After  this  we  allowed  them  to  come 
close  up,  and  when  we  had  examined  them  at 
very  close  quarters,  we  decided  to  try  to  catch 
one.  To  our  astonishment  they  would  all  allow 
themselves  to  be  picked  up,  nor  did  they  show 
any  signs  of  fear  when  released,  but  merely  ran 
round  our  feet  plucking  at  the  tags  of  our  boot- 
laces. I  have  seen  many  wild  birds  which 
showed  little  fear  of  man,  but  have  never  come 
across  such  extraordinarily  familiar  birds  as  these 
ibises. 

We  counted  all  the  individuals  we  could  on  this 
part  of  the  island,  and  estimated  that  there  were 


122       VOYAGES   OF  A  NATURALIST 

about  forty  pairs.  I  should  imagine  that  there  are 
several  other  nesting  places,  but,  owing  to  the  great 
size  of  the  island  and  to  the  difficulties  of  landing 
on  most  parts  of  it,  we  were  not  able  to  find  another 
colony. 

While  photographing  these  birds  I  noticed  some 
pigeons  flying  round  the  clump  of  fig  trees,  and 
as  they  appeared  to  be  constantly  settling  there, 
I  walked  up  to  the  foot  of  one  of  the  trees  to  wait 
for  them.  In  a  very  short  time  I  had  shot  four 
examples,  which  proved  to  be  Alectroenas  minor — 
a  species  peculiar  to  Aldabra.  In  appearance  they 
were  not  unlike  the  Comoro  pigeon,  but  were 
very  much  smaller.  Some  young  birds  were  in 
their  first  plumage,  which  is  not  only  much  greener 
than  that  of  the  adults,  but  each  feather  is  tipped 
with  yellowish  buff,  giving  the  bird  a  peculiar 
spangled  appearance.  In  the  shade  of  the  trees 
numbers  of  robber-crabs  were  creeping,  and  they 
showed  considerable  annoyance  at  our  presence, 
waving  their  claws  in  a  threatening  manner 
whenever  we  approached. 

After  a  very  pleasant  time  spent  amongst  the 
ibises  and  pigeons,  we  walked  back  to  our  boat 
and  put  off  for  the  steam  launch.  The  tide  had 
fallen  considerably,  and  it  was  a  long  time  before 
we  made  out  the  launch  in  the  distance.  On  the 
way  we  landed  at  a  small  deserted  village,  where 
half  an  hour  was  spent  in  search  of  the  Aldabra 
rail,   only  two   of  which   were   seen.     A   pair   of 


CO 


CO 

H 

M 
o 

CO 

Q 

CO 

hi 

M 


A  DANGEROUS   CURRENT  123 

Aldabra  doves*  was  also  procured,  and  then,  as 
it  was  getting  late,  we  hurried  on  to  the  launch 
and  steamed  away.  Darkness  fell,  however,  long 
before  we  sighted  the  yacht,  and  had  it  not  been 
for  our  pilot  we  should  have  had  great  difficulty 
in  getting  aboard  that  night.  The  water  was  so 
low  that  it  was  necessary  to  keep  exactly  in  the 
middle  of  the  channel,  a  task  by  no  means  easy, 
for  even  under  the  guidance  of  the  pilot  we  once 
missed  our  way  and  suddenly  found  ourselves  in 
very  shallow  water,  from  which  we  had  to  make 
our  way  with  extreme  caution. 

Aldabra  is  undoubtedly  of  a  great  age,  as  is 
evidenced  by  the  fact  that  nearly  all  its  birds  have 
become  differentiated  from  the  nearest  allies  found 
elsewhere.  Amongst  these  the  ibis,  dove,*  and 
a  night j art  are,  perhaps,  the  most  remarkable. 
The  giant  tortoise  is  also  peculiar,  although,  as 
I  have  mentioned  above,  it  has  been  exported  to 
the  Seychelle  Islands,  where  numbers  are  kept 
in  a  semi-domesticated  state. 

After  leaving  Aldabra  Lord  Crawford  intended 
to  pay  a  visit  to  Cosmoledo  and  Astove,  two  small 
coral  islands  in  the  immediate  neighbourhood. 
As  far  as  I  can  ascertain,  these  islands  have  never 
been  visited  by  a  naturalist,  and  they  are  said  to 
be  inhabited  by  several  species  of  birds.  But 
during  the  night,  while  steaming  to  Cosmoledo, 
we  were  carried  several  miles  out  of  our  course 

*  Turtar  aldabranus.  f  Caprimulgus  alddbrensis. 


124       VOYAGES   OF  A  NATURALIST 

by  a  strong  uncharted  current,  and  in  the  pitch 
darkness,  in  which  it  was  impossible  to  see  more 
than  a  few  yards  ahead,  we  ran  ashore  on  the 
leeward  side  of  Assumption.  Here  we  remained 
fast  for  some  twenty-four  hours,  fixed  on  the  sand. 
I  shall  not  soon  forget  that  night.  As  soon  as 
we  made  sure  that  we  were  fast,  and  that  the  ship 
had  suffered  no  harm,  I  finished  off  the  birds  I  was 
engaged  in  skinning,  then  joined  my  companions  in 
watching  dismally  the  water  as  it  gradually  fell 
away  from  our  bows. 

At  daybreak  all  arrangements  were  made  to  try 
to  get  the  ship  off  at  high  tide.  An  anchor  was 
carried  out  astern,  and  as  the  water  rose  we 
hauled  on  it,  at  the  same  time  working  the  engines 
at  full  speed  astern,  but  to  no  purpose.  All  the  time, 
however,  "Valhalla'11  was  grinding  out  for  herself 
a  bed  in  the  soft  sand,  and  during  the  next  high 
tide  she  floated  off,  the  captain  having  previously 
lowered  all  the  boats  and  cables,  and  a  quantity  of 
coal  to  lighten  her.  The  yacht  was,  fortunately, 
none  the  worse,  and,  as  soon  as  she  was  shipshape 
again,  we  steamed  away  for  the  Seychelle  Islands. 

Thus  the  fauna  of  Cosmoledo  and  Astove  is 
still  unknown.  I  feel  sure  that  these  two  islands 
would  well  repay  a  visit,  as  we  were  told  by  people 
in  the  Seychelles  that  they  abounded  with  bird- 
life,  but  should  any  of  my  readers  ever  attempt 
to  visit  them  I  would  suggest  that  they  approach 
them  in  daylight. 


CASCADE,    MAHE,    SEYCHELLES.      HOME    OF   AlectroenCLS 

pulcherrima. 
(Photographed  by  Mr.    E.  G.   B.  Meade-Waldo.) 


[1241 


CHAPTER    XIII. 


SEYCHELLE     ISLANDS. 


On  22nd  March,  1906,  Mahe,  the  largest  island 
of  the  Seychelle  group,  was  sighted,  and  shortly 
afterwards  we  came  to  anchor  off  the  town. 

Lord  Crawford's  intention  was  to  take  the  yacht 
round  to  all  the  most  interesting  islands  of  the 
group,  but  owing  to  very  bad  weather  the  greater 
part  of  this  plan  had  to  be  abandoned.  However, 
we  spent  sixteen  delightful  days  here,  and  visited 
the  islands  of  Praslin  and  Felicite. 

Mahe  rises  almost  perpendicularly  from  the  sea 
to  a  height  of  about  2000  feet.  Deep  valleys 
run  down  from  the  summit  to  the  sea-shore, 
and  the  island  is  for  the  most  part  covered  with 
forest. 

During  our  stay  we  were  most  kindly  enter- 
tained by  Mr.  H.  Thommasset,  who  invited  us  to 
his  beautiful  "  Cascade  Estate,"  which  is  situated 
about  1000  feet  above  the  sea.  Vanilla  was  the 
principal  crop  grown  at  the  time,  though,  owing 
to  a  fall  in  the  price,  it  is  not  now  nearly  so 
profitable  as  it  formerly  was.     For  this  reason  a 


126       VOYAGES   OF  A  NATURALIST 

large  quantity  of  rubber-trees  were  being  imported 
and  planted,  and  these  promised  to  do  well. 

Mr.  Meade- Waldo  and  I  started  out  to  pay  our 
visit  early  one  morning.  Driving  from  Mahe 
to  the  foot  of  the  cascade,  we  engaged  two  natives 
to  carry  our  baggage,  and  climbing  up  the  winding 
pathway  to  Mr.  Thommasset's  house — an  exceed- 
ingly steep  ascent — we  were  immediately  rewarded 
for  our  exertions  when  we  reached,  just  below  the 
house,  a  magnificent  sheet  of  water  which  fell 
in  a  glorious  cascade  over  the  brow  of  the  hill 
into  the  valley  below.  We  stood  for  a  time  close 
to  the  waterfall,  and  were  deliciously  cooled  by 
the  refreshing  spray  as  well  as  by  the  draught 
made  by  the  rush  of  the  water.  From  this  a  few 
minutes'  walk  brought  us  to  the  Cascade  Estate. 
The  house,  situated  on  a  small  plateau,  com- 
mands a  splendid  view  ;  the  well- wooded  ravine, 
with  its  beautiful  waterfall,  runs  sharply  down 
to  the  shore,  while  far  away  in  the  haze  of  distance 
rises  the  island  of  Praslin,  and,  nearer,  small 
islets,  covered  with  vegetation,  stand  out  in  clear 
relief  against  the  deep  blue  sea. 

Mr.  Thommasset's  estate  is  one  of  the  best  places 
on  the  island  in  which  to  observe  birds,  but, 
unfortunately,  indigenous  species  are  few.  A 
number  of  different  kinds  of  "  foreign "  birds 
have  been  introduced,  and  it  is  probably  owing 
to  the  excessive  numbers  of  Indian  mynahs  that 
the    indigenous    species    are    so    scarce    near    the 


CO 

H 

J 

J 

H 

W 

o 

tH 

w 

CO 

•< 

© 

— 

^ 

— 

'*-o 

«! 
S 

<a 

fe 

^ 

o 

S 

o 

H 

* 

co     O 


-o 


O 

O 


H 

H 

i— i 

o 

I 

— 


I 

o 


ALIEN  BIRDS   A  CURSE  127 

town  ;  in  fact,  the  original  avifauna  is  threatened 
with  extinction.  These  mynahs  have  spread  even 
as  far  as  the  Cascade  Estate,  but  in  the  town  itself 
they  are  in  such  numbers  that  every  garden  and 
tree  is  covered  with  them. 

The  Madagascar  weaver  bird*  has  also,  most 
unfortunately,  been  introduced.  The  history  of 
this  stupid  act,  as  told  me  on  good  authority, 
is  that  two  neighbours  went  to  law  concerning 
the  ownership  of  a  certain  field  which  each  claimed 
as  his  property.  The  loser,  to  be  revenged  on 
his  adversary,  brought  from  Madagascar  a  cage 
full  of  weaver  birds,  which  he  liberated  on  his 
neighbour's  land.  In  any  case,  whether  this 
account  of  the  origin  of  the  birds  be  true  or  not, 
the  effect  of  their  introduction  has  been  that  it  is 
now  impossible  to  grow  any  rice  or  grain  on 
Mahe,  and  at  the  present  time  these  "  weavers  ' 
are,  next  to  the  mynah,  the  commonest  land- 
birds. 

Nearly  all  the  indigenous  land-birds  of  the 
Seychelles  are  peculiar  to  the  group,  and  one 
species  of  sunbirdf  is  found  only  on  Mahe,  the 
other  islands  being  inhabited  by  a  somewhat 
similar  species,  which  differs  in  that  it  has  the 
tufts  of  feathers  on  the  breast  of  a  fiery-red  colour 
instead  of  yellow.  Both  species  are  otherwise 
dull  brownish-grey,   and  are  thus  very  different 

*  Foudia  madagascariensis. 

f  Cinnyris  mahei.     "Bull.  B.O.C.,"  Vol.  XVI.,  p.  106. 


128       VOYAGES   OF  A  NATURALIST 

from  the  brilliantly-plumaged  sunbirds  of  Africa, 
which  in  general  coloration  are  perhaps  even  more 
beautiful  than  the  majority  of  humming  birds. 
Dull  coloration  is  characteristic  of  other  birds  of 
the  Seychelles.  The  white-eye*  is  of  a  dull 
brownish-grey  instead  of  being  bright  yellow  and 
green,  as  are  the  majority  of  the  species  of  this 
genus,  while  the  Seychelle  parrotf  is  also  greyish- 
brown  with  but  a  faint  tinge  of  yellow.  The 
Madagascar  and  Comoro  parrots,  however,  are 
similar  in  this  respect.  It  is  remarkable  that  on 
this  group  of  islands  there  should  be  three  such 
dull-coloured  species  belonging  to  genera  noted 
for  their  bright-coloured  species.  Possibly  this 
is  the  effect  of  isolation  for  a  very  great  time, 
and  these  birds  may  be  the  oldest  members  of 
the  avifauna  of  the  Seychelles.  £ 

During  the  night  spent  at  Cascade  Estate  I 
made  several  unsuccessful  attempts  to  shoot  a 
small  owl,  which  was  calling  continually  through- 
out the  night  in  a  large  tree  just  outside  the 
house.  This  owl — Gymnoscops  insularis — Mr. 
Thommasset  informed  me  he  frequently  heard, 
and  occasionally  saw  as  it  flew  by  day  when 
driven  out  of  its  hiding-place  amongst  the  rocks 
or  hollow  trees.  A  small  kestrel§  appeared  to 
be  not  very  abundant,  but  I  think  that  it  may  be 

*  Zosterops  modesta.  f  Coracopsis  barlcleyi. 

%  The  Seychelle  Islands  are  like  St.  Paul's  Rocks,  of  neither  volcanic 
nor  coral  origin. 

§  Tinnunculus  gracilis. 


en 

H 

J 

- 

H 

_ ^ 

W 

6 

o 

*X3 

^ 

^ 

<u 

Q 

fc 

<» 

<3 

^ 

73 
t— ( 

R$ 

-a 

• 

H 

Ss 

i— i 

— 

N 

H^ 

H 

Si 

E^ 

iO 

l-H 

^ 

r^i 

% 

<: 

O 

A 

-^ 

e 

J 

&5 

Ph 

© 

•^A 

o 

o 

-=: 

£ 

hi 

N— ■" 

ft 

fc 

<3 

J 

TORTOISE   FARMS  129 

more  so  than  a  casual  visitor  would  imagine, 
for  it  is  extremely  tame  and  will  sit  for  hours 
motionless  and  hidden  amongst  the  thick  foliage. 

A  fine  fruit-pigeon*  is  not  uncommon  on  the 
higher  parts  of  the  Seychelle  Islands.  This  bird 
is  also  exceedingly  tame,  but,  unlike  the  kestrel, 
it  looses  rather  than  profits  by  its  fearlessness. 
It  is  good  to  eat,  and  being  readily  caught  by 
means  of  a  noose  fastened  to  a  long  stick,  it  falls 
an  easy  victim  to  natives,  by  whom  the  flesh  is 
greatly  esteemed.  The  bird  much  resembles  the 
previously  mentioned  pigeon  of  the  Comoros, 
but  is  somewhat  larger  and  has  a  deep  crimson 
crown. 

In  the  grounds  of  Government  House  we  saw 
a  large  number  of  Aldabra  tortoises  enclosed 
within  a  stone  wall.  Some  of  them  were  of  large 
size,  and  a  great  many  were  newly  hatched.  We 
were  informed  that  they  bred  freely  in  confine- 
ment, and  that  the  young  grew  very  quickly. 
These  tortoises  are  used  for  food  by  the  natives, 
and  on  visiting  the  market  we  saw  several  tethered 
by  the  leg  and  exposed  for  sale.  On  all  the 
islands  and  inhabited  islets  of  this  group  there 
were  tortoise-farms.  We  were  astonished  to 
find  how  easily  these  huge  creatures  were  able  to 
climb.  On  Felicite,  for  instance,  there  was  a 
walled  enclosure,  one  side  of  which  was  formed 
by  a  high  mass  of  rock,  and  the  tortoises  were 

*  Aleclroenas  palcherrima. 


130       VOYAGES   OF  A  NATURALIST 

climbing  over  this  or  lying  at  rest  on  narrow 
ledges. 

In  nearly  all  these  farms  the  tortoises  bear  a 
number  which  is  painted  in  white  on  the  shell. 
Many  farm-owners  keep  a  record  of  all  their 
stock,  while  at  Government  House  a  complete 
register  is  made  with  the  dates  of  hatching  and 
so  forth.  In  the  latter  place  we  rode  upon  the 
largest  tortoise.  This  creature  was  of  a  fierce 
disposition,  for  with  outstretched  neck  and  every 
appearance  of  anger  he  attacked  all  who  ventured 
near  him,  and  we  were  told  that  he  would  bite  if 
allowed  the  opportunity.  All  these  tortoises  have 
been  imported  from  Aldabra,  and  there  are  now 
probably  considerably  more  individuals  on  the 
Seychelles  than  on  the  former  island. 

After  we  had  spent  about  a  week  on  Mahe 
the  ship  steamed  across  to  Praslin,  about  twenty 
miles  distant.  We  anchored  in  Curieuse  Bay, 
an  inlet  of  Praslin,  and  sheltered  by  the  island 
of  Curieuse,  which  lies  close  on  the  other  side  of 
a  narrow  channel. 

A  short  walk  on  shore  during  our  first  afternoon 
was  not  productive.  There  were  fewer  birds 
than  on  Mahe.  A  paradise  flycatcher*  of  the 
size  of  a  sparrow,  but  jet  black,  with  the 
central  tail-feathers  prolonged  to  a  great  length, 
was  the  most  interesting  bird  seen.  It  is  known 
locally  as  the  "  veuve,"  or  widow,  but  apparently 

*  Terpsiphone  corvina. 


© 

00 


- 
- 

- 

m 
Q 


CO 


£ 

w 


o 

o 

o 

o 

» 

J 

■* 

## 

H 

— 

h    *• 

»— * 

Eh 

A   HARE   PARROT  131 

it  is  not  common,  as  during  our  stay  only  two  were 
met  with.  A  thrush,  or  "  bulbul  "*  is  by  far  the 
most  abundant  land-bird  on  Praslin,  as  it  is  also  on 
most  of  the  other  islands  of  the  group.  Its  notes 
are  among  the  most  unmelodious  sounds  I  have 
ever  heard.  All  day  long  it  pours  forth  harsh 
shrieks.  Several  of  them  were  brought  home  alive, 
and  regularly  every  morning  at  daybreak  they 
would  begin  to  scream,  rarely  ceasing  before  sunset. 
In  captivity  they  are  of  a  most  quarrelsome 
disposition,  though  in  a  wild  state  they  are  usually 
seen  together  in  parties  of  from  two  to  twenty 
individuals. 

One  of  our  chief  objects  in  visiting  Praslin  was 
to  get  a  specimen  of  the  black  parrot,  f  These 
birds  are  strictly  protected  by  Mons.  E.  Boulle, 
the  owner  of  a  greater  part  of  the  island,  and 
through  his  kindness  we  were  able  to  see  this  rare 
bird  in  a  wild  state.  It  is  now  only  to  be  found  in 
one  locality,  where,  close  to  Mons.  Boulle' s  house, 
numbers  come  to  feed  on  the  flowers  of  a  magnolia 
tree.  To  this  tree  we  made  our  way,  but  the  only 
birds  we  could  find  on  our  arrival  were  numbers 
of  thrushes  and  sunbirds.  I  shot  two  of  the 
former  and  one  of  the  latter  ;  while  packing  them 
up  a  native  came  to  tell  me  that  he  had  just  seen 
two  parrots  higher  up  the  hillside.  I  started  off, 
but  after  spending  a  short  time  wandering 
about  amongst  bushes,  a  most  unlikely  place  for 

*  Ixocincla  crassirostris.  j  Coracopsis  barklcyi. 


132        VOYAGES   OF  A  NATURALIST 

parrots,  I  descended  the  hill  again  and  took  up 
my  station  under  the  magnolia  tree.  After  an 
hour's  interval  I  heard  a  musical  whistle, 
reminding  me  of  the  call  of  the  Madagascar 
black  parrot,  and,  to  my  delight,  the  coveted  bird 
came  flying  straight  to  the  tree.  A  minute  later 
it  was  in  my  hand  ;  it  proved  to  be  immature, 
and  though  full-grown,  was  not  so  dark  as  an 
adult.  The  general  colour  of  its  plumage  was  a 
sooty-brown  with  a  yellowish  wash  on  the  chin 
and  throat,  and  a  distinct  greenish  sheen  on  the 
wing.  As  no  more  parrots  appeared,  we  started 
back  for  the  ship.  I  was  told  by  one  native  that 
he  had  never  seen  more  than  ten  of  these  parrots 
together  at  a  time,  but  Mons.  Boulle  assured  me 
that  he  had  quite  recently  seen  "  a  hundred " 
sitting  together  in  this  particular  magnolia  tree, 
which  is  the  only  one  of  its  kind  on  the  island. 

Next  day  we  steamed  across  to  Felicite,  a 
small  island  given  over  to  the  cultivation  of 
cocoanut  trees,  with  which  it  is  for  the  most  part 
covered.  We  were  conducted  over  it  bv  the 
owner,  Mr.  Birgne.  The  most  interesting  bird 
here  was  the  fruit-pigeon  of  the  same  species  as 
that  found  on  Mahe.  It  was  extremely  abundant, 
owing  entirely  to  the  care  Mr.  Birgne  had  taken 
to  preserve  it.  He  told  me  that  he  never  allowed 
it  to  be  caught  or  molested  in  any  way. 

On  returning  to  Praslin  we  landed  in  Marie 
Louise  Bay,  at  the  foot  of  the  "  Coco  de  Mer  " 


COCO    DE    MER,       TRASLIN    ISLAND,    SEYCHELLES. 


[132] 


THE   COCO   DE   MER  133 

Valley,  and  spent  the  afternoon  amongst  these 
remarkable  double-cocoanut  trees,  which  are 
found  in  a  wild  state  nowhere  except  in  this  one 
small  valley.  They  are  not  so  tall  as  the  common 
cocoanut  trees,  but  the  leaves  are  much  larger 
and  of  a  great  breadth.  The  fruit  is  of  immense 
size,  somewhat  resembling  a  huge  double-cocoanut, 
and  is  said  to  take  many  years  to  ripen  ;  its  kernel 
is  of  a  grey  jelly-like  substance,  and  the  taste  is 
very  insipid — far  inferior  to  that  of  the  common 
cocoanut.  The  principal  use  to  which  the  nut 
is  put  is  for  the  manufacture  of  bowls  for  water 
or  food ;  the  shells,  when  split  in  half,  make 
capacious  basins  or  dishes,  and  are  largely  used 
by  the  natives  of  India  for  rice. 

The  first  description  of  the  Coco  de  Mer  was 
given  to  some  of  the  fruit  found  floating  in  the 
open  sea,  which  was  supposed  to  belong  to  a  sea 
plant,  and  so  received  the  name  of  "Coco  de  Mer." 
When  the  Seychelles  were  discovered,  the  fruit 
of  these  trees  in  Praslin  was  found  to  be  identical 
with  that  of  the  so-called  Coco  de  Mer.  Many 
of  the  trees  have  now  been  introduced  into  Mahe, 
but  their  growth  is  exceedingly  slow,  and,  so  far 
as  I  know,  they  have  not  as  yet  borne  fruit. 

During  the  night  the  yacht  lay  at  anchor  at 
the  foot  of  the  Coco  de  Mer  Valley,  and  early  in 
the  morning  we  started  for  North  Cousin,  a  small 
islet  to  the  south  and  east  of  Praslin.  As  we 
made  our  passage  the  wind  rose  ;    rain  fell  in  tor- 


134       VOYAGES   OF  A  NATURALIST 

rents,  and  it  became  impossible  to  see  more  than 
a  few  yards  ahead.  For  an  hour  and  a  half  every 
sign  of  land  was  blotted  out,  although  there  were 
islands  on  all  sides  ;  in  fact,  the  wind  increased 
to  such  a  degree  that  when  the  weather  finally 
cleared  our  position  was  found  to  have  remained 
practically  unchanged  for  over  an  hour,  although 
the  ship  had  been  kept  at  full  speed.  The  sea  had 
risen  so  high  that  landing  upon  Cousin  Island 
became  an  impossibility,  and  we  were  forced  to 
return  to  Mahe.  Several  more  days  were  spent 
at  anchor  during  incessant  rain  ;  frequently 
a  squall  would  spring  up  without  warning, 
and  several  times  the  "  Valhalla "  dragged  her 
anchor. 

On  one  occasion  we  had  a  visit  from  King 
Prempeh,  who  is  kept  in  exile  on  Mahe.  He  came 
on  board  in  full  native  dress,  though  some  per- 
suasion was  required  before  he  would  discard  the 
top  hat  and  frock  coat  in  which  he  usually  appears. 
Prempeh  seems  to  be  treated  far  better  than  he 
deserves,  for  if  all  reports  are  true,  he  was  one  of 
the  most  bloodthirsty  tyrants  that  ever  existed ; 
and  I  must  say  that  his  appearance  does  not  belie 
this,  for  a  more  repulsive-looking  creature  I  never 
saw.  Of  immense  bulk,  with  small  head  and  low 
retreating  forehead,  he  was  not  prepossessing  as 
he  waddled  about  the  deck.  A  phonograph 
and  pianola  amused  him  exceedingly,  and  when 
an  iced    drink    was   given  to  him    he  took    the 


>5 


COCO    DE    MER,      PRASLIN    ISLAND,    SEYCHELLES. 


[135] 


FAREWELL   TO   THE   SEYCHELLES    135 

liveliest  interest  in  it,  though  he  must  have  seen 
ice  during  his   "  residence  "   in  the  Seychelles. 

The  day  before  we  left  Mahe  Lord  Crawford 
gave  a  "  garden "  party  on  board,  which  was 
attended  by  nearly  all  the  inhabitants  ;  we  thus 
had  an  opportunity  to  bid  farewell  to  our  good 
friends  before  we  sailed  in  the  early  morning  for 
Aden,  en  route  for  home. 


l  2 


A     VOYAGE     TO     THE     WEST     INDIES. 


C5 


in 
O 


H 

B 

< 
«! 

O 

H 

P 
G? 


P3 


Pi 
C3 


C/2 


CHAPTER    XIV. 


MARTINIQUE. 


On  December  18th,  1903,  the  "Valhalla"  sailed 
from  Cowes  for  the  Canary  Islands,  en  route  to  the 
West  Indies. 

On  5th  February,  1904,  we  dropped  anchor  at 
Port  de  France,  which  has  been,  since  the 
destruction  of  St.  Pierre,  the  principal  harbour 
of  Martinique.  Our  object  was  to  obtain  permis- 
sion from  the  Governor  to  visit  the  ruins  of  St. 
Pierre,  which  was  destroyed  by  an  earthquake 
on  8th  May,  1902. 

It  may  be  well  to  mention  that  the  destruction 
wrought  by  the  volcanic  eruptions  at  Martinique 
and  St.  Vincent  was  not  nearly  so  complete  as 
many  appear  to  think.  It  seems  to  be  supposed 
that  these  islands  suffered  to  such  an  extent 
that  their  peculiar  species  of  birds  became  extinct 
at  the  time  of  the  volcanic  disturbances.  This 
is  not  so,  for  in  both  islands  the  only  damage 
done  was  in  the  immediate  vicinity  of  the 
volcanoes  ;  thus,  on  St.  Vincent  only  a  very  small 
portion  of  the  country  has   been  destroyed;  the 


140       VOYAGES   OF  A  NATURALIST 

grass    and    other    vegetation  in    1904    was    again 
showing  over  the  sides  of  the  Soufriere. 

On  St.  Vincent  the  fine  parrot — Chrysotis 
guildingi — which  is  found  nowhere  else  in  the 
world,  has  not  yet  become  extinct,  and  is  still 
found  in  some  numbers  on  the  high  peaks. 

On  Martinique  the  havoc  caused  by  the  eruption 
was  more  serious,  inasmuch  as  St.  Pierre,  its 
principal  port,  was  entirely  destroyed  with  its 
inhabitants.*  Little  damage,  however,  has  been 
done  to  the  surrounding  country.  The  trees  on 
the  top  of  a  neighbouring  range  of  hills  have 
been  burned,  but  the  country  at  the  foot  of  these 
hills  is  quite  untouched.  Several  villages  within 
a  couple  of  miles  of  the  city  are  quite  uninjured, 
and  are  inhabited  ;  the  sides  of  the  hills  up  to 
within  a  short  distance  of  the  summit  are  covered 
with  vegetation,  and  show  no  signs  of  injury. 

The  country  round  Port  de  France  is  almost 
entirely  cultivated — sugar  being  the  principal 
crop — even  to  the  tops  of  the  peaks.  We  were 
informed  that,  owing  to  this  excessive  clearance 
of  the  trees,  the  rainfall  has  been  considerably 
lessened,  and  at  times  there  is  a  considerable 
shortage  of  fresh  water.  A  strict  law  has,  I  believe 
now  been  passed  against  the  felling  of  timber. 
Owing   to   this   scarcity   of   trees,   the  land-birds 

*  There  is  a  story  that  one  man,  a  black,  was  rescued  from  St.  Pierre 
owing  to  the  fact  that,  being  in  a  prison  cell  underground  at  the  time, 
he  escaped  the  choking  ashes  which  covered  the  town.  I  do  not  vouch 
for  this  story,  but  mention  it  as  it  was  related  to  us  in  other  islands  of 
the  West  Indies. 


ST.   PIERRE  141 

are  by  no  means  numerous,  and  the  only  ones 
seen  were  a  few  starlings,*  grass-finches,  t  and 
flycatchers.  J 

At  one  time  most  of  the  islands  of  the  West 
Indies  were  inhabited  by  peculiar  forms  of 
parrots,  while  several  parroquets  inhabited  the 
larger  islands.  Many  of  these  are  now  extinct^ 
including  the  macaws,  of  Jamaica,  and  at  the 
present  time  the  parrots  of  St.  Vincent,  St.  Lucia, 
Dominica,  the  Cayman  Islands,  Cuba,  and  Bahamas 
are  the  only  living  representatives  of  this  group. 
No  parrot  or  parroquet  is  now  to  be  found  on 
Martinique,  and  this  is  scarcely  surprising,  as  there 
are  no  forests  existing  there  of  sufficient  size  to 
offer  a  home  for  these  birds. 

The  Governor  of  Martinique  having  kindly 
granted  us  permission  to  land  at  St.  Pierre,  we 
steamed  round  to  that  place  on  7th  February. 
The  whole  town  has  been  completely  destroyed, 
and  that  part  which  was  situated  at  the  foot  of 
Mont  Pelee  is  buried  under  the  ashes  and  debris 
from  the  volcano. 

The  anchorage  has  not  been  disturbed  in  any 
way,  so  that  we  steamed  up  close  to  the  shore 
and  dropped  anchor  in  the  once  prosperous  har- 
bour. Lowering  a  boat  we  landed,  and  started 
off  for  a  walk,  or  rather  a  scramble,  through  the 
ruins  of  the  town.     The  largest  wall  standing  was 

*  Quiscalas  inflexirostris.  |  Euethia  bicolor. 

t  Elainea  martinica. 


142       VOYAGES   OF  A  NATURALIST 

that  of  the  cathedral.  All  the  other  buildings 
had  completely  collapsed,  though  in  some  places 
a  few  feet  of  wall  still  remained  in  an  upright 
position. 

The  ruins  of  the  town  were  becoming  covered 
by  a  creeping  plant  bearing  scarlet  flowers,  while 
bread-fruit  trees  were  shooting  up  amongst  the 
broken-down  houses  and  even  in  the  streets. 
The  main  street  was  still  discernible,  and, 
although  one's  passage  was  blocked  by  debris 
in  many  parts  of  the  smaller  thoroughfares,  it 
was  quite  easy  to  walk  over  a  great  part  of  the 
town.  The  effects  of  the  earthquake  were  such 
that  the  walls  of  nearly  all  the  buildings  fell 
inwards  ;  the  whole  of  the  roof  and  the  tops  of 
walls  of  the  cathedral  have  fallen  inside  the 
building,  and  the  same  is  the  case  with  nearly  all 
the  houses. 

A  number  of  persons  were  searching  amongst 
the  ruins  for  anything  valuable  or  curious,  and 
from  one  of  them  I  bought  a  small  blue  glass 
tumbler  which  had  been  made  shapeless  by  the 
fierce  heat  to  which  it  had  been  exposed.  One  of 
my  companions  purchased  a  small  "  Crown  Derby  ' 
coffee  cup  and  saucer  for  a  shilling.  One  of  our 
sailors  found  a  quantity  of  wire  nails  run  together 
into  a  solid  block,  weighing,  perhaps,  a  couple  of 
pounds,  and  several  similar  bundles  were  offered 
to  us.  One  man  was  "  hawking  "  a  marble  figure 
of  Venus,  while  another  offered  us  a  bust  of  the 


H 

_: 

W 

H 
o 

>- 

DO 

a 

H 

— 

O 

EC 

:- 

o 

CO 


a 


THE  RUINS   OF  THE   TOWN         143 

Pope,  both  quite  undamaged  by  the  heat,  and 
showing  no  signs  of  having  been  buried  in  the 
ruins. 

During  our  visit  the  top  of  Mont  Pelee  was 
completely  hidden  by  clouds  of  smoke,  which 
had  been  pouring  out  ever  since  the  eruption. 

A  few  birds  were  seen  amongst  the  ruins  of  the 
town.  We  were  informed  that  during  and  shortly 
before  the  disturbances  on  Martinique  and  St. 
Vincent,  enormous  flocks  of  pigeons*  appeared 
on  the  island  of  Grenada,  where  they  remained 
for  a  fortnight.  During  the  eruption,  and  for 
several  days  afterwards,  quantities  of  dust  fell 
over  many  of  the  islands,  especially  the  Barbadoes, 
where  it  was  collected  in  bottles  and  sold  to 
visitors. 

*  Columba  squamosa. 


CHAPTER    XV. 


GRAND    CAYMAN    ISLAND. 


After  leaving  Jamaica  on  8th  March,  1904,  we 
laid  our  course  for  Grand  Cayman,  the  largest 
of  the  three  islands  of  the  Cayman  group,  which 
lies  to  the  west  of  Jamaica. 

The  Cayman  Islands  have  been  but  rarely 
visited  by  naturalists,  and  as  they  are  inhabited 
by  many  species  of  land-birds  which  are  found 
nowhere  else,  we  looked  forward  to  spending  an 
interesting  time  there. 

Grand  Cayman,  Little  Cayman,  and  Cayman 
Brae  form  part  of  the  Colony  of  Jamaica,  and 
are  situated  between  the  meridians  of  79°  44' 
and  81°  26'  W.,  and  the  parallels  of  19°  44'  and 
190°  46'  N.  They  are  said  to  have  been  discovered 
by  Columbus  on  his  return  voyage  from  Portobello 
to  Hispaniola  (now  Hayti),  and  were  named  by 
him  Las  Tortugas,  owing  to  the  number  of  turtles 
which  abound  on  the  coast.  The  present  name 
is  supposed  to  be  derived  from  caiman — an 
alligator,  which  Grand  Cayman  somewhat  re- 
sembles in  shape  when  viewed  from  the  east. 


VEGETATION  AND   INHABITANTS    145 

Grand  Cayman  is  about  seventeen  miles  in 
length,  and  from  four  to  seven  miles  in  breadth. 
On  the  northern  side  is  the  "  Sound  " — an  expanse 
of  shallow  water  about  six  miles  in  length  off 
George  Town,  the  capital.  Ships,  as  a  rule,  find 
this  the  best  anchorage,  although  its  advantage 
somewhat  depends  on  the  prevailing  winds. 

The  island  is  well  covered  with  vegetation,* 
the  largest  trees  being  mangroves,  which  here 
rise  to  a  considerable  height,  while  a  low  growing 
species  of  palm  provides  useful  material  for 
thatching  and  the  manufacture  of  baskets,  etc. 
Like  the  smaller  islets  of  the  group,  Grand  Cayman 
is  composed  of  coral,  and  in  no  spot  is  it  many 
feet  above  the  level  of  the  sea.  There  is,  however, 
in  most  parts  sufficient  soil  for  the  cultivation  of 
sugar  cane,  sweet  potatoes,  and  other  plants, 
and  in  many  places  there  is  a  luxuriant  growth 
of  grass  which  is  used  as  pasturage  for  a  small 
number  of  cattle.  Poultry  and  pigs  are  also 
reared,  and  besides  providing  food  for  the  in- 
habitants, are  occasionally  shipped  to  neighbour- 
ing islands. 

The   inhabitants   of   the    Cayman   Islands    are, 
I  believe,  descended  from  buccaneers  who  at  one 
time    made    these    islands    their    headquarters. 
They   are   of   a  fair  complexion,   and  those  who 
live  at  a  distance  from  the  port  are  extremely 

*  An  orchid,  said  to  be  peculiar  to  it,  grows  in  quantities  on  Grand 
Cayman. 


146       VOYAGES    OF  A  NATURALIST 

hospitable.  A  number  of  small  schooners  have 
been  built  on  Grand  Cayman,  and  are  used  for 
trading  between  the  islands  of  the  group  and 
Jamaica.  The  principal  trade  is  in  turtles,  which 
are  for  the  most  part  caught  on  the  coasts  of  the 
mainland,  and  brought  to  Grand  Cayman,  where, 
until  required  for  shipment,  they  are  kept  in  an 
enclosed  portion  of  the  Sound. 

We  arrived  off  George  Town  too  late  in  the 
afternoon  to  go  ashore  the  same  day,  but  early 
the  following  morning  we  landed  and  called  on 
the  Governor,  His  Honour  F.  Sheddon  Sanguinetti, 
who  most  kindly  gave  us  a  special  permit  to  collect 
birds.  The  time  of  our  visit  corresponded  with 
the  close  time  for  wild  birds,  and  a  law  for  their 
protection  is  very  properly  enforced. 

Having  been  provided  with  a  guide  in  the 
shape  of  a  small  native  boy,  one  of  my  companions 
and  I  started  off  for  a  long  walk  into  the  interior. 
Before  we  had  gone  far  from  the  settlement  we 
became  greatly  struck  by  the  abundance  of  bird 
life.  In  no  other  island  in  the  West  Indies  did  I 
see  such  numbers  of  so  many  different  kinds  of 
birds  as  on  Grand  Cayman.  In  each  patch  of 
vegetation  we  came  upon  fresh  species,  and  we 
were  very  soon  busily  engaged  in  observing  and 
collecting  them. 

Most  of  the  land-birds  are  peculiar  to  the 
island,  though  there  are  a  considerable  number 
of    immigrants   from    America   which   spend   the 


V 


FEMALE      LEAF-INSECT,     2ND     GENERATION,     BRED     BY 

MR.    W.    H.    ST.   QUINTIN,    FROM    EGGS    LAID   BY    INSECTS 

BROUGHT   HOME    ON    "  VALHALLA  "  FROM  SEYCHELLES. 


[140] 


CROWNED  WARBLERS  147 

winter  there,  and  one,  at  least,  of  these  appears 
to  have  established  itself  as  a  resident  species. 
This  is  the  crowned  warbler,*  a  small  bird  of  a 
dull  greyish-brown  above,  white  below,  with  a  crest 
of  yellow  feathers.  Two  other  species  of  this  genus 
are  found  on  the  island,  and  one — Dendroeca 
auricapilla — which  is  very  common  on  Grand 
Cayman,  but  is  found  nowhere  else,  is  a  most 
handsome  little  bird  of  a  beautiful  golden  canary 
yellow,  with  the  crown  of  the  head  tinged  with 
chestnut.  We  found  it  close  to  the  settlement, 
where  small  flocks  were  flitting  about  through  the 
trees  and  bushes.  Nearly  all  the  West  Indian 
Islands  possess  species  closely  allied  to  the  Cayman 
golden  warbler,  but  the  latter  surpasses  all  others 
in  the  purity  and  brilliance  of  its  colouring.  The 
other  species — Dendroeca  vitellina — is  smaller  and 
of  less  brilliant  coloration,  the  general  plumage 
being  greenish-yellow  slightly  streaked  on  the 
sides  of  the  neck  with  black.  This  bird  is  also 
peculiar  to  Grand  Cayman,  and  it  is  interesting 
to  note  that  another  warbler — Dendroeca  discolor 
— an  American  species,  much  resembling  it,  though 
perfectly  distinct,  is  a  winter  visitor.  A  pleasant 
surprise  awaited  us  later,  for  on  Little  Cayman 
yet  another  species  of  this  genus  was  found,  and 
this  one  proved  to  be  new  to  science. 

One  cannot  walk  far  on  Grand  Cayman  without 
seeing  the  almost  grotesque-looking  black  ani,  or 

*  Dendroeca  coronata. 


148        VOYAGES   OF   A  NATURALIST 

cuckoo.  This  bird  is  extremely  abundant,  as  it 
is  in  some  of  the  other  West  Indian  Islands,  and 
also  in  Brazil.  Several  individuals  are  usually 
seen  together,  and  they  roam  over  the  pasture 
land  in  follow-my-leader  style,  uttering  a 
monotonous  bubbling  cry.  They  are  said  to  be 
partial  to  the  company  of  cattle  and  sheep,  and 
to  relieve  them  of  their  ticks,  but  I  cannot  vouch 
for  this  on  personal  observation.  Usually  they 
were,  when  feeding,  sitting  together  in  a  flock  on 
the  grass,  amongst  the  roots  of  which  they  were 
apparently  searching  for  insects.  They  are  of 
about  the  size  of  our  cuckoo,  but  jet  black  in 
colour,  though  old  examples  in  fresh  plumage 
have  a  bluish  sheen  on  the  upperparts.  The  bill 
is  peculiarly  shaped,  being  deep,  with  the  upper 
mandible  strongly  arched.  Common  though  these 
birds  are,  I  believe  that  little  is  known  of  their 
nesting  habits.  Several  females  are  said  to  lay 
their  eggs  in  the  same  nest,  but  they  do  not,  like 
true  cuckoos,  deposit  their  eggs  in  the  nests  of 
other  birds. 

Another  and  more  handsome  cuckoo  was 
Coccyzus  maynardi,  of  about  the  same  size  as  the 
black  ani,  but  of  totally  different  coloration, 
the  upperparts  being  clove-brown,  the  tail  blacker, 
and  edged  with  white  and  black,  and  the  underparts 
buffish  white.  This  bird  did  not  appear  to  be  so 
abundant  as  the  ani,  and  during  our  stay  we  saw 
but  one  example. 


A  BARE  PARROT  149 

Mocking-birds*  and  Carolina  thrushes^  were 
very  common,  and  we  also  shot  specimens  of  a 
handsome  woodpecker^  peculiar  to  the  island, 
and  one  of  the  tamest  birds  I  have  ever  seen. 

Grand  Cayman  is  the  home  of  a  species  of  parrot§ 
found  nowhere  else.  We  wished  to  obtain 
specimens  of  this  bird,  but  were  told  that  they 
were  all  gathered  together  in  the  tallest  mangrove 
trees  on  the  north  side,  to  which  they  retire  for 
nesting,  but  as  soon  as  they  had  finished  breeding 
they  were  to  be  seen  in  numbers  all  over  the  island. 
Several  were  brought  alive  on  board,  and  some 
were  purchased  for  about  six  shillings  apiece — 
a  very  low  price  for  such  a  rare  bird.  I  could  not 
get  any  wild  specimens  near  the  settlement,  so 
I  arranged  to  go  over  to  the  north  end  for  them. 
As  I  had  but  twenty-four  hours  at  my  disposal 
I  had  my  doubts  as  to  whether  I  should  even  see 
any  parrots.  However,  I  resolved  to  try,  and 
accordingly  the  Governor  placing  a  guide  at  my 
disposal,  we  set  out  late  one  afternoon,  and  after 
a  drive  of  some  miles  arrived  at  our  destination 
shortly  before  dark.  Here  we  obtained  rooms 
in  a  farmhouse,  where  I  was  considerably  cheered 
by  the  information  that  a  number  of  parrots  had 
been  seen  close  by  a  few  hours  before. 

At  daybreak  next  morning  we  started  for  a  long 
walk  to  the  nearest  belt  of  mangrove  trees.     For 

*  Mimus  orpheus.  f  Galeoscoptes  carolinensis. 

%  Melanerpes  caymanensis.  §  Chrysotis  caymanensis. 

M 


150       VOYAGES   OF  A  NATURALIST 

several  hours  we  saw  no  signs  of  either  mangrove 
trees  or  parrots,  and  I  began  to  think  that  our 
journey  had  been  in  vain.  Presently,  however, 
we  reached  a  small  farm,  where  we  stopped  for 
a  short  time  at  the  invitation  of  the  owner.  This 
man  told  me  that  every  morning,  shortly  after 
daybreak,  the  parrots  came  down  to  his  land  to 
feed  on  the  fruit  of  the  guavas,  and  that  only  an 
hour  ago  he  had  seen  several.  We  thereupon 
started  off  again,  and  after  an  hour's  walk  came 
up  to  the  mangroves,  a  belt  of  tall  trees  about 
half  a  mile  in  length.  Before  we  reached  them 
the  discordant  cries  of  the  parrots  were  plainly 
heard,  and  presently  a  party  of  them  flew  across 
the  path.  We  entered  the  wood,  and,  after  wait- 
ing a  short  time,  I  shot  a  fine  adult  bird.  It  was 
very  handsome,  the  feathers  of  the  upperparts 
being  green,  edged  with  black,  the  forehead  white, 
and  the  underparts  of  a  rich  crimson,  banded 
with  black. 

We  obtained  two  more  parrots  on  our  way  back, 
and  finally  got  on  board  the  ship  late  in  the  after- 
noon after  a  most  successful  and  enjoyable  ex- 
cursion. 

It  is  somewhat  remarkable  that  Grand  Cayman 
should  have  a  peculiar  form  of  parrot,  while  Little 
Cayman  is  inhabited  by  a  Cuban  species.  This, 
however,  is  one  of  many  cases  in  which  isolation 
produces  a  new  form  or  species.  Some  species 
of   birds    appear   to    change    more   rapidly   than 


ISLAND   FORMS  151 

others.  The  Cayman  Islands  offer  some  good 
examples  of  this,  for  apart  from  the  two  species 
of  parrots,  Grand  Cayman  has  a  peculiar  starling,* 
while  Little  Cayman  is  inhabited  by  the  Cuban 
species,")"  and,  as  already  mentioned,  both  islands 
have  peculiar  forms  of  warblers.  There  are 
several  other  equally  interesting  cases.  On  the 
whole,  the  avifauna  of  the  Cayman  Islands  seems 
to  be  nearest  to  that  of  Cuba,  though  a  new  species 
of  tyrant  flycatcher, £  which  was  found  by  us  on 
Grand  Cayman,  is  more  nearly  allied  to  a  species 
found  on  the  Bahamas. 

On  13th  March  we  left  Grand  Cayman,  and 
steamed  to  Little  Cayman,  off  which  we  anchored 
early  the  same  afternoon. 

*  Quiscalus  caymanensis.  f  Q-  gundlachi. 

i  Pitangus  caymanensis.     ''Ibis,"  190-1,  p.  582. 


M  2 


CHAPTER    XVI. 


LITTLE    CAYMAN    ISLAND. 


Little  Cayman  Island  is  considerably  smaller 
than  the  main  island  of  this  group.  It  is  of  the 
same  formation,  but  the  centre  is  partly  covered 
with  mangrove  swamps. 

Lord  Crawford  had  not  placed  this  island  in 
the  original  programme,  but  he  was  anxious  to 
obtain  a  series  of  specimens  of  a  small  gannet, 
none  of  which  the  British  Museum  possessed.  This 
bird  was  supposed  to  be  found  only  on  the  Cayman 
Islands,  but  we  could  not  obtain  any  on  Grand 
Cayman,  and  decided  to  visit  this  smaller  island 
where,  as  we  were  informed,  great  numbers  bred. 

The  winds  on  Little  Cayman  are  variable.  At 
the  time  of  our  visit  the  anchorage  we  chose  on 
the  lee  side  was  the  most  sheltered,  though  it  is 
often  impossible  to  anchor  there,  in  which  case 
ships  have  either  to  anchor  off  the  settlement 
in  somewhat  rough  water  or  stand  off  and  wait 
for  the  wind  to  drop. 

Some  of  the  inhabitants  having  seen  the  yacht 
approaching,  were  waiting  for  us  when  we  landed, 
and  on  being  questioned  as  to  where  the  gannets 


A  GREAT  GANNET  COLONY         153 

were,  they  at  once  offered  to  take  us  to  their 
haunt,  which  proved  to  be  close  to  the  settlement 
and  about  three-quarters  of  an  hour's  walk  from 
our  anchorage.  The  way  led  through  a  thickly- 
wooded  country,  but  after  a  time  we  emerged 
into  a  plantation  of  cocoanut  trees,  the  fruit  of 
which  forms  the  main  product  of  the  island,  and 
shortly  afterwards  we  reached  the  settlement — a 
group  of  wooden  cottages  thatched  with  leaves  of 
the  cocoanut  palm. 

The  sea  was  dashing  on  the  shore  within  a  few 
yards  of  the  village,  behind  which  was  a  large 
mangrove  swamp,  where  we  discovered  the  nesting- 
place  of  the  gannets.  Their  numbers  were  in- 
calculable ;  thousands  upon  thousands  were  flying 
round  overhead  ;  streams  of  them  were  coming 
from  the  sea,  and  every  tree  was  covered  by  them. 
Frigate  birds  were  also  very  abundant,  and  they 
doubtless  secured  plenty  of  food,  for  the  gannets 
were  most  cowardly ;  directly  a  frigate  bird 
appeared  they  dropped  the  fish  they  were  carrying 
and  made  off  with  harsh  cries  of  alarm. 

The  breeding  season  appeared  to  be  nearly  over, 
and,  as  the  night  was  fast  approaching,  it  was 
necessary  to  obtain  such  specimens  as  we  required 
without  delay.  At  the  first  shot  the  air  was  filled 
with  an  immense  number  of  birds,  and  their 
clamour  as  they  whirled  overhead  was  deafening# 

The  nests  were  mere  collections  of  sticks  in 
the  branches  of  mangrove  trees.     A  few  of  them 


154       VOYAGES   OF  A  NATURALIST 

contained  young  birds  covered  with  white  down, 
but  most  of  the  young  were  flying  overhead  in 
company  with  their  parents.  After  climbing  up 
to  several  nests  we  succeeded  in  finding  two  eggs, 
which  were  of  a  white  chalky  texture.  After 
obtaining  as  many  birds  as  we  required  we  started 
on  our  walk  back  to  the  ship. 

Early  next  morning  we  landed  again  and  walked 
towards  the  "  gannetry."  Our  chief  object  was 
to  get  specimens  of  some  of  the  land-birds.  In 
this  we  were  successful ;  amongst  the  number  of 
small  birds  shot  during  the  morning  I  obtained 
three  specimens  of  a  new  species  of  warbler.* 
Most  of  the  other  land-birds  we  met  with  were 
similar  to  those  found  on  Grand  Cayman. 

The  only  mammals  we  saw  on  the  Cayman 
Islands  were  rats,  which  have  been  introduced, 
and  one  bat  on  Grand  Cayman.  Reptiles  were 
equally  scarce.  A  snake  f  was  obtained  on  Grand 
Cayman,  but  was  not  seen  on  Little  Cayman. 

During  the  first  night  I  spent  some  hours  fishing 
from  the  deck  of  the  yacht,  and,  although  I  caught 
nothing,  I  never  remember  seeing  so  many  fishes 
together.  The  sea  appeared  to  be  full  of  them, 
and  as  they  darted  about  they  left  flashing 
phosphorescent  tracks  behind  them. 

At  midday  we  steamed  away  from  Little 
Cayman,  and  shaped  our  course  for  Havana. 

*  Dendrceca  crawfordi.     "Bull.  B.O.C.,"  Vol.  XIV.,  p.  95. 

f  Dromicus  amgulifer. 


A     VOYAGE     ROUND     THE     WORLD. 


CHAPTER    XVII. 

MONTE    VIDEO    AND    THE    STRAITS    OF    MAGELLAN. 

During  this  voyage,  on  which  we  started  on 
November  19th,  1902,  we  were  unable,  for  various 
reasons,  to  visit  the  island  of  South  Trinidad. 
After  a  stav  at  Bahia,  we  sailed  for  Monte  Video 
and  the  Straits  of  Magellan. 

On  9th  January,  1903,  in  Latitude  24°  23' 
39"  S.,  Longitude  40°  V  W.,  a  number  of  the  two 
species  of  Trinidad  petrels,  which  I  have  described 
in  a  previous  chapter,  followed  the  ship  for  three 
days.  At  this  time  I  was  extremely  anxious  to 
get  specimens  of  these  birds,  but,  owing  to  the 
rough  weather  we  were  experiencing,  it  was 
impossible  to  lower  a  boat.  Thus  I  was  in  the 
exasperating  position  of  seeing  within  a  few  yards 
of  the  ship  a  quantity  of  birds  quite  unobtainable, 
of  which  very  few  specimens  existed  in  collections, 
for  these  two  species  of  petrel  had  hitherto  been 
found  only  on  the  island  of  South  Trinidad.* 

Three  days  later,  in  Latitude  33°  29'   33"  S., 

*  Since  the  above  was  written  a  single  specimen  of  CEstrclata 
arminjoniana  has  been  obtained  off  the  West  Indies  (c/.  "  Bull.  B.O.C.," 
XIX.,  p.  98). 


158       VOYAGES   OF  A  NATURALIST 

Longitude  50°  3'  47"  W.,  the  first  albatros*  was 
seen. 

I  may  here  mention  that,  though  many  attempts 
were  made  in  the  Atlantic,  Pacific,  and  Indian 
Oceans,  we  never  caught  an  albatros  on  a  line. 
We  subsequently  came  to  the  conclusion  that  they 
will  not  take  a  baited  hook  unless  they  are  very 
badly  in  want  of  food.  Possibly  we  were  sailing 
at  too  great  a  speed,  but  a  long  line  was  used, 
and  the  bait  was  kept  motionless  on  the  water 
for  as  long  a  time  as  possible.  When  hove-to  off 
Tristan  da  Cunha,  Captain  Caws  and  I  spent  hours 
"  fishing  "  for  sooty  albatroses,  but  although  several 
of  these  birds  took  the  bait  in  their  bills,  they 
would  not  swallow,  and  usually  dropped  it  im- 
mediately. This  is,  I  know,  not  the  experience 
that  others  have  had  with  albatros  "  fishing,'1 
as  several  friends  have  since  assured  me  that  these 
birds  are  easily  caught. 

The  next  day  the  giant  petrelf  was  seen.  In 
size  this  fine  bird  equals  several  of  the  smaller 
species  of  albatroses,  and  when  on  the  wing  it 
much  resembles  the  sooty  albatros,  but  its  yellow 
bill  serves  to  distinguish  it.  Occasionally,  almost 
entirely  white  examples  of  the  giant  petrel  are 
met  with,  but  we  only  once  saw  one.  It  is  now, 
I  believe,  well  known  that  the  attacks  which  have 
often   been   reported   as   having   been   made   by 

*  Diomedea  exulans.  f  Ossifraga  gigantea. 


ASHORE   AT   MONTE   VIDEO  159 

albatroses  on  sailors,  who  have  fallen  overboard, 
are  in  fact  attributable  to  this  species. 

Early  on  the  morning  of  14th  January  we 
anchored  off  Monte  Video.  Owing  to  the  shallow 
water  the  "  Valhalla  "  had  to  lie  about  two  miles 
distant  from  the  town,  and  on  account  of  this  we 
made  but  one  excursion  into  the  country. 
Travelling  by  rail  to  the  small  town  of  Los  Piedros, 
we  walked  into  the  country,  which  is  mostly  flat 
pasture  land  for  miles  round.  Quantities  of 
large  blue-flowered  thistles  covered  the  country. 
An  interesting  account  of  these  thistles  is  given 
by  Darwin.  He  says  : — "  There  is  little  good 
pasture,  owing  to  the  land  being  covered  by  beds 
either  of  an  acrid  clover  or  of  the  great  thistle  ; 
in  some  parts  they  were  as  high  as  the  horse's 
back,  but  in  others  they  had  not  yet  sprung  up. 
When  the  thistles  are  full-grown,  the  great  beds 
are  impenetrable  except  by  a  few  tracks,  as 
intricate  as  those  of  a  labyrinth.  These  are  only 
known  to  the  robbers,  who  in  this  season  inhabit 
them,  and  sally  forth  at  night  to  rob  and  cut 
throats  with  impunity.  Upon  asking  at  a  house 
whether  robbers  were  numerous,  I  was  answered, 
6  The  thistles  are  not  yet  up  ' — the  meaning  of 
which  reply  was  not  at  first  obvious." 

During  our  stay  here  some  time  was  devoted 
to  fishing  from  the  ship.  Examples  of  two  species 
were  caught,  one  of  which  proved  to  be  new  to 
science,  and  has  since  been  described  under  the 


160       VOYAGES   OF  A  NATURALIST 

name  Corvina  crawfordi.  This  fish  was  exceedingly 
abundant,  and  we  were  much  surprised  to  find 
that  it  had  not  previously  been  named. 

On  20th  January,  having  taken  a  pilot  for  the 
Straits  of  Magellan,  we  left  Monte  Video,  but  as 
the  day  advanced  we  had  to  drop  anchor,  owing 
to  a  very  strong  head  wind,  and  for  the  remainder 
of  that  day  and  the  next  we  lay  to.  From  this 
time  onward  it  became  much  colder,  and  we  were 
glad  to  get  into  winter  clothing.  This,  however, 
only  applied  to  the  temperature  at  sea — on 
land  in  the  Straits  of  Magellan,  the  furthest  south 
we  reached,  the  air,  although  fresh,  was  certainly 
not  colder  than  during  a  fine  April  in  England. 

On  22nd  January  the  first  diving  petrels  were 
met  with.  These  curious  little  birds  were  con- 
tinually rising  under  our  bows,  flying  a  few  yards, 
and  dropping  suddenly  into  the  sea,  when  they 
immediately  dived.  This  diving  petrel — Peleca- 
noides  urinatrix — is  exceedingly  abundant  through- 
out the  whole  of  the  waters  of  the  Straits  of 
Magellan.  In  appearance  it  reminds  one  forcibly 
of  the  little  auk,  being  glossy  black  above  and 
white  below.  The  throat  is  speckled  with  grey, 
and  a  white  band  crosses  the  wings.  The  wings 
are  very  small  and  weak  ;  the  bird,  doubtless,  is 
losing  the  power  of  flight.  A  second  species  was 
met  with  a  week  or  two  later  in  the  Bay  of 
Valparaiso.  This  was  Pelecanoides  garnoti,  which 
differs  from  the  former   species  chiefly  in  being 


PENGUINS   AT  SEA  161 

larger   and  having   a  broader  white  bar   on  the 
wing. 

In  the  Southern  Indian  Ocean  a  third  species 
of  this  peculiar  genus  inhabits  the  coasts  of  the 
Crozette  Islands,  and  extends  to  Kerguelen  Land, 
while  during  the  third  voyage  of  "  Valhalla," 
in  1905-6,  we  obtained  specimens  of  a  fourth  and 
previously  undescribed  species  at  Tristan  da  Cunha. 

Penguins*  were  also  seen  during  the  same  day, 
as  well  as  later,  after  we  had  entered  the  Straits. 
Most  of  those  seen  at  sea  were  lying  on  their  sides 
with  one  leg  out  of  the  water — a  characteristic 
attitude  of  these  birds  as  well  as  of  other  members 
of  the  genus,  the  nearly-allied  S.  demursus  of 
South  Africa  and  the  adjacent  islands  being 
frequently  seen  in  a  similar  position. 

A  few  days  later  we  shot  a  Magellan  penguin 
for  our  collection.  I  shall  not  readily  forget  the 
great  difficulty  I  had  in  skinning  this  bird. 
Between  the  skin  and  the  flesh  lay  a  mass  of  oily 
fat  more  than  half-an-inch  thick,  in  which  were 
embedded  the  stiff  quills  of  the  breast  feathers. 

We  afterwards  found  that  just  before  the  moult 
the  Cape  penguins,  f  coming  up  from  the  sea 
enveloped  in  fat,  remain  during  the  moulting  season 
on  shore,  and  never  enter  the  water.  As  soon  as 
the  moult  is  finished  they  are  quite  thin,  and  then 
proceed  to  sea  for  a  month  before  returning  to 
breed. 

*  SpJieniscus  magellanicus.  f  Spheniscus  demursus. 


162       VOYAGES   OF   A  NATURALIST 

Later  in  the  evening  of  this  day  we  entered  the 
Straits  of  Magellan,  and  after  passing  a  jutting 
point  of  shingle,  called  Dungeness  Point — a  name 
which  reminded  us  forcibly  of  home — we  anchored 
in  Possession  Bay.  Early  next  morning  we 
weighed  anchor,  but,  owing  to  a  very  strong  head 
wind,  we  were  not  able  to  make  any  way,  and  were 
obliged  to  anchor  again. 

During  the  day  two  curiously-marked  porpoises 
played  round  the  ship  ;  they  were  pure  glossy 
white  excepting  the  head,  tail,  and  dorsal  fin, 
which  were  black.  Comparatively  little  is  known 
of  the  porpoises  and  dolphins  of  the  southern 
oceans,  and  these  may  very  likely  have  belonged 
to  some  undescribed  species,  but  all  our  attempts 
to  harpoon  them  were  unsuccessful. 

At  eight  o'clock  next  morning,  the  wind  having 
dropped,  we  started  westwards  and  passed  through 
the  first  "  narrows."  Three  hours  later  we  steamed 
close  past  St.  Elizabeth  and  St.  Magdalena 
Islands,  formerly  famous  for  the  large  number 
of  kelp-geese  which  bred  on  them,  and  thence 
onward  through  the  second  "  narrows."  In  these 
"  narrows '  enormous  numbers  of  sea-birds — 
terns,  skuas,  albatroses,  and  diving  petrels — were 
seen.  Of  these  birds  perhaps  the  most  noteworthy 
was  the  skua,*  as  from  this  time  until  we  reached 
Valparaiso  this  species  was  continually  encountered. 

The  country,  as  seen  from  the  ship,  was,  from 

*  Megalestris  chilensis. 


CONDORS  AND  STEAMER-DUCKS  163 

the  east  of  the  Straits  to  Punta  Arenas,  bare  and 
sandy.  Here  in  the  desert  were  numbers  of 
huanacos,*  large  parties  of  them  were  standing 
close  to  the  shore.  Unfortunately,  we  had  no 
opportunities  for  landing,  and  had,  therefore, 
to  be  content  with  a  distant  view  of  these 
animals. 

As  soon  as  Punta  Arenas — the  only  town  in  the 
Straits  of  Magellan — is  reached,  the  aspect  of  the 
land  entirely  changes  ;  mountains  and  trees  take 
the  place  of  the  desert,  and  on  every  side  one  gets 
the  impression  of  fertility.  The  large  trees,  of 
which  these  forests  are  composed,  are  of  two 
species  :  the  deciduous  Antarctic  beechf  and  the 
evergreen  beech, J  the  former  being  by  far  the 
more  abundant. 

While  passing  through  the  first  "  narrows  "  a 
fine,  if  distant,  view  was  obtained  of  three  condors, § 
which  were  sailing,  or  rather  circling,  round  a  wall 
of  rock  close  to  the  water.  This  was  the  only 
occasion  on  which  we  saw  this  magnificent  bird, 
and  from  what  we  heard,  I  fear  that  it  is  not 
nearly  so  abundant  as  it  was  a  few  years  ago, 
but  what  has  caused  the  decrease  it  is  difficult  to 
say. 

The  steamer-duck  ||  has  also  undoubtedly  de- 
creased in  number  of  late  years.  It  cannot  now 
be  called  abundant — the  description  given  by  the 

*  Llama  huanacos.        f  Farjus  antarcticns.         J  F.  betuloidcs. 
§  Sarcorhamphus  gryphus.  Tachjcrcs  cincrcu*. 


164     VOYAGES   OF  A  NATURALIST 

early  voyagers — though  many  may  still  be  seen 
throughout  the  western  portion  of  Magellan 
Straits  and  in  Smythe's  Channel. 

The  condor  may  have  been  shot  down  by 
shepherds,  of  whom  there  are  now  numbers ; 
but  the  decrease  of  the  steamer-duck  cannot  be 
ascribed  to  human  agency,  as  all  the  vast  tract  of 
country  bordering  the  waters  of  Smythe's  Channel, 
in  which  these  birds  are  found,  is  practically 
uninhabited  except  by  Fuegian  Indians ;  and, 
although  very  few  of  these  people  were  to  be  seen, 
we  found  no  vestige  of  duck-remains  either  in  their 
boats  or  in  their  deserted  camps. 


< 
H 

w 

05 


K 
H 

H 

Q 
i— i 

03 

O 
<1 

73 

— 

I 

J 
w 

Q 
i 

< 

P5 


CHAPTER    XVIII. 

PUNTA    ARENAS,    STRAITS    OF    MAGELLAN. 

At  mid-day  we  anchored  off  Punta  Arenas,  or 
Sandy  Point,  a  town  which  is  rapidly  becoming 
of  importance,  not  only  because  it  is  the  only  town 
in  the  Magellan  Straits,  but  also  because  of  the 
very  large  number  of  sheep  raised  in  the  im- 
mediate neighbourhood,  from  which  a  quantity  of 
wool  is  shipped  to  England.  I  am  indebted  to 
Messrs.  Jacomb,  Son  &  Co.,  wool  brokers,  of 
London,  for  the  following  facts  regarding  the  Punta 
Arenas  wool  clip. 

"  The  wool  is  practically  all  from  cross-bred 
sheep,  varying  in  quality  from  fine  half-bred  to 
coarse  Lincoln,  the  bulk  being  coarse.  The 
quantity  of  wool  exported  to  the  United  Kingdom 
is,  roughly,  from  30,000  to  40,000  bales  yearly, 
and  nearly  all  goes  to  London  for  sale.  This 
wool  shows  yearly  marked  improvement,  and  is 
nearly  equal  to  the  best  New  Zealand  clips.  It 
is  in  good  demand  from  buyers  of  all  nation- 
alities. After  being  sold  by  public  auction,  part 
of  it  is  shipped  to  the  United  States  of  America, 

N 


166       VOYAGES   OF  A  NATURALIST 

Germany,  France,  etc.,  while  rather  more  than 
half  remains  to  be  forwarded  to  English  manu- 
facturing centres." 

The  greater  part  of  the  country  about  Punt  a 
Arenas  is  covered  with  virgin  forest,  except 
certain  large  tracts  which  have  been  cleared  for 
pasture  land.  Clearings  are  made  by  firing  the 
trees,  and  during  our  stay  there  was  a  forest  fire 
continually  raging  ;  indeed,  it  had  been  doing  so, 
we  were  told,  for  more  than  a  month,  and  its 
blaze  on  a  windy  night  lit  up  the  whole  town 
magnificently  for  our  view. 

I  walked  through  some  of  the  cleared  parts 
of  this  forest.  The  ground  was  covered  iwith  a 
thick,  rich-looking  grass,  studded  here  and  there 
with  bushes  of  berberis.  There  appeared  to  be 
two,  if  not  three,  kinds  of  berberis  in  these 
Straits. 

The  most  numerous  species  of  birds  about  the 
town  were  a  chat-like  tyrant-bird,*  the  adult  male 
of  which  is  chestnut  brown,  with  a  black  head  and 
underparts,  and  a  small  kestrel.  I  also  saw  and 
obtained  specimens  of  a  bunting, f  a  flycatcher,} 
and  a  martin§  ;  the  last-named  resembles  our 
house-martin,  except  that  it  has  no  feathering 
on  the  tarsi  or  toes.|| 

*  Gentritea  niger.  f  Zonotrichia  canicapilla. 

J  Elainea  albiceps.  §  Tachycineta  meyeri. 

i|  I  have  frequently  obtained  in  Sussex  autumn  specimens  of  our 
house-martin  (Chelidon  urbica)  with  these  parts  bare  of  feathers,  but  in 
these  cases  the  feathers  had  doubtless  been  worn  off. 


THE   EXTINCT   GROUND-SLOTH      167 

One  of  my  first  excursions  at  Punta  Arenas 
was  a  long  walk  on  the  shore  towards  a  small 
iron  lighthouse,  which  marks  the  eastern  ex- 
tremity of  the  point.  Hundreds  of  terns,*  the 
commonest  sea-bird  in  this  part  of  the  Straits, 
were  met  with.  A  few  siskinsf  were  also  seen ; 
but  the  commonest  land-bird  was  the  above- 
mentioned  Centrites,  which  was  in  great  numbers, 
most  of  them  being  young  birds. 

Chilian  skuas  were  chasing  the  terns.  Several 
"  quail-snipe  "t  were  met  with,  feeding  on  a  strip 
of  grass  close  to  the  sea.  This  remarkable  bird 
resembles  a  sandpiper  in  form,  but  it  has  a  bill 
like  that  of  a  quail.  A  goose,  probably  the  kelp- 
goose^  and  the  southern  black-backed  gull  were 
also  noted. 

In  several  shops  in  the  town  the  skins  both  of 
mammals  and  of  birds  were  exposed  for  sale. 
These  skins  were  worthless  as  specimens,  as  in 
all  cases  the  bones  of  the  legs  had  been  removed. 
Cormorants  1 1  and  rheas^f  were  shown,  but  the 
most  interesting  exhibit  was  a  piece  of  skin  of  the 
extinct  ground-sloth  (Mylodon),  a  portion  about 
four  inches  long  and  two  inches  broad,  with  much 
of  the  hair  still  attached.  On  enquiring  the 
price  I  was  asked  £50.  This  piece  of  skin  had 
been  found  with  other  remains  in  a  cave,  several 

*  Sterna  hirundinacea.  f  Chrysomitris  barbatus. 

J    Thinocorus  rumicivorus.  §  Chloephaga  magellanica. 

|  Phalacrocorax  atriceps.  If  Rhea  americana. 

n2 


168       VOYAGES   OF  A  NATURALIST 

miles  east  of  Punta  Arenas,  and  not  far  from  the 
shore  of  the  Straits. 

This  giant  ground-sloth  appears  to  have 
inhabited  the  shores  of  the  Straits  of  Magellan, 
and  quite  recently  it  was  believed  that  specimens 
were  still  living  in  Patagonia.  This,  however, 
is  most  unlikely,  as  the  Patagonian  natives  live 
almost  entirely  on  the  money  they  obtain  for  the 
skins  of  the  wild  animals  of  the  country,  and  they 
regularly  bring  their  collections  of  skins  to  Punta 
Arenas  for  sale.  If  the  mylodon  were  still  in 
existence  in  a  living  state,  these  natives  long  ago 
would  have  been  aware  of  the  fact,  and  have 
brought  in  specimens  for  sale. 

One  afternoon  the  Governor,  Captain  Gomez, 
invited  us  to  visit  some  coal  mines  which  had  just 
been  opened,  and  we  gladly  availed  ourselves  of 
the  opportunity.  We  travelled  up  to  the  mines, 
about  five  miles  distant,  in  a  light  railway.  The 
track  was  laid  through  a  fine  forest  of  Antarctic 
beech  trees,  and  in  a  stream  which  ran  through 
this  forest  several  men  were  searching  for  gold. 
The  coal  mines  were  situated  in  the  forest  at  an 
altitude  of  about  500  feet  above  the  level  of  the 
sea.  The  mouth  of  the  shaft  was  at  the  foot  of 
a  low  cliff,  and  we  went  in  on  a  truck,  lying  on  our 
backs.  It  was  a  curious  sensation,  rushing  down 
into  the  tunnel,  which  was  on  a  slight  slope. 
We  soon  came  to  the  "  working,"  where  the  coal 
was  being  hewn  out  and  loaded  into  trucks.     The 


A   COAL   MINE  169 

mine  had  but  recently  been  opened,  and  the 
Governor  could  not  say  whether  it  would  pay  or 
not.  The  coal  seemed  remarkably  brittle.  Close 
to  the  entrance  of  the  shaft  I  found  a  number  of 
oysters  embedded  in  the  black  clay,  and  succeeded 
in  digging  out  a  perfect  specimen. 

We  afterwards  spent  a  delightful  hour  in  the 
forest.  Birds  were  extremely  scarce,*  and  we  saw 
little  else  besides  a  small  tree-creeper, j  a  bird 
afterwards  met  with  in  most  of  our  anchorages 
in  the  Straits  of  Magellan  and  in  Smythe's  Channel. 
Although  it  has  a  tail  composed  of  stiff  feathers 
like  our  well-known  creeper,  J  it  does  not  seem  to 
climb  the  trunks  of  trees  like  that  bird  :  those 
we  saw  were  hopping  about  the  trees  like  tits. 
It  is  a  familiar  little  bird,  and  follows  one 
through  the  forest,  continually  uttering  its  shrill 
cry. 

On  3rd  February  we  left  Punta  Arenas,  having 
been  delayed  for  twenty-four  hours,  owing  to  a 
slight  breakdown  in  the  engine  room,  and  pro- 
ceeded westwards.  At  seven  o'clock  the  same 
day  we  anchored  in  Port  Gallant  anchorage, 
about  eighty  miles  from  Punta  Arenas. 

Ships  going  through  the  Straits  have  to  anchor 
every  night,  owing  to  the  difficult  and  dangerous 
passages.     All  through  the  Straits  and  Smythe's 

*  Insects  are  less  numerous  in  the  country  bordering  the  Straits 
than  are  birds,  and  during  the  whole  passage  through,  the  only  insects 
I  saw  were  a  bee  and  two  beetles. 

f  Oxyuru8  spinicaudata.  J  Certhia  familiaris. 


170       VOYAGES   OF  A  NATURALIST 

Channel  are  natural  harbours,  where  ships  can 
anchor  with  safety.  These  anchorages  were  a  great 
pleasure  to  all  of  us,  for  as  soon  as  the  ship  came 
to  one  of  them  a  boat  was  lowered,  and  we  set  off 
to  visit  some  of  the  beautiful  islets  with  which 
the  Straits  are  studded. 

In  Port  Gallant  we  had  our  first  view  of 
steamer-ducks.  Seeing  two  ducks  sitting  on  the 
water  we  steered  towards  them,  when,  to  our 
delight,  they  "  got  up  steam  "  and  raced  away. 
In  different  accounts  we  read  of  the  various  ways 
in  which  this  duck  is  supposed  to  propel  itself 
through  the  water.  The  older  accounts  say  that 
it  uses  its  "  tiny  wings  as  paddles  "  and  "  rows 
itself  through  the  water."  It  was  then  called  the 
"  racehorse-duck."  During  our  passage  through  the 
Straits  we  paid  much  attention  to  this  subject, 
and  came  to  the  following  conclusions  : — when 
alarmed,  steamer-ducks  at  once  run  away  over  the 
water,  flapping  their  wings  (which  are  not  nearly 
so  "  tiny  "  as  those  of  the  Guillemot  in  proportion 
to  the  sizes  of  the  birds),  and  travelling  at  an  almost 
incredible  speed — in  fact,  almost  as  fast  as  an 
ordinary  duck  can  fly.  The  feet  of  the  bird  are 
large  and  strong,  the  muscles  enormously  developed. 
The  wings,  although  not  of  sufficient  size  to  raise 
the  bird  completely  from  the  water,  are  able 
to  lift  the  body  clear  of  the  surface,  so  that  the 
feet  come  into  play,  when,  by  running  on  the  water 
and    flapping  their  wings,  the  birds  race  so  fast 


THE   STEAMER-DUCK  171 

that  a  six-oared  boat  is  never  able  to  get  within 
gunshot  of  them  while  they  are  moving. 

It  has  been  stated  by  some  authors  that  the 
immature  steamer-ducks  are  able  to  fly  ;  again, 
others  say  that  there  are  two  species,  one  volant 
and  the  other  flightless.  Personally,  I  never  saw 
one  fly,  though  one  of  our  party,  Major  Wilbraham, 
did  see  one  rise  from  the  water  and  fly  away. 

Of  this  bird  Professor  Cunningham  writes  *  : — 
"  It  was  first  noted  by  Pedro  Sarmiento,  in 
1582.  Penethy,  Byron,  and  Cook  gave  it  the 
name  of  "  racehorse-duck."  Later,  however, 
Captain  Kingf  changed  this  name  to  that  of 
steamer-duck.  He  also  observed  that  certain  of 
these  ducks  had  volant  powers,  and  thought  that 
he  distinguished  two  species,  recognisable  both  by 
size  and  plumage — the  flying  birds  he  called 
patachonicus,  the  non- volant  birds  brachypterus." 
Professor  Cunningham  further  states  his  belief 
that  there  is  but  one  species,  and  that  the  volant 
birds  are  immature  examples,  as  all  the  flying 
birds  that  he  examined  anatomically  showed 
signs  of  incomplete  ossification  of  their  bones. 

All  the  examples  we  obtained,  and  all  those 
I  have  examined  in  the  British  Museum,  un- 
doubtedly belong  to  one  species  only  ;  and  if  I 
may  venture  to  give  an  opinion,  I  should  say  that 
Professor  Cunningham's  is  undoubtedly  the  right 

*  Transactions  of  the  Zoological  Society  of  London. 

|  Proceedings  of  the  Zoological  Society  of  London,  1830-1,  p.  15. 


172       VOYAGES   OF  A  NATURALIST 

solution,  as  it  would  surely  be  an  almost  un- 
precedented thing  to  find  two  very  nearly  allied 
species  living  together,  one  able  to  fly  and  the  other 
unable  to  do  so.  At  the  same  time,  it  is  somewhat 
remarkable  that,  although  we  saw  examples  of 
this  duck  of  all  ages  and  in  all  stages  of  develop- 
ment, we  met  with  but  one  which  was  able  to  fly. 
It  may  be  that  this  species  is  gradually  becoming 
entirely  flightless,  and  that  the  volant  individuals 
met  with  are  survivals  of  a  former  stage  in  a  state 
of  transition,  and  have  not  as  yet  lost  the  full 
power  of  flight. 

A  fine  pair  of  adult  steamer-ducks  which  we 
obtained,  weighed  respectively  9 \  and  10  pounds 
(a  young  bird  with  downy  wings  was  only  5  pounds 
in  weight).  I,  therefore,  cannot  believe  that  this 
species  can  ever  weigh,  as  has  been  stated,  as  much 
as  20  pounds.  The  gizzards  of  all  those  examined 
by  us  contained  broken  fragments  of  the  shells  of 
mussels.* 

In  Port  Gallant  anchorage  we  saw  a  large  flock 
of  surface-feeding  ducks,  but  were  unable  to  obtain 
specimens.  Some  dotterelj — a  southern  repre- 
sentative of  the  bird  which  nests  now  so  rarely  on 
the  hills  of  the  north  of  England  and  Scotland — 
were  feeding  on  the  edge  of  a  large  fresh-water 
lagoon,  and  I  shot  two  young  examples.  A  black- 
bird:}; was  also  obtained — a  bird  in  first  plumage, 

*  Mytilus  magellanicus.  f  Eudromias  modesta. 

J  Turdus  magellanicus. 


A   BEAUTIFUL   BAY  173 

in  which  state  it  much  resembles  the  young  of 
our  blackbird,  except  that  it  has  a  black  cap. 
This  bird  was  met  with  frequently  later  on  in 
Smythe's  Channel,  and  was,  in  fact,  one  of  the 
few  land-birds  seen  there.  Its  melancholy 
whistle  was  to  be  heard  continually  ringing  out 
over  the  otherwise  silent  fjords  towards  sunset. 

At  daybreak  the  next  morning  we  left  Port 
Gallant,  and,  proceeding  westwards,  anchored 
towards  evening  at  Churruca  Bay,  which  is  the 
most  western  anchorage  in  the  Straits  of  Magellan. 
This  place  is  one  of  the  most  beautiful  that  it  has 
ever  been  my  good  fortune  to  see.  Towering 
peaks,  covered  from  summit  to  base  with  im- 
penetrable beech  forests,  almost  encircled  the 
deeply  indented  bay,  the  water  of  which  was  inky 
black,  and  the  surface  smooth  as  glass.  Here 
and  there  were  little  islets,  some  fringed  with  a  tall 
white-flowered  plant ;  others  surrounded  with 
hedges  of  fuchsias  in  full  flower.  Flock  after  flock 
of  Magellan  cormorants  flew  by  us,  their  white 
breasts  flashing  bright  against  the  dark  water  of 
the  bay,  while  steamer-ducks  scudded  to  right 
and  left,  as  we  glided  to  our  anchorage  in  the 
glorious  natural  harbour. 

As  soon  as  the  anchor  was  down  we  had  two 
boats  lowered.  A  long  chase  after  steamer-ducks 
proved  unsuccessful.  The  birds  dived  at  the  least 
alarm,  to  reappear  far  out  of  shot,  and  escaped 
over  the  water  with  their  curious  flapping  "  run.': 


174       VOYAGES   OF  A  NATURALIST 

On  one  island  the  remains  of  an  encampment 
of  Fuegian  Indians  was  seen  ;  this  consisted  of 
a  few  "  wigwams  "  built  up  with  branches,  and 
outside  them  a  large  heap  of  mussel  shells — of 
natives  there  was  no  sign. 

Afterwards,  when  we  were  under  steam,  the 
people  themselves  brought  their  canoes  alongside, 
but  when  we  were  on  land  they  kept  out  of  our 
way,  disappearing  in  a  wonderful  fashion. 
Major  Wilbraham  one  day  saw  a  canoe-load  of 
them  land  in  one  of  these  harbours,  and,  wishing 
to  try  to  converse  with  them,  he  steered  his  boat 
for  the  same  place.  When  he  arrived,  however, 
he  found  that  people,  canoe,  and  all  had  vanished 
into  the  forest,  and  by  no  amount  of  searching 
could  he  find  any  trace  of  them. 

The  food  of  these  people  is  composed  almost 
entirely  of  mussels,  which  are  very  plentiful  in  all 
these  waters. 


CHAPTER  XIX. 

SMYTHE'S  CHANNEL — GULF  OF  PENAS — VALPARAISO. 

Early  on  the  morning  of  5th  February  we  left 
Churruca  Bay  and  entered  Smythe's  Channel. 
The  scenery  in  this  channel  is  even  more  beautiful 
than  that  of  the  Straits  of  Magellan.  Mountains, 
covered  with  primeval  forest,  tower  high  on 
both  sides,  while  the  water,  smooth  and  of  an  inky 
blackness,  is  dotted  with  islands  of  all  sizes. 
Unfortunately,  these  splendours  cannot  be  seen 
to  advantage,  on  account  of  the  execrable  climate 
of  this  part  of  the  world.  All  the  winter  it  is  said 
to  be  snowing  continually,  and  during  the  five  days 
we  spent  in  the  channel  it  rained  continuously, 
while  a  perpetual  mist  veiled  the  snow-topped 
peaks. 

To  wander  through  the  dripping  forests  was  not 
pleasant.  At  the  best  of  times  they  are  almost 
impenetrable,  owing  to  the  thick  vegetation, 
but  when  at  every  step  one  was  met  with  a  shower 
of  water  falling  from  the  trees  and  bushes,  the  dis- 
comfort was  great. 

Soon    after    midday,    a  boat-load    of    Fuegians 


176       VOYAGES   OF  A  NATURALIST 

appeared  in  front  of  us,  and  as  the  ship  was  slowed 
down,  they  came  alongside,  and  after  a  little 
persuasion  came  on  board.  They  soon  made 
friends  with  the  crew,  and  the  pilot,  who  knew 
their  language,  talked  to  them.  They  at  once 
began  to  bargain  for  biscuits,  etc.  All  they  had 
to  offer  in  exchange  were  the  well-worn  otter  skins 
with  which  they  were  clothed.  They  readily 
divested  themselves  of  these  and  implored  us  to 
give  them  biscuits,  tobacco,  and  matches  :  the 
latter  they  seemed  to  understand  perfectly.  We, 
of  course,  gave  them  a  plentiful  supply,  and  they 
went  away  quite  happy. 

It  appears  that  whole  families  travel  about  in 
one  canoe,  in  which  they  go  from  island  to  island 
in  the  channel.  In  the  canoe  a  fire  is  kept  con- 
tinually burning,  and  if  this  should  go  out,  these 
poor  people  are  in  a  bad  way,  as,  owing  to  the 
dampness  of  the  wood,  it  is  almost,  if  not  quite, 
impossible  to  kindle  fire  by  friction. 

Owing  to  the  greatly  reduced  number  of  these 
natives,  Tierra  del  Fuego,  which  was  so  named 
on  account  of  their  custom  of  signalling  by  fire, 
can  hardly  now  be  said  to  be  appropriately 
named. 

The  same  evening  we  anchored  in  Port  Dixon, 
where  the  night  was  spent,  and  sailing  at  daylight 
next  morning  we  arrived  towards  evening  in 
Puerto  Bueno  harbour.  Here  we  visited  a  large 
fresh-water  lake,  which  our  pilot  assured  us  was  a 


A   BARREN   LAKE  177 

"  fine  place  for  ducks."  A  fine  place  it  undoubtedly 
is,  but  as  for  ducks,  there  were  none.  In  no  place 
have  I  been  more  struck  with  the  entire  absence 
of  life  than  in  the  immediate  surroundings  of  this 
lake.  Although  the  country  appeared  to  be  per- 
fectly suited  to  birds  and  animals,  the  only  living 
creatures  we  saw  were  a  single  bird,  a  creeper 
of  the  species  I  have  previously  described,  and 
one  small  toad,*  found  on  the  margin  of  the  lake  : 
this  was  in  an  immature  state,  black,  striped  with 
yellow. 

After  leaving  the  lake  we  took  to  the  boats 
again  and  landed  on  a  small  island.  On  the  rocky 
shore  some  oyster-catchers  were  feeding,  but  they 
were  extremely  shy,  and  we  were  unable  to  get 
within  shot  of  them.  A  tiny  humming-bird  was 
fairly  numerous,  and  several  were  seen  perched 
on  the  bare  tree-tops.  At  least  two  species  of 
humming-birds  have  been  recorded  from  the  Straits 
of  Magellan,  but  I  was  unable  to  identify  the  ex- 
amples we  saw,  as  no  specimens  were  obtained. 
It  seemed  strange  to  meet  with  humming-birds 
on  the  chilly  coasts  of  the  Magellan  Straits  :  one 
always  associates  them  with  the  tropical  portions 
of  America. 

We  also  saw  and  shot  a  large  rail,|  which  in  size 
and  colouring  resembles  our  moorhen,  but  has  a 
long  curved  bill  somewhat  like  that  of  a  curlew 
in   shape,  but  on  a  much  smaller  scale.     It  is  only 

*  Na?inophryne  variegata.  f  Rallus  vigilantis. 


178       VOYAGES   OF  A  NATURALIST 

found  on  the  shores  of  the  Straits  of  Magellan 
and  Smythe's  Channel,  and  is  somewhat  rare  in 
collections. 

A  fine  male  kelp-goose  was  seen  on  this  island. 
This  species  —  Chlo'd'pliaga  magellanica  —  is  re- 
markable in  that  the  males  are  white  while  the 
females  are  grey,  banded  with  black.  The  Governor 
of  Punta  Arenas  gave  us  two  little  goslings  of 
this  goose,  but  they  died  as  soon  as  we  got  into  a 
warmer  latitude. 

On  the  rocks  which  border  the  shore,  in  most  of 
the  anchorages  in  Smythe's  Channel,  an  interesting 
bird — the  Cinclodes  patagonicus — was  seen  and  ob- 
tained. It  is  somewhat  like  a  dipper  in  action,  as 
it  runs  over  the  rocks  searching  for  insects.  On 
several  occasions  one  of  these  birds  came  into  the 
boat  as  we  were  rowing  about  the  harbour,  and 
showed  little  fear,  remaining  perched  on  the  side 
of  the  boat  for  a  minute  or  more. 

When  we  reached  the  ship  at  dusk,  wet  through 
with  the  continuous  rain,  we  heard  that  a  canoe- 
load  of  Indians  had  been  to  pay  a  visit  during  our 
absence. 

The  following  day  we  reached  Molineux  Sound, 
and  after  we  had  anchored,  the  rain  ceased,  the 
sun  appeared,  and  we  much  enjoyed  the  first  fine 
afternoon  we  had  experienced  since  leaving  Punta 
Arenas. 

Molineux  Sound  differs  somewhat  from  the 
other  anchorages  we  visited,   the  country  being 


MOLINEUX  SOUND  179 

much  more  open,  less  wooded,  and  not  nearly  so 
mountainous.  One  small  valley  in  the  immediate 
vicinity  of  the  harbour  was  occupied  by  a  chain  of 
reed-girt  lakes,  rising  one  above  the  other  like  a 
series  of  lochs.  On  each  side  of  the  valley  the 
gentle  slopes  of  the  hills  were  covered  with  shrubs 
and  low  beech  trees. 

Though  this  appeared  to  be  an  ideal  place  for 
land-birds,  we  met  with  very  few,  and  these 
were  of  two  species  only — a  large  hawk,*  and  a 
pair  of  the  Magellan  thrushes.  The  scarcity  of 
animal  life  on  the  shores  of  Smythe's  Channel 
has  been  previously  mentioned  by  Captain 
Macfarlane.|  Sea-birds  were,  however,  fairly 
numerous,  cormorants  being  the  most  abundant, 
though  steamer-ducks  were  not  uncommon.  We 
here  saw  a  brood  of  downy  ducklings  of  this 
species,  which,  though  apparently  not  many  days 
old,  scudded  away  over  the  water  at  such  speed 
that,  although  my  boat  was  rowed  by  six  men, 
we  were  unable  with  all  our  exertions  to  get  within 
shot.  The  ducklings  were  accompanied  by  their 
parents,  which  swam  round  the  boat,  quacking 
in  alarm,  but  they  kept  well  out  of  shot,  and  only 
occasionally  showed  themselves  above  the  water. 
Most  of  the  time  during  which  they  were  sub- 
merged their  bills  were  visible  above  the  surface 
of  the  water. 

The  steamer-ducks  appear  always  to  frequent 

*  Milvago  chimango.  t  Cf.  "Ibis,"  1887,  p.  201. 


180       VOYAGES   OF  A  NATURALIST 

the  growth  of  kelp-weed,  which  grows  in  profusion 
round  the  rocky  islets  in  the  Straits  of  Magellan 
and  Smythe's  Channel.  Amongst  this  weed  they 
obtain  their  food,  which  consists  entirely  of  mussels 
of  two  species.*  Some  of  these  mussels  grow  to 
a  large  size,  and  we  frequently  found  shells  measur- 
ing up  to  six  inches  in  length. 

In  Molineux  Sound  two  examples  of  the  diving 
petrel  were  obtained.  Other  petrels  are  strong- 
flying  ocean  birds,  but  this  species  trusts  entirely 
to  its  diving  powers  for  means  of  escape  when 
pursued.  Its  flight  is  weak  and  short :  the  bird 
soon  drops  back  to  the  water  and  at  once 
dives.  When  skinning  this  bird,  one  cannot 
fail  to  be  struck  by  the  curious  formation  of 
the  gizzard,  which  is  soft  and  flabby,  and  is,  in 
fact,  merely  an  enlargement  of  the  proventriculus. 
All  those  I  examined  were  crammed  with  small 
fishes. 

In  each  anchorage  throughout  these  channels 
a  trammel  net  was  set,  and  in  most  of  the  harbours 
we  had  good  catches  of  fish.  By  far  the  most 
numerous  appeared  to  be  a  species  of  grey  mullet. 
Small  sharks  were  also  caught  and  preserved, 
while  one  specimen  of  Aphrites  gobio  was  obtained 
and  brought  home  in  spirits.  This  fish  has  an 
enormous  head,  out  of  all  proportion  to  its  small 
body.  In  the  Straits  of  Magellan  some  large  spider- 
crabs  were  caught,  several  of  which  were  as  much 

*  Mytilus  magellanicus  and  M.  patagonicus. 


TIERRA  DEL  FUEGIANS  181 

as  two  feet  across  from  claw  to  claw.  These 
crabs  are  excellent  eating,  being  far  superior  to 
any  lobster  we  had  ever  tasted. 

On  8th  February  we  left  Molineux  Sound. 
During  that  morning  two  canoe-loads  of  Indians 
came  alongside.  In  one  of  these  I  saw  the  head 
of  a  deer,  which  I  bought  for  three  biscuits.  It 
proved  to  be  the  head  of  a  "  huemule,"  and, 
although  too  decomposed  to  skin,  I  managed  to 
save  its  skull,  but  this  was  washed  overboard 
during  the  fearful  weather  we  encountered  in  the 
Gulf  of  Penas.  After  a  little  persuasion  the 
natives  came  aboard.  They  were  wretched- 
looking  creatures,  little  more  than  four  feet  ten 
inches  in  height,  with  long  straight  black  hair, 
cut  square  across  the  forehead,  while  their  faces 
were  almost  repulsive,  and  their  otter-skin  clothing 
was  worn  and  scanty. 

Through  our  pilot  I  learned  that  they  had 
caught  the  "  huemule  "  with  the  aid  of  their  dogs 
— fearful  looking  mongrels — which  they  had  in 
the  boat  with  them.  Before  they  left  these  strange 
people  completely  divested  themselves  of  their 
otter-skin  clothes,  which  they  presented  to 
Captain  Caws ;  then,  caring  nothing  for  the  most 
inclement  weather,  they  cast  off  the  leather  thong 
which  held  their  boat  to  the  gangway  of  the  ship, 
and  rowed  away,  naked,  to  the  shore.  It  was  thus 
that  we  saw  the  last  of  these  Indians,  the  exter- 
mination of  whom  is  but  a  matter  of  a  short  time. 

o 


182       VOYAGES  OF   A  NATURALIST 

We  were  informed*  that  they  are  annually  carried 
off  in  numbers  to  a  large  missionary  station  not 
far  from  Punta  Arenas,  where  they  soon  die  from 
the  effects  of  civilization.  Every  year,  we  heard, 
they  become  fewer  and  fewer,  and  there  can  be 
no  doubt  that  in  a  comparatively  short  time 
the  natives  of  Tierra  del  Fuego  will  be  a  race  of 
the  past. 

An  hour  later  we  passed  Eyre  Sound,  and 
afterwards  for  several  miles  the  water  of  the 
channel  was  full  of  broken  ice,  which  had  originated 
from  a  neighbouring  glacier.  This  was  our 
only  experience  of  steaming  through  ice.  The 
ship  was  obliged  to  proceed  at  "  dead  slow," 
and,  for  several  hours,  blocks  of  ice  of  various  sizes 
were  grinding  and  crashing  against  our  bows. 
Many  of  these  miniature  icebergs  contained  rocks 
and  masses  of  earth,  while,  during  our  passage 
through  them,  many  streaks  of  paint  from  the 
ship's  side  were  left  on  their  surfaces. 

Looking  up  Eyre  Sound  we  had  a  splendid  view 
of  a  glacier — a  mass  of  ice  and  snow,  extending 
upwards  for  several  thousands  of  feet.  Late  on  the 
same  afternoon  we  entered  water  free  of  ice,  and, 
towards  sunset,  anchored  in  Eden  Harbour. 

The  weather,  as  usual,  was  wet,  and  a  thick  mist 
hung  over  the  mountains.  We  rowed  up  the 
harbour  to   the   mouth   of   a  small  river.     Here 

*  This  information  was  given  us  by  our  pilot,  a  man  who  had  spent 
many  years  in  these  waters,  and  whose  information  always  proved 
reliable. 


EDEN   HARBOUR  183 

geese  were  more  plentiful  than  in  the  other 
anchorages  visited.  I  saw  but  one  species — 
Chloephaga  poliocephala — which  is  one  of  the  most 
handsome  geese  in  the  world.  It  is  about  the 
size  of  the  well-known  Egyptian  goose,  and 
somewhat  resembles  it  in  the  coloration  of  its 
upperparts  ;  the  underparts  are  white,  barred  on 
the  flanks  with  black,  and  the  breast  is  encircled 
by  a  broad  band  of  bright  chestnut-red.  In  this 
harbour  we  met  with  another  kind  of  cormorant 
— Phalacrocorax  vigua — which  is,  I  believe,  the 
species  found  so  abundantly  in  the  roadstead  at 
Monte  Video.  This  being  so,  it  is  rather  remark- 
able that  we  did  not  meet  with  it  in  the  Straits 
of  Magellan. 

In  Eden  Harbour  we  saw  a  steamer  lying  on 
the  rocks,  and  were  told  by  our  pilot  that  it 
had  been  wrecked  a  few  months  previously.  In 
many  parts  of  Smythe's  Channel  we  saw  such 
wrecks,  and  I  believe  that  in  few  parts  of  the  world 
is  navigation  so  difficult  and  dangerous  as  in  these 
waters ;  there  are  so  many  offshoots  from  the 
main — and  only  navigable — channel,  that  it  is 
necessary  to  know  the  passage  very  well  to  get 
through  with  safety.  Fortunately,  both  the 
Straits  and  Smythe's  Channel  are  well  provided 
with  natural  harbours,  where  ships  can  anchor 
with  perfect  safety. 

In  nearly  all  these  harbours  there  are  numbers 

of  boards,  on  which  are  painted  the  names  of  the 

o2 


184       VOYAGES   OF  A  NATURALIST 

ships  which  have  anchored  there,  nailed  to  the 
trees  near  the  shore,  thus  completely  disfiguring 
the  beauty  of  nature. 

In  many  parts  of  Smythe's  Channel  otters* 
were  met  with.  These  animals  nearly  always 
sink  when  shot,  and  we  had  some  difficulty  in 
obtaining  the  single  specimen  which  we  brought 
home.  They  were  usually  seen  in  parties  of 
three  or  four,  swimming  about  among  the  kelp- 
weed  close  to  the  shore.  In  this  thick  growth 
of  weed  it  was  not  so  difficult  to  retrieve  them 
when  shot,  as  the  strands  of  kelp  prevented 
them  sinking  before  the  boat's  arrival. 
Superficially,  this  animal  is  much  like  our  well- 
known  otter,  but  the  fur  is  perhaps  slightly  darker 
in  colour,  and  rather  thicker.  Several  of  the 
parties  of  Indians  we  met  with  in  this  channel 
had  the  remains  of  otters  in  their  boats,  and  the 
whole  of  their  clothing  seems  to  consist  of  the 
skins  of  this  animal.  How  they  kill  them  I  do 
not  know,  but  it  may  be  that  their  dogs  catch 
them.  I  saw  no  arrows  or  any  other  weapons 
in  their  canoes.  The  Patagonian  natives  use 
bow  and  arrow  to  obtain  their  skins,  but,  from 
all  accounts,  they  appear  to  be  more  of  a  hunting 
race  than  the  Fuegians. 

On  the  morning  of  9th  February,  we  passed 
through  the  "  English  narrows."  This  is  the 
most  difficult  part  of  the  channel,  as  there  is  only 

*  Lutra  patachonica. 


oc 


< 

H 
O 


O 

H 

Eh 
CQ 

« 

o 

M 
K 
«U 
K 

CQ 


A  DANGEROUS  CHANNEL  185 

room  for  one  ship  to  go  through  at  a  time,  and 
the  current  is  so  strong  that  it  is  necessary  to  pro- 
ceed at  full  speed.  Blowing  our  steam  whistle, 
to  warn  any  ship  that  might  be  coming  in  an 
opposite  direction,  we  steamed  through.  On 
either  side  of  us  the  mountains  towered  so  high 
and  so  close  that  one  almost  imagined  they  were 
within  a  stone's  throw.  Exactly  in  the  centre  of 
the  narrows  there  lay  the  remains  of  a  steamer 
which  had  been  wrecked  some  time  before,  and 
we  seemed  to  be  carried  straight  for  this  by  the 
current,  but  when  close  to  it  we  swept  aside 
and  steamed  safely  through. 

Early  in  the  afternoon  we  anchored  in  Gray's 
Harbour,  our  last  anchorage  in  Smythe's  Channel, 
and  here  a  most  delightful  afternoon  was  spent. 
Birds  were  more  abundant,  and  examples  of 
several  species  were  shot.  A  grebe,*  much 
resembling  our  little  grebe,  or  "  dabchick,"  in 
appearance,  was  shot  by  Lord  Crawford.  This 
was  the  only  time  we  saw  a  grebe  in  either  the 
Straits  of  Magellan  or  Smythe's  Channel. 
Cormorants  of  the  three  species  mentioned  pre- 
viously were  seen  in  large  numbers.  Steamer- 
ducks  were  also  fairly  common,  and  one,  the  finest 
we  had  yet  shot,  was  obtained  by  Lord  Crawford. 
I  landed  alone  on  a  projecting  arm  of  the 
harbour,  and  forced  my  way  through  the  forest. 
The  undergrowth  was  composed  entirely  of  prickly 

*  Podictps  americanas. 


186       VOYAGES   OF  A  NATURALIST 

berberis  bushes,  while  the  ground  was  strewn 
with  the  rotting  remains  of  fallen  trees,  which, 
from  their  appearance,  had  probably  lain  there 
for  many  years.  Without  having  experienced  it, 
I  should  not  have  realized  how  difficult  it  was  to 
walk — even  a  few  yards — through  the  undergrowth. 
I  was  considerably  surprised  when,  as  I  stepped 
on  an  apparently  sound  tree  which  had  fallen  across 
the  path,  the  whole  tree-trunk,  as  well  as  the  ground 
beneath  it,  crumbled  away.  The  next  minute  I 
was  buried  up  to  the  waist  in  decaying  wood. 
This  happened  very  frequently,  so  that  great  care 
had  to  be  taken  to  avoid  a  serious  accident. 

While  extricating  myself  from  one  of  these 
rotten  tree-trunks,  I  suddenly  saw  in  front  of  me 
a  bird*  which  I  had  not  hitherto  met  with.  In 
appearance  it  somewhat  resembled  a  wren  with  an 
enormously  long  tail.  It  was  too  close  to  shoot 
with  a  large-bore  gun,  such  as  I  was  armed  with, 
and,  in  spite  of  all  that  I  could  do  to  frighten  it 
away  to  a  reasonable  distance,  it  refused  to  move. 
All  my  attempts  to  secure  it  were  unsuccessful,  and 
I  was  obliged  to  leave  the  place  without  obtaining 
it.  I  was  very  anxious  to  get  a  specimen,  as  the 
bird  is  rare  in  collections,  so  I  went  back  to  the 
ship  for  a  small-bore  gun,  and  was  successful 
in  finding  and  shooting  another  of  these  birds, 
only  to  see  it  fall  amongst  dense  bushes  and 
decayed  wood,  in  which  it  was  utterly  lost. 

*  Sylviorthorhynchus  desmursi. 


A  GALE  187 

Early  the  next  morning  we  sailed  from  Gray's 
Harbour,  and  emerging  from  the  smooth  waters  of 
Smythe's  Channel  we  entered  the  stormy  seas  of  the 
Gulf  of  Penas.  A  gale  was  blowing  in  our  teeth,  and 
although  going  at  full  speed  for  twenty-four  hours 
we  covered  a  distance  of  only  fifteen  miles.  All 
night  long  the  screw  was  racing,  and  the  water  was 
breaking  over  the  bows  of  the  ship — a  most  un- 
pleasant change  from  the  smooth  and  easy  passages 
we  had  enjoyed  previously.  Skinning  birds  I 
found  to  be  quite  impossible,  owing  to  the  pitching 
of  the  ship,  and,  although  a  good  sailor,  I  have 
never  experienced  a  more  uncomfortable  time. 
During  this  gale  albatroses  were  sailing  over  the 
stern  of  the  ship,  their  wings  spread  and  almost 
motionless  against  the  wind. 

Soon  after  midday  on  14th  February  the  coast 
of  Chile  was  sighted,  and  during  the  afternoon 
we  entered  the  Bay  of  Valparaiso.  The  sur- 
roundings of  Valparaiso,  as  seen  from  the  harbour, 
are  bare  and  desolate  in  the  extreme.  There  is 
little  vegetation,  and  the  whole  country  has  a  dry 
and  barren  appearance.  Far  away  in  the  distance 
we  could  see  the  outline  of  the  Andes. 

Most  of  my  time  here  was  spent  in  cruising 
about  in  the  bay,  in  our  steam  launch,  in  quest  of 
sea-birds.  Land-birds  are  scarce,  owing  to  the 
fact  that  they  are  shot  by  the  Chilians  for  food. 
Sea-birds  are  far  more  numerous,  and  in  the  bay 
we  met  with  several  interesting  species.     Perhaps 


188       VOYAGES   OF   A   NATURALIST 

the  most  striking  was  a  pelican,*  which  was  in 
numbers  amongst  the  shipping  in  the  harbour, 
where  it  was  quite  tame  and  allowed  of  a  near 
approach.  The  fact  that  it  is  plentiful  and  tame 
in  the  harbour  may  be  accredited  to  protection 
by  law.  Outside  the  harbour  we  found  it  very 
shy  and  wary,  and  for  some  days  we  tried  in  vain 
to  shoot  one  for  the  collection.  Gulls,  terns, 
and  petrels  were  also  very  numerous  in  the  bay. 

The  very  handsome  Franklin's  gull,"]"  in  general 
appearance  much  resembling  our  well-known 
black-headed  gull,  and  having  the  whole  of  the 
underparts  of  a  beautiful  rosy  pink,j  was 
numerous  in  the  harbour.  This  pink  colour, 
which  is  also  found  on  the  feathers  of  the  underparts 
of  many  other  gulls  and  terns,  does  not  show  in 
dried  skins.  I  pulled  several  feathers  from  the 
breast  of  one  of  the  gulls  and  placed  them  in  an 
envelope,  which  was  at  once  put  inside  a  book, 
but  in  spite  of  these  precautions  I  found  that  after 
a  week  the  feathers  had  turned  quite  white — a  fact 
which  shows  that  the  disappearance  of  the  pink 
colour  is  not  due  to  fading  from  exposure  to  the 
light. 

On  the  day  of  our  arrival  we  saw  large 
flocks  of  grey  phalaropes  sitting  on  the  smooth 
waters  of  the  bay.     Later  on,  when  cruising  about 

*  Pelecanus  thagus.  f  Larus  franklini. 

%  Very   old    examples   of    our   Larus   ridibundus   have    the    breast 
suffused  with  pink  after  the  spring  moult. 


< 


go 
r. 


it 


Si 

H 


P 

O 


K 

73 

< 
O 


■ 


SEA-BIRDS   AT  VALPARAISO         189 

in  the  launch  some  miles  from  the  shipping,  I 
met  with  small  parties  of  these  birds,  and  one 
specimen  was  obtained.  The  bird  breeds  in  the 
high  north,  and  occurs  in  England  on  "  passage  " 
during  its  migrations,  which  extend  as  far  south 
as  Chile  and  New  Zealand. 

Richardson's  skua,  another  sea-bird  well  known 
off  English  coasts,  was  also  obtained  at  Valparaiso. 
We  were  somewhat  surprised  to  see  this  species 
so  far  south,  as  it  had  not  previously  been  recorded 
from  this  latitude.  It  varies  considerably  in 
coloration,  some  examples  being  dark  chocolate- 
brown  on  the  breast,  while  others  are  white.  A 
specimen  of  the  latter  "  phase  "  was  shot. 

Every  evening  great  numbers  of  petrels  of  two 
species  came  in  close  to  the  shipping.  The  more 
common  was  a  dark  brown  bird,  and  this  proved 
to  be  Puffinus  griseus,  which  is  an  occasional 
visitor  to  England;  the  other  was  Puffinus 
creatopus,  a  somewhat  rare  bird.  The  former  was 
seen  every  evening  in  vast  numbers — in  fact, 
so  many  came  into  the  bay  of  an  evening  that  the 
water  was  literally  black  with  them. 

A  few  giant  petrels  were  noticed,  and  they 
deserve  special  mention,  owing  to  the  fact  that 
they  are  one  of  the  most  voracious  of  sea-birds; 
nothing  seems  to  come  amiss  to  them  in  the  way 
of  food.  The  example  we  shot  was  feeding 
greedily  on  a  dog,  long  dead  !  As  we  had  not 
previously  obtained  a  specimen  of  the  bird,  it  was 


190       VOYAGES   OF  A  NATURALIST 

taken  on  board  and  skinned.  I  shall  not  easily 
forget  it,  not  only  on  account  of  its  fearful  stench, 
which  seemed  to  penetrate  to  all  corners  of  the 
yacht,  but  also  because  of  the  remarks  of  my 
companions,  which  were  scarcely  complimentary, 
either  to  me  or  to  my  "  specimen.'1 

Round  about  the  shipping  were  numbers  of 
fishes,  and  it  was  a  most  interesting  sight  to  see  the 
pelicans  feeding  on  them.  All  day  these  huge  birds 
remained  perched  on  the  buoys,  but  towards 
evening  they  flew  round  the  harbour  in  search  of 
food.  They  would  fly  in  circles  round  a  shoal  of 
small  fishes,  and  every  now  and  then  one  would 
suddenly  close  its  wings  and  plunge  head  foremost 
into  the  water.  As  soon  as  it  appeared  on  the 
surface  again,  the  pouch  under  the  bill  was  seen  to 
be  enormously  extended  with  fish,  which  were 
then  swallowed  in  a  somewhat  leisurely  manner. 
Frequently,  however,  a  black-backed  gull*  ap- 
peared on  the  scene,  and,  settling  on  the  pelican's 
head,  endeavoured  to  extract  the  fish  from  its 
mouth.  We  could  not  be  certain  if  the  gull  ever 
succeeded  in  stealing  anything  in  this  manner, 
but  from  the  frequent  attacks  of  this  kind  made 
by  the  gulls,  there  can  be  little  doubt  that  they 
often  succeed  in  robbing  the  larger  bird  of  its 
prey.  The  pelicans,  however,  did  not  seem  to 
resent  this  treatment  in  the  least. 

At    length,    after'   several    unavoidable    delays, 

*  Larus  dominicanus. 


WE    SAIL  WESTWARDS  191 

we  left  Valparaiso,  and,  falling  in  with  a  local 
"  trade  wind,"  we  got  under  sail,  and  proceeded 
westwards,  bound  for  the  South  Sea  Islands. 


CHAPTER    XX. 


EASTER    ISLAND. 


Fourteen  days  after  leaving  Valparaiso,  Easter 
Island,  the  "  Mystery  of  the  Pacific,"  was 
sighted. 

Easter  Island  is  2300  miles  west  of  Chile,  and, 
though  it  is  comparatively  well-known  by  repute 
on  account  of  the  huge  images,  hewn  out  of  lava, 
that  are  to  be  found  in  many  parts  of  the  island, 
especially  near  the  sea  shore,  it  has  been  very 
seldom  visited. 

When  first  discovered  by  Roggewein,  a  Dutch 
captain,  on  Easter  day,  1721,  it  was  uninhabited, 
but  the  island  is  now  used  as  a  sheep  and  cattle 
run,  and  belongs  to  a  Chilian  company.  During 
his  second  voyage  Cook  estimated  the  number  of 
inhabitants  as  700,  but  this  was  evidently  an 
under-estimate,  as  in  1860  they  numbered  3000. 
Three  years  later  the  depredations  of  slavers  had 
reduced  the  population  to  one-half,  and  later  an 
epidemic  of  measles  wrought  further  havoc,  so  that 
by  1868  only  some  900  inhabitants  remained.  In 
1872  there  were  only  295,  and  ten  years  later  only 


HUMAN    SKULLS    FROM    EASTER   ISLAND. 


[192J 


LAVA  STATUES  193 

150,  while  at  the  time  of  our  visit  the  population 
was  not  more  than  100. 

When  we  arrived  the  weather  was  rough,  and 
we  were  unable  to  lower  a  boat,  and  but  for  the 
fact  that  Lord  Crawford  had  taken  the  mails 
from  Valparaiso  for  the  inhabitants,  we  should 
no  doubt  have  sailed  away  without  landing. 
Fortunately,  however,  the  people  on  shore  saw 
the  yacht,  and  sent  a  surf-boat  out  to  us,  and  by 
this  means  we  were  able  to  go  ashore. 

We  were  only  there  a  very  short  time,  and  in 
consequence  were  unable  to  see  many  of  the 
interesting  caves  and  carvings  which  abound  on 
the  island ;  and  this  was  especially  unfortunate, 
as  practically  nothing  is  known  of  the  former 
inhabitants,  while  the  fauna  and  flora,  such  as 
they  are,  have  never  been  collected. 

There  are  now,  I  believe,  two  Easter  Island 
images  in  the  British  Museum.  The  images, 
we  judged,  are  on  an  average  at  least  twenty 
feet  in  height,  while  some  of  them  are  probably 
considerably  more.  They  have  been  hewn 
out  of  the  lava  in  one  or  more  of  the  craters 
on  the  island.  In  one  of  the  smaller  of  these 
craters,  Major  Wilbraham  saw  several  statues  in 
an  unfinished  condition,  the  features  being  carved 
on  the  surface  of  the  lava.  It  would  seem, 
therefore,  that  the  outline  of  the  statue  was  first 
carved,  and  that  the  block  of  lava  was  afterwards 
cut   out   and   carried   by   some   unknown   means 


194       VOYAGES   OF   A  NATURALIST 

down  to  the  coast,  where  it  was  set  upright,  facing 
the    sea. 

Apparently  all  these  images  are  alike  in  general 
appearance.  The  carving  is  rough  :  it  represents 
a  human  face  with  a  very  large  and  prominent 


Fig.  1. — Lava  Image. 

nose,  a  rather  protruding  mouth,  a  pointed  chin, 
the    forehead    narrow,    and   the    brows   beetling. 

(Fig.  1.) 

Each  statue  is  mounted  on  a  platform  of  loose 
blocks  of  lava,  and  these  platforms  seem  to  be 
ancient     burial-places.        All     the     stones     with 


HUMAN   BONES  195 

which  the  platforms  are  built  are  of  the  size  of  a 
man's  head,  perhaps  slightly  larger,  and  they  are 
arranged  in  the  form  of  a  rough  square  of  about 
the  dimensions  of  an  ordinary  dinner-table  ;  in 
the  centre  of  each  platform  there  is  a  hollow  space. 
Soon  after   we   first  landed,  one  of  the   party 

noticed  a  fragment  of  a 
human  skull  lying  near 
one  of  the  statues,  and, 
on  enquiry,  we  were  told 
that  the  skull  had 
come    from    one    of   the 

Fig.  2.— Lava  crown  for  statue,      platforms.   Our  informant 

added  that  there  were 
human  remains  in  all  the  piles  of  rocks  at  the 
foot  of  the  images,  and  that,  if  we  liked,  he  would 
tell  the  rest  of  the  natives  to  collect  a  quantity 
of  bones  for  us.  This  same  man — a  native  of 
Tahiti,  who  had  been  on  Easter  Island  for  several 
years — told  us  emphatically  that  the  bones  were 
on  the  island  when  the  present  inhabitants  first 
arrived  there  from  Tahiti. 

We,  of  course,  accepted  his  offer,  and,  on  our 
return  to  the  landing-place  a  few  hours  afterwards, 
we  found  a  large  stack  of  bones  awaiting  us.  We 
ourselves  examined  several  of  the  platforms, 
and  in  each  one  there  were  remains  of  human 
skeletons.  Some  were  complete,  and  some  con- 
sisted only  of  a  few  small  bones,  such  as  vertebrae 
or  ribs.     Many  of  the  bones  were  in  good  condition, 


196       VOYAGES   OF  A  NATURALIST 

but  others  were  much  decayed,  and  showed  signs 
of  having  lain  in  these  graves  for  a  very  great 
length  of  time. 

So  far  as  we  could  discover,  only  one  body  was 
buried  in  each  platform.  The  body  seemed  to 
have  been  placed  in  its  grave  in  no  special  position 
— at  least,  the  bones  were  all  together  in  a  pile, 
though  possibly  the  body  may  have  been  placed 
in  a  crouching  position,  a  supposition  borne  out 
to  a  certain  extent  by  the  fact  that  the  spaces  in 
the  platforms  were  of  no  great  size. 

All  the  bones  collected  were  carefully  packed 
and  taken  on  board,  and  are  now  in  the  British 
Museum.  Mr.  T.  A.  Joyce  has  examined  this 
collection  and  has  most  kindly  placed  his  notes  on 
the  subject  at  my  disposal.  I  have  made  several 
extracts  from  them  and  owing  to  his  courtesy  am 
able  to  give  a  fuller  account  of  all  that  is  known 
of  this  interesting  island  than  would  otherwise 
have  been  possible.  A  series  of  forty-nine  skulls 
was  brought  from  Easter  Island  by  Capt. -Lieu- 
tenant Geiseler,  after  the  visit  of  the  German 
gunboat  "  Hyane  "  to  the  island.  Geiseler  ob- 
tained several  of  the  skulls  himself  either  from 
the  "  platforms  "  or  from  specially  built  mortuary 
chambers.  He  stated  that  the  "  platforms"  were 
used  by  the  present  inhabitants  as  burial  places, 
and  adds  that  this  practice  was  in  vogue  at  the 
time  of  his  visit ;  and  that  the  natives  were  in  the 
habit  of  removing  the  bones  as  the  bodies  decayed 


SKULLS  197 

to  make  room  for  further  burials,  leaving  only  the 
skulls.  It  seems  strange,  therefore,  that  the  natives 
should  have  told  us  that  the  bones  were  there 
before  the  island  became  re-inhabited ;  also  that 
we  should  have  found  but  one  skull  in  each 
"  platform." 

After  a  careful  examination  of  the  skulls  brought 
back  by  us,  Mr.  Joyce  finds  in  them  distinct  evi- 
dences of  a  Melanesian  type,  and  he  naturally 
describes  this  as  a  most  surprising  find  in  an 
island  so  far  removed  from  Melanesia;  his  words 
are,  "  and  considering  the  remoteness  of  Easter 
Island  from  Melanesia  of  the  present  day,  this  fact 
in  itself  is  sufficiently  puzzling  and  interesting.'1 

We  were  informed  by  the  overseer  of  the  island 
that  the  present  inhabitants  were  imported  from 
Tahiti,*  and  if  this  be  the  case  it  is  difficult  to 
account  for  the  presence  of  Melanesian  types  in 
the  skulls  found  on  the  island,  unless,  indeed, 
many  of  these  skulls  are  really  those  belonging  to 
the  former  inhabitants. 

The  huge  images  set  up  on  a  platform  of  stones, 
arranged  so  as  to  form  a  covered  chamber  or 
vault,  seem  to  point  to  these  having  been  in- 
tended to  mark  a  burial  place.  In  fact,  it  is 
difficult  to  imagine  for  what  other  purpose  they 
were  erected. 

The  portions  of  skulls  from  which  the  accom- 

*  The  present  inhabitants  are  in  appearance  pure-bred  Polynesians 
and  possess  the  handsome  features  of  the  Taliitians. 

P 


198       VOYAGES   OF  A  NATURALIST 

panying  photograph  was  taken  are  in  my  posses- 
sion and  are  crumbling  with  age. 

Caves  were  seen  and  the  stone  houses  ex- 
amined, during  our  visit,  by  Major  Wilbraham, 
who  has  kindly  supplied  me  with  the  following 
short  description  of  them,  and  the  carvings  they 
contain.  It  is  much  to  be  regretted  that,  owing 
to  the  short  time  available,  Major  Wilbraham 
did  not  have  sufficient  opportunity  to  make  an 
even  more  thorough  examination.  In  company 
with  Doctor  Macdonald  he  spent  a  night  ashore, 
as  guest  of  the  overseer,  Mr.  Cooper,  and  the 
following  are  extracts  from  his  journal : — 

"  March  13th. — Macdonald  and  I  got  up  early 
and  rode  to  the  top  of  the  crater,  which  is  called 
on  the  map  Rano  Kao.     This  is  perfectly  circular, 


Fig.  3. — Plan  of  stone  house  at  the  lip  of  the  crater  of 

Rano  Kao. 

seven  hundred  feet  deep,  and  two  and  a  half  miles 
round,  while  the  bottom  is  covered  by  a  marsh. 
Part  of  the  way  down  the  crater  are  a  series  of  cliffs 


STONE   HOUSES  AND  CARVINGS     199 

each  of  which  has  a  cave-dwelling  entrance,  but 
we  had  no  time  to  examine  these. 

"  We  rode  to  the  south-west  or  sea-side  of  the 
crater,  where  the  lip  was  broken  away  into  the 
sea,  and  looks  on  three  rocky  islets. 

"  There  are  just  on  the  lip  a  number  of  low  stone 
houses  facing  the  sea.  In  plan  they  are  narrow 
ellipses  (Fig.  3),  the  walls  and  roofs  being  built  of 
shallow,    undressed    slabs.       The    doorways    are 

very  narrow  and  low.  The 
floors  are  clay,  but  as  there  is 
at  present  only  about  four  feet 
headroom,  they  were  probably 
once  lower.  I  found  an  oval 
smooth  stone,  about  ten  inches 
long,  with  a  scratched  device 
(Fig.  4).  The  rough  boulders 
outside  were  covered  with  figures  not  ungraceful, 
generally   a   female   form   in   a   curved   position, 


Fig.  4. — Carved  stone. 


Fig.  5. — Female  figures  cut  on  the  boulders. 


p  2 


200       VOYAGES   OF  A  NATURALIST 

sometimes  with  a  sort  of  chignon,  decorated  with 
two  long  feathers  pointing  forwards.  This  figure 
was  sometimes  doubled,  and  a  particularly  fine 
one  was  inside  one  of  the  houses  (Fig.  5).     Odd 


0^ 


Fig.  6. — Designs  carved  in  the  rock  outside  the  houses  at  the  lip 

of  the  crater. 

corners  of  the  rock  were  filled  up  with  these  designs 
(Fig.  6).  There  was  also  a  block  with  a  rather 
deeply  carved  sort  of  owl's  face  inside  one  house. 
Outside  one  house  were  the  deep  marks  of  tool 
grinding. 

"  Some  houses  had  two  entrances  on  the  same 
side,  and  sometimes  a  middle  partition.     I  found 


Fig.  7. — A  painting  in  a  cave  of  a  frigate  bird. 

no  implements,  but  had  no  means  of  digging. 
I  saw  a  few  obsidian  chips,  and  have  no  doubt 
there  is  much  to  find  here. 

"  Mr.  Cooper  gave  me  a  broken  stone  fish-hook 
and  an  old  wooden  idol. 


PAINTINGS   AND   IDOLS  201 

"  We  rode  down  to  a  cave  by  the  sea  on  the 
west  side,  called  in  the  map  c  Hangaroa.'  There 
were  many  paintings  in  red  and  white  and  black, 
principally  frigate  birds  (Fig.  7),  and  a  man-of-war 
with  white  portholes,  and  another  square-sailed 
ship.  These  do  not  appear  to  be  of  great 
antiquity. 

"  In  the  village  I  got  some  rough  obsidian  spear- 
heads and  a  large  stone  adze. 

"  Mr.  Cooper  tells  me  that  there  are,  in  other 
parts  of  the  island,  inscriptions  in  stone,  but  we 
saw  none  ;    he  describes  them  as  like  '  Japanese 


Fig.  8. — Wooden  "charm."     Worn,  perhaps,  on  the  heart. 

writing.'*  The  more  modern  idols  are  of  the  type 
of  the  statues,  with  a  broad  nose  with  narrow 
bridge.  The  old  wooden  idol  (mentioned  above) 
is  quite  different,  with  high  cheek  bones  and  a 
'  Wellington  '  nose." 

There  is  evidently    much  of   great  interest   to 

*  The  Easter  Islanders  alone  of  all  the  inhabitants  of  Oceanea  and 
South  America  possessed  a  written  language.  Wooden  tablets,  on  which 
the  script  has  survived,  are  described  by  Mr.  O.  M.  Dalton,  cf.  "Man," 
1904—1. 


202       VOYAGES   OF  A  NATURALIST 

be  found  on  Easter  Island,  and  it  would  well 
repay  the  trouble  and  expense  of  a  thorough 
investigation ;  but,  if  anything  is  going  to  be 
done  it  must  be  done  soon.  Every  year  makes 
a  great  difference  to  the  state  of  the  carvings 
and  caves,  as  the  latter  are  now  much  used  as 
shelters  for  sheep,  and  in  a  comparatively  short 
time  all  traces  of  any  carvings  will  be  worn  away 
by  the  frequent  passing  to  and  fro  of  these 
animals. 

It  would  not  be  so  very  difficult  for  an  ex- 
pedition to  visit  the  island,  for  at  least  once  every 
month  a  schooner  or  a  small  steamer  leaves 
Valparaiso  and  calls  there,  and  I  have  no  doubt 
that  one  could  easily  reach  it  by  these  means. 

The  whole  of  my  time  during  our  short  visit 
was  spent  in  collecting  specimens  of  natural 
history,  and  I  had  no  opportunity  of  visiting  the 
caves  and  stone  houses.  Birds  and  insects  were 
very  scarce — in  fact,  I  have  never  seen  an  island  of 
the  size  of  Easter  Island  inhabited  by  so  few 
birds. 

There  is  apparently  but  one  species  of  indigenous 
land-bird.  This  bird  I  did  not  meet  with,  but  it 
was  described  to  me  by  Dr.  Macdonald,  who  saw 
a  single  example  near  the  settlement,  as  being 
somewhat  like  a  reed-bunting  but  with  a  red 
breast.  I  believe  this  to  be  an  undescribed  species, 
and  it  is  unfortunate  that  no  specimen  was 
procured. 


A  POOR  FAUNA  203 

There  is  a  tinamou,  a  bird  much  resembling 
a  partridge,  but  this  has  been  introduced  from 
South  America.  Two  of  these  birds,  which  were 
shot  and  skinned,  proved  to  belong  to  a  common 
species  of  tinamou,  known  as  Nothoprocta 
perdicaria.  Sea-birds  were  rather  more  numerous, 
but  these  were  mostly  seen*  from  the  ship  before 
we  landed.  On  the  island  itself  I  saw  but  two 
species,  the  common  noddy  tern,  the  same  bird 
as  that  found  on  Saint  Paul's  Pocks,  and  white 
terns.*  The  latter  were  seen  in  the  crater  of 
Pano  Kao,  where  they  were  apparently  nesting. 

In  a  marsh  at  the  bottom  of  the  crater  were 
numbers  of  small  geese,  which  were  seen  both  by 
myself  and  Major  Wilbraham.  These  geese  may 
have  been  introduced,  but  as  none  of  us  had  time 
to  get  to  the  bottom  of  the  crater,  no  specimens 
were  procured.  In  coloration  they  appeared  to 
belong  to  two  species  ;  some  being  black  with  a 
patch  of  white  on  the  wing,  while  others  were  of 
a  red  colour.  These  differences  may,  however, 
be  due  to  sex.  A  golden  plover  was,  we  were  told, 
introduced  by  Mr.  Cooper,  who,  several  years  ago, 
turned  out  six  of  these  birds  on  the  island. 

There  are  no  indigenous  mammals  on  Easter 
Island,  the  rat  which  inhabits  it  having  been 
imported,  and  a  cat,  which  is  found  wild,  being 
descended  from  the  domestic  cat. 

On  the  second  day  of  our  visit  I  landed  early 

*  Gygis  alba. 


204       VOYAGES   OF  A  NATURALIST 

in  the  morning,  and  set  off  in  the  direction  of  the 
crater.  After  a  long  walk  I  eventually  reached 
the  lip  of  this  volcano,  but,  owing  to  lack  of  time, 
I  was  unable  to  get  to  the  marsh  at  the  bottom  of 
it.  I  scrambled  about  half-way  down  to  pick 
up  a  tern  which  I  had  shot,  but  at  this  point  it  was 
extremely  difficult  to  descend,  owing  to  the  nature 
of  the  ground,  which  was  covered  with  loose  stones 
and  debris.  I  obtained  a  glimpse  of  the  geese,  and 
had  a  good  view  of  the  marsh  about  a  thousand 
feet  below  me. 

Easter  Island  is  now  almost  entirely  covered 
with  grass,  and,  from  the  sea,  presents  an  unbroken 
view  of  rolling  grass-covered  country.  A  closer 
inspection  shows  that  amongst  the  grass  lie  in- 
numerable rocks  of  lava  of  various  sizes,  and  were 
it  not  for  the  number  of  sheep- tracks  in  all 
directions,  it  would  be  a  tedious  matter  to  walk 
any  distance  in  many  parts  of  the  island. 

A  few  low  trees  have  been  planted  amongst 
the  houses  at  the  settlement,  and  at  the  bottom 
of  the  crater  I  noticed  some  small  trees  and  bushes. 
In  former  times  there  were  many  trees,  but  all 
appear  to  have  been  felled,  and  the  land  cleared 
to  make  grazing  ground  for  sheep  and  cattle. 

At  the  time  of  our  visit  there  were  40,000  sheep. 
They  were  very  small,  and  their  wool  was  of  a 
yellowish  colour,  doubtless  discoloured  by  the 
earth.  All  the  wool  is  shipped  to  Valparaiso, 
whence  it  goes  to  Bradford,  in  Yorkshire. 


LASSOING   A   BULLOCK  205 

Two  sheep  and  a  bullock  were  required  for  the 
ship,  and  we  watched  the  natives  catching  them. 
The  sheep  were  easily  ridden  down  by  a  couple  of 
men  on  horseback,  and  were  at  once  slaughtered. 

A  bullock  was  then  singled  out  and  separated 
from  the  herd  by  the  two  mounted  natives.  Each 
man  was  armed  with  a  strong  lasso  made  of  raw 
hide,  the  end  of  which  was  fastened  to  the  saddle 
of  his  horse.  As  soon  as  the  bullock  was  cut  off 
from  its  companions  it  was  headed  for  the  shore. 
Driven  frantic  by  the  cries  of  its  pursuers  it 
charged  straight  for  us,  and  we  had  barely  time  to 
scramble  out  of  the  way  before  it  was  galloping 
over  the  spot  where  we  had  been  sitting.  Then 
brought  to  a  standstill  by  a  low  cliff,  it  was  most 
skilfully  lassoed  by  one  of  the  horsemen,  who, 
from  a  distance  of  some  twenty  yards,  threw  his 
thong  in  such  a  way  that  the  running  noose  fell 
over  the  horns  of  the  bullock  and  at  once  drew 
tight.  The  second  native  then  cast  his  lasso 
over  the  beast's  hindquarters,  the  lower  end  of  the 
loop  lying  on  the  grass  just  behind  its  hind  feet. 
The  other  native  then  rode  to  the  front  making 
the  bullock  step  backwards  and  thus  stand  within 
the  circle  of  the  lasso  which  was  at  once  pulled 
tight,  so  that  the  poor  beast  fell  heavily  to  the 
ground.  It  was  then  dispatched  by  a  knife  thrust 
in  the  throat. 

I  was  indeed  sorry  when  we  sailed  away  from 
Easter  Island  after  so  short  a  stay.     I  had  been 


206       VOYAGES   OF   A  NATURALIST 

able  to  spend  only  some  six  hours  on  shore,  and 
the  greater  part  of  that  time  was  taken  up  in 
walking  from  the  landing-place  to  the  crater,  a 
distance  of  something  over  three  miles  along  an 
exceedingly  rough  track. 

In  a  voyage  of  this  kind,  however,  it  is  im- 
possible to  do  so  much  as  was  originally  intended, 
owing  to  delays  which  are  always  experienced  in 
ports.  For  instance,  we  were  delayed  for  various 
reasons  at  Bahia  for  two  weeks,  and  the  same 
length  of  time  at  Valparaiso,  where  the  ship  was 
dry-docked,  owing  to  an  injury  to  the  propeller, 
sustained  while  steaming  through  the  ice  in 
Smythe's  Channel. 

In  such  ways  as  these,  days  were  lost  in  places 
of  little  interest  compared  to  that  of  Easter 
Island  and  Pitcairn.  The  whole  of  this  voyage 
occupied  nine  months  only,  and  so  we  were  forced 
to  be  content  with  extremely  short  stays  at  many 
of  the  islands,  while  visits  to  others,  such  as  South 
Trinidad  and  the  Marquesas,  had  to  be  abandoned 
altogether. 


CHAPTER    XXL 


PITCAIRN    ISLAND. 


At  six  o'clock  on  the  morning  of  March  22nd, 
1903,  we  sighted  Pitcairn.  The  history  of  this 
island  and  its  people  is  well-known,  but  a  brief 
account  here  of  the  origin  of  the  inhabitants 
may  not  be  out  of  place. 

At  the  time  of  its  discovery  Pitcairn  was  un- 
inhabited, but  afterwards  it  became  the  home  of 
some  of  the  survivors  of  the  mutineers  of  H.M.S. 
"  Bounty,"  who,  after  capturing  the  ship,  visited 
Tahiti  and,  taking  native  wives,  finally  settled  on 
Pitcairn  and  destroyed  the  "  Bounty."  Here 
they  remained  undiscovered  for  twenty  years, 
until  a  passing  ship,  noticing  signs  of  inhabitants, 
lowered  a  boat  and  found  them  with  their 
descendants.  Since  that  time  Pitcairn  has  been 
inhabited  almost  solely  by  the  descendants  of 
the  mutineers,  and  at  the  time  of  our  visit  there 
were  about  one  hundred  and  ninety  persons 
living  there. 

As  we  drew  close  we  could  see  that  it  was  of 
small  size,   and  rose  precipitously  from  the  sea. 


208       VOYAGES   OF  A  NATURALIST 

Banana  trees,  cocoanut  palms,  and  bushes  were 
growing  in  great  profusion,  and  gave  a  green, 
fertile  appearance.  Here  and  there,  where  the 
land  had  been  tilled,  the  red-coloured  earth  made 
a  vivid  contrast  with  the  green  foliage,  while  the 
deep  blue  of  the  sea  and  sky  put  the  finishing 
touch  to  a  charming  picture. 

Immediately  the  anchor  was  dropped  in  "Bounty 
Bay  "  two  boats  came  off  to  the  ship,  and  as  they 
drew  alongside  their  occupants  scrambled  on  deck. 
Nearly  all  of  the  men  were  well-built,  several  of 
them  being  six  feet  in  height.  They  were  bare- 
footed, and  clothed  in  blue  cotton  coats  and 
trousers.  Their  boats  were  laden  with  fruit — 
bananas,  limes,  and  water-melons — which  was  soon 
offered  for  barter  or  sale.  Their  first  request  was 
one  for  cartridges  in  order  to  shoot  their  fowls 
which  ran  wild  over  the  island.  Latter  on,  while 
pushing  our  way  through  the  thick  bushes  on 
Pitcairn,  we  frequently  disturbed  parties  of  these 
fowls,  birds  of  all  colours,  which  took  to  flight  and 
sailed  away  at  a  great  rate.  Some  were  pur- 
chased by  the  steward  for  our  consumption,  but, 
as  might  have  been  expected,  they  were  ex- 
ceedingly tough  and  leathery. 

As  soon  as  possible  we  went  ashore  in  one  of 
the  boats.  The  surf  is  always  breaking,  even  on 
the  best  landing  place,  and  these  islanders  gave  us 
a  fine  exhibition  of  boat  management.  We  rowed 
straight  at  the  breaking  surf  until  within  a  few 


o 


< 


— 

o 
< 

73 


o 


i— i 
o 


A  CURIOUS   WARBLER  209 

feet  of  it,  when  suddenly  our  boatmen  swung 
the  boat  sharply  and,  almost  touching  a  huge  rock, 
passed  in  safety  into  a  small  sheltered  bay,  where 
we  landed  on  a  sloping  sandy  shore. 

High  up  on  the  shore,  under  the  shade  of  banana 
trees,  was  a  boathouse  containing  several  large 
boats,  one  of  which  was  pointed  out  to  us  as 
"  the  boat  Queen  Victoria  gave  us."  It  was 
presented  to  the  Pitcairn  Islanders  several  years 
ago  by  the  late  Queen,  who  always  took  a  deep 
interest  in  this  little  British  colony. 

We  ascended  a  steep  winding  pathway  to  the 
settlement,  and  as  we  walked  numbers  of  small 
blue-tailed  lizards*  ran  across  the  path  in  front 
of  us,  while  many  were  seen  climbing  over  the 
rocks  and  tree-trunks.  Amongst  the  tree-tops 
small  warblers  were  busily  searching  for  insects, 
and  uttering  a  loud  "  chack-chaek."  This  bird, 
a  reed-warbler — Tatar e  vaughani — is  the  only 
land-bird  to  be  found  on  Pitcairn.  It  has  a  rare 
peculiarity  of  plumage.  When  young  the  colour 
is  normally  a  greenish-brown,  but  after  the  first 
moult  many  of  the  feathers  in  the  wings  and  tail 
become  a  creamy  white.  In  no  case  are  these 
white  feathers  evenly  distributed,  but  they  are 
scattered  indiscriminately  amongst  the  normally 
coloured  quills,  f     The  uneven  distribution  of  the 

*  Lygosoma  cyamirum. 

f  It  is  possible  that  very  old  birds  may  have  entirely  white  wings  and 
tail.  Amongst  the  specimens  we  obtained  some  were  whiter  than 
others,  though  in  no  case  were  they  evenly  marked  with  white. 


210       VOYAGES   OF  A  NATURALIST 

white  feathers  points  to  a  tendency  to  albinism 
from  some  cause,  and  it  may  be  due  to  excessive 
interbreeding.  This  seems  quite  likely,  as  the 
island  is  very  small,  and  this  one  sedentary  species 
is  particularly  abundant  from  the  shore  to  the 
highest  peak.  For  its  size  it  utters  an  extremely 
loud  note,  and  I  was  frequently  surprised  by  a 
harsh  screaming,  like  that  of  a  jay,  which  I  found 
to  be  made  by  this  little  reed-warbler. 

Flying  over  the  tops  of  the  cocoanut  palms 
were  numbers  of  white  terns,*  while  now  and 
again  a  red-tailed  tropic  birdj  sailed  high 
overhead. 

A  short  walk  brought  us  to  the  settlement, 
and  there  we  were  met  by  the  women  and  children. 
The  arrival  of  a  ship  at  Pit  cairn  is  a  rare  event, 
and  everyone  seemed  very  pleased  to  see  us.  All 
the  houses  originally  built  by  the  mutineers  of 
the  "  Bounty "  are  still  standing,  and  were  in- 
habited at  the  time  of  our  visit.  They  are  strongly 
made  of  wood,  which  was  probably  taken  from 
the  "  Bounty."  Each  house  has  two  rooms, 
both  of  which  are  on  one  floor,  raised  about  18 
inches  from  the  ground  by  means  of  stout  posts. 
The  roofs  are  thatched  with  palm  leaves,  and  the 
windows  are  unglazed  openings  cut  in  the  wooden 
walls,  and  fitted  with  sliding  wooden  shutters. 
The  newer  houses  in  the  settlement  are  for  the  most 
part  built  after  the  same  pattern.     In  the  centre 

*  Gygis  alba.  f  Phaethon  rubricauda. 


THE    INHABITANTS  211 

of  the  village  is  a  large  wooden  building,  which  is 
used  both  as  church  and  school. 

The  ruler  of  the  people  of  Pitcairn  is  a  Mr. 
McCoy,  who  is  called  the  chief  magistrate.  Un- 
fortunately he  was  away  on  a  visit  to  Tahiti,  and 
we  therefore  did  not  see  him.  Lord  Crawford 
paid  a  visit  to  the  two  oldest  inhabitants,  Mr. 
Thursday  October  Christian,  aged  84,  and  Mrs. 
Young,  aged  82,  both  of  whom  are  grandchildren 
of  original  mutineers.  Both  these  old  people  were 
ill  in  bed,  but  appeared  to  be  much  delighted  to 
see  us.  In  each  home  were  three  pictures,  cut  out 
of  an  illustrated  paper,  representing  Queen 
Victoria  and  our  present  King  and  Queen. 

The  older  people,  as  well  as  the  young  children 
of  Pitcairn,  have  fair  complexions,  but  the  people 
of  from  30  to  50  years  of  age  are  quite  as  dark  as 
the  average  Polynesian.  It  appears  from  this 
that  the  Pitcairners  resemble  their  ancestors, 
the  "  Bounty "  mutineers,  every  alternate 
generation. 

Having  obtained  a  guide,  Dr.  Macdonald  and  I 
started  on  a  walk  over  the  island.  From  the  settle- 
ment we  ascended  the  highest  peak,  about  1000  feet 
above  the  level  of  the  sea,  the  way  leading  through 
a  luxuriant  grove  of  bananas,  amongst  which  the 
reed-warblers  were  very  abundant.  The  peak  is 
composed  of  a  mass  of  bare  rock,  and  from  the 
summit  we  had  a  fine  view  of  the  settlement  and 
the  southern  end  of  the  island.     Well-made  paths 


212       VOYAGES   OF  A  NATURALIST 

were  numerous,  and  during  the  day  we  walked 
over  the  whole  of  the  island,  the  greater  part  of 
which  is  under  cultivation.  Water-melons, 
oranges,  and  bananas  are  the  principal  crops ; 
the  fruit  was  ripe  and  in  great  abundance.  A 
continual  supply  of  fresh  water  trickles  from  near 
the  summit  of  the  peak,  and  this  is  conducted  to 
the  settlement  by  means  of  wooden  troughs.  The 
water  is  collected  in  paraffin  barrels,  and  in  these 
we  found  the  larvce  of  a  mosquito.*  Near  the 
summit  we  passed  through  a  grove  of  cocoanut 
palms,  in  which  several  pairs  of  white  terns  were 
nesting,  and  our  guide  told  me  that  there  are 
several  places  in  the  island  where  some  sea-bird 
nests  in  holes  in  the  ground,  but  that  it  was  not 
then  its  breeding  season.  This  bird  must  be  a 
petrel,  but  of  what  species  I  do  not  know. 

The  windward  side  of  the  island  is  precipitous, 
and  in  the  cliff  there  is  a  cave  which  Major  Wil- 
braham  examined.  He  found  little  of  interest, 
however,  except  a  rough  carving  of  the  rising  sun. 
The  only  records  of  inhabitants  previous  to  the 
mutineers  which  we  could  discover  were  some 
stone  axe-heads,  which  we  brought  away.  There 
appear  to  be  no  burial-places,  such  as  those  found 
on  Easter  Island,  nor  any  images  or  monuments 
of  any  kind.  Possibly,  however,  Pitcairn  was  never 
previously  inhabited,  and  the  axe-heads  may  have 
been  left  by  visitors  from  a  neighbouring  shore. 

*  Stegomyia  fasciata. 


- 
z 

- 

o 


CI 


on 

H 
W 
Z 


M 

- 

— 

- 

T. 

o 


Z 
W 

n 

o 

o 

is 


Z 

- 

DC 


O 


A    MEETING  213 

It  may  be  that  the  Easter  Island  people  paid 
periodical  visits,  and,  although  we  found  no  stone 
axes  on  that  island,  it  is  quite  probable  that  some 
would  be  revealed  by  a  careful  search. 

No  mammals  are  indigenous  to  Pitcairn,  but 
rats  have  been  imported  by  ships  and  their  burrows 
were  seen  in  plenty.  A  number  of  goats,  of  which 
we  saw  a  large  herd,  run  wild,  and  provide  meat 
for  the  inhabitants.  Occasionally  they  are  driven 
in  a  valley  to  be  counted,  as  only  a  certain  number 
may  be  shot  annually. 

We  saw  no  butterflies  on  the  island,  but  there 
were  many  small  moths,  and  one  species — 
Plutetta  maculipennis — was  most  abundant. 

At  sunset  we  went  on  board  the  yacht,  which 
was  anchored  off  the  settlement,  but  early  next 
morning  a  heavy  squall  arose  and  the  anchor  was 
found  to  be  dragging.  Fortunately  steam  was  up, 
and  we  got  away  from  the  rocky  shore,  towards 
which  the  wind  had  been  rapidly  carrying  us, 
without  mishap.  It  was  found  afterwards  that 
the  flukes  of  the  anchor  had  been  broken  off, 
probably  by  striking  a  rock  when  "let  go  "  on 
the  previous  morning.  During  the  following  day, 
for  as  long  as  we  remained  at  Pitcairn,  the  yacht 
had  to  be  hove  to  off  the  island. 

During    the    morning    we    landed    again    and 

attended  in  the  large  building  previously  mentioned 

a  meeting  of  the  islanders,  at  the  close  of  which 

the  National    Anthem    was    sung.     Each    verse, 

Q 


214       VOYAGES   OF  A  NATURALIST 

written  on  a  blackboard,  was  held  up  by  a  stalwart 
native  for  everyone  to  read.  The  singing  was 
excellent,  and  in  part  singing  I  have  rarely  heard 
its  equal ;  every  one  of  the  islanders  sang  heartily 
in  perfect  tune  and  time.  At  the  close  of  this 
meeting  the  Union  Jack  was  hoisted  over  Mr. 
McCoy's  house,  and  a  salute  of  twenty-one  guns 
was  thereupon  fired  from  "  Valhalla."  Before  we 
left  all  the  inhabitants  visited  the  yacht,  and 
Lord  Crawford  was  presented  with  a  piece  of  iron 
ballast  and  some  copper  nails,  which  had  been 
saved  from  the  "  Bounty." 

Soon  after  mid-day  we  steamed  slowly  away, 
and  four  boats  laden  with  men  and  women  singing 
a  farewell  song  followed  for  some  distance  in  our 
wake. 

All  the  inhabitants  of  Pitcairn  can  speak  perfect 
English,  but  when  speaking  among  themselves 
they  cannot  easily  be  understood  by  a  stranger, 
as  they  then  clip  their  words,  sounding  only  the 
first  and  last  letters.  Why  they  do  this  it  is 
difficult  to  say.  When  questioned,  they  replied 
that  they  were  talking  their  "  own  language," 
adding  that  this  language  only  differed  from 
English  in  the  above  mentioned  particular. 


CHAPTER    XXII. 

TAHITI — SOCIETY    ISLANDS. 

Six  days  after  leaving  Pitcairn,  Tahiti,*  the  largest 
and  most  important  of  the  Society  Islands,  was 
sighted,  and  at  10  o'clock  in  the  morning  we 
dropped  anchor  off  the  town  of  Papeete.  The 
barrier-reef  protecting  the  harbour  is  almost 
a-wash  at  low  water,  and  we  had  to  lie  outside 
and  wait  for  a  pilot. 

From  this  position  a  splendid  view  of  the  island 
was  obtained.  A  series  of  jagged  peaks  extends 
through  its  whole  length — peaks  covered  from 
base  to  summit  with  dense  forest,  and  intersected 
by  narrow  gorges  filled  with  rushing  torrents  of 
clear  water.  The  town  of  Papeete  is  built  in  a 
clearing  in  the  forest ;  between  it  and  the 
shore  lies  a  stretch  of  grass  dotted  with  trees, 
many  of  which  grow  within  a  few  feet  of  the  sea 
and  overhang  the  water.  The  main  street  runs 
parallel  with  the  harbour,   and  a  short  distance 

#  Tahiti  is  often  referred  to  as  Otaheite.  This  name,  we  were 
assured  by  the  Tahitians,  is  incorrect,  and  originated  from  a  mistake 
made  by  Captain  Cook. 

Q  2 


216       VOYAGES   OF   A  NATURALIST 

inland  we  could  see  the  French  flag  flying  over 
Government  House. 

The  pilot,  after  a  little  delay,  made  his  appear- 
ance, and,  taking  us  safely  through  the  opening  in 
the  reef  into  the  still  water  beyond,  brought  us  to 
an  anchorage  close  up  to  the  town. 

It  is  forbidden  to  shoot  birds  both  on  Tahiti 
and  on  the  neighbouring  island  of  Eimeo,  nor 
were  we  able  to  obtain  permission  from  the 
Governor  to  collect  for  scientific  purposes.  During 
the  whole  of  our  stay,  which  lasted  for  nearly  a 
fortnight,  we  saw  very  few  birds  indeed.  A  swift 
of  a  species  of  Collocalia  was  most  frequently  seen  ; 
this,  with  a  few  small  grass-finches  and  a  single 
thrush-like  bird,  completed  the  list  of  indigenous 
land-birds  met  with  by  us.  The  Indian  mynah 
was  introduced  some  years  ago  for  the  purpose  of 
destroying  a  large  yellow-bodied  wasp  which  is  so 
numerous  as  to  be  a  pest.  The  mynah  increased 
enormously,  and  is  now  very  plentiful,  but  the 
number  of  wasps  remains  the  same.  There  can 
be  little  doubt  that  it  is  entirely  owing  to  the 
presence  of  this  bird  that  the  native  species  have 
become  so  scarce. 

Sea-birds  were  also  scarce,  the  greater  frigate 
birds,*  tropic  birds,  and  noddies!  were  occasionally 
observed,  while  white  ternsj  were  seen  in  some 
numbers  flying  round  the  palm  trees,  on  the  leaves 
of  which  they  lay  their  single  egg.     Both  blue 

*  Fregata  aquila.         f  Anous  stolidus.  %  Gygis  alba. 


A  REMARKABLE   SANDPIPER        217 

and  white  forms  of  a  small  heron*  were  seen  to- 
gether on  a  small  islet,  and  lastly,  at  the  mouth 
of  a  river  at  Tautira,  some  miles  from  Papeete, 
a  single  sandpiper")"  was  met  with. 

Tahiti  at  one  time  was  the  home  of  a  handsome 
sandpiper^:  so  aberrant  as  to  be  placed  in  a  genus 
by  itself.  The  bird  was  discovered  by  Captain 
Cook,  and  the  only  specimen  of  it  now  in  existence 
is  in  the  Leyden  Museum.  Dr.  Bowdler  Sharpe 
has  lately  described,  from  an  old  coloured  figure, 
a  second  species  of  the  genus  from  the  neighbouring 
island  of  Eimeo.  There  is,  of  course,  a  chance 
that  the  Prosobonia  may  yet  be  re-discovered  on 
Tahiti,  or  on  one  of  the  neighbouring  islands, 
for  the  group  has  been  by  no  means  thoroughly 
explored. 

We  paid  several  visits  to  the  barrier-reef,  where 
the  water  was  so  clear  that  we  could  see  every- 
thing as  in  a  glass  tank.  There  were  many  large 
holothurians,  one  of  which  on  being  captured 
ejected  an  example  of  the  long  silvery  fish  which 
has  been  described  as  living  in  these  "  sea-slugs." 

The  coral  was  covered  in  many  places  with  sea- 
urchins,  which  were  possessed  of  spines  three  or 
four  inches  in  length,  so  that  when  walking  on  the 
reef  great  care  had  to  be  taken  to  prevent  a  nasty 
wound. 

One  evening  we  watched  some  natives  spearing 

*  Demicgrelta  sacra.  f  Totanus  incanus. 

%  Prosobonia  leucoptera. 


218        VOYAGES   OF  A  NATURALIST 

fish  by  torch-light.  Two  canoes  paddled  out  a 
few  yards  apart  until  they  were  exactly  over  the 
reef.  A  torch,  composed  of  dead  leaves  of  the 
cocoanut  palm,  was  then  lighted  and  waved  to 
and  fro  until  the  fish,  attracted  by  the  glare,  rose 
to  the  surface  of  the  water  and  swam  near  the 
boats.  Then  followed  a  delightful  exhibition  of 
skill.  A  native  standing  up  in  the  bows  of  his 
canoe  would  hurl  his  long  spear  at  a  fish  as  it 
crossed  in  front  of  him,  and  so  deadly  was  the  aim 
that  even  small  fish,  several  yards  distant,  were 
seldom  fortunate  enough  to  escape.  The  spears 
were  made  of  light  wood,  with  five  straightened 
fish-hooks  bound  in  a  cluster  at  the  end. 

Afterwards  we  all  waded  on  the  reef  attempting, 
in  native  fashion,  to  spear  the  fish  as  they  darted 
about  in  the  masses  of  coral,  but  we  were  not  very 
successful,  and  soon  were  glad  to  abandon  the  sport, 
since  several  of  us  were  badly  pricked  by  the 
sea-urchins,  the  spines  of  which  broke  off  short 
after  entering  the  flesh  and  produced  intense  pain. 

One  day  our  friends  on  shore  arranged  a  picnic 
in  our  honour  at  a  place  called  Fautawa,  which 
was  reached  by  about  an  hour's  drive  through 
magnificent  scenery.  The  road  for  a  great  part  of 
the  way  led  along  the  edge  of  a  mountain  stream, 
winding  through  a  deep  valley  in  which  Fautawa 
is  situated.  At  the  top  of  the  valley  there 
towered  above  us  a  tall  peak  the  summit  of  which 
was  composed  of  a  series  of  jagged  points  clustered 


A  PICNIC  219 

together  in  the  shape  of  a  crown.  Having  arrived 
at  our  destination  we  were  in  time  to  see  the  last 
of  the  festal  preparations  made  by  the  natives 
for  our  entertainment — the  removal  of  the  sucking- 
pig  from  the  oven.  The  oven  was  a  hole  dug  in 
the  ground  and  lined  with  large  stones  which  had 
been  previously  heated  in  a  fire.  Banana  leaves 
had  been  placed  over  the  hot  stones,  then  the  pig 
had  been  laid  in  whole  and  completely  buried, 
first  with  the  banana  leaves,  and  finally  with  a 
layer  of  earth.  Here  it  had  remained  for  an  hour 
or  more,  and  certainly  when  it  was  exhumed  it 
was  perfectly  cooked,  and  served  up  with  plantains 
it  made  a  most  palatable  dish.  We  were  given 
several  other  native  dishes,  of  which  the  most 
choice  perhaps  was  the  famous  "  cocoanut  salad. ': 
This  salad  is  made  of  the  heart  of  the  green  top  of 
a  cocoanut  tree,  and  as  each  salad  involves  the 
destruction  of  a  tree,  it  is  only  prepared  on  a  special 
occasion. 

After  a  few  days'  stay  at  Papeete  we  were 
invited  to  pay  a  visit  to  the  village  of  Tautira, 
which  is  reputed  to  be  the  most  picturesque  spot 
in  Tahiti.  We  gladly  accepted  the  invitation, 
and  got  under  weigh  early  one  morning.  Steam- 
ing close  to  the  land  we  had  a  fine  view  of  the 
wild  rugged  coast,  and  of  the  high  jagged  peaks 
with  their  cloud-covered  summits.  Many  water- 
falls, looking  in  the  distance  like  threads  of  silver, 
were  falling  sheer  down  the  precipitous  wall  of 


220       VOYAGES   OF  A  NATURALIST 

rock  which  forms  the  coast  in  this  part  of  Tahiti. 
Now  and  again  valleys  would  open  into  view, 
and  down  them  sparkling  rivers  rushed  into  the 
sea. 

It  was  late  in  the  afternoon  when  we  reached 
Tautira,  and  a  boat  at  once  put  off  from  the 
shore.  In  it  came  the  chief  of  the  village,  who 
piloted  us  safely  through  the  passage  in  the  reef. 
We  anchored  off  the  mouth  of  the  small  river, 
near  the  banks  of  which  the  village  of  Tautira  is 
built. 

The  barrier-reef  in  this  part  of  the  island  is 
almost  a-wash  at  high  tide  ;  it  is  nearly  semi- 
circular in  shape,  and  so  perfectly  flat  on  the  top 
that,  as  we  entered  the  passage,  we  seemed  to  be 
steaming  through  a  gateway  in  a  low  wall. 

The  shore  is  a  strip  of  red-coloured  sand,  with 
a  narrow  belt  of  cocoanut  palms.  Behind  the 
palm  trees  lies  the  village,  and  beyond  rises  a 
magnificent  range  of  hills  clothed  to  the  summit 
with  almost  impenetrable  forests.  The  houses  are 
well  built,  of  native  pattern  ;  the  walls  are  made 
of  upright  bamboos,  with  a  half -inch  space  between 
each  to  allow  a  free  passage  of  air  into  the  house. 
Rows  of  mats  are  so  arranged  that  they  can  be 
let  down  to  cover  the  walls  in  case  of  rain,  while 
at  other  times  they  are  rolled  up  under  the  eaves. 
All  the  houses  are  thatched  with  leaves  of  either 
the  cocoanut  palm  or  pandanus. 

The  surroundings  of  Tautira  are  very  beautiful. 


MHHMM 


O 
CI 


EH 


CLIMBING  FOR   COCOANUTS  221 

The  ground  is  covered  with  a  thick  growth  of 
green  grass,  studded  with  hibiscus  and  other 
flowering  plants,  while  orange  trees  grow  in  great 
profusion. 

In  Tahiti,  as  well  as  in  most  of  the  South  Sea 
Islands,  great  numbers  of  cocoanuts  are  grown, 
and  after  being  dried  for  copra  are  shipped  in  large 
quantities  to  Europe.  We  were  much  interested 
in  the  different  methods  of  gathering  the  nuts  in 
various  islands.  In  Tahiti  the  natives  climb  the 
trees  with  the  help  of  a  strip  of  green  fibrous  bark 
torn  off  the  stem  of  a  hibiscus  tree.  After  knotting 
the  two  ends  together,  the  climber  slips  his  feet 
half  through  the  circle,  and,  standing  with  his  legs 
apart,  so  as  to  stretch  the  thong  tight,  ascends  the 
tree  in  a  series  of  leaps,  with  a  foot  on  each  side  of 
the  trunk.  A  practised  climber  will  thus  mount 
trees  of  a  very  considerable  height  with  a  celerity 
and  ease  which  do  not  suggest  the  long  practice 
actually  required.  On  making  a  trial  myself, 
I  found  it  difficult  to  climb  even  so  much  as  a  foot 
from  the  ground. 

In  its  fresh  green  state  the  cocoanut  provides 
a  most  refreshing  drink,  but  as  it  grows  older  the 
"  milk  "  hardens  and  forms  the  white  kernel  with 
which  we  are  all  familiar.  This  kernel  is  the 
celebrated  copra,  and  is  commercially  put  to 
many  different  uses.  In  Tahiti  it  is  used  for  sauces 
and  for  cocoanut  oil.  One  sauce,  which  was  served 
with  fish  at  the  above-mentioned  picnic,  although 


222       VOYAGES   OF  A  NATURALIST 

compounded  of  scraped  nut  and  sea-water,  was 
really  quite  palatable. 

At  Tautira  one  of  the  sailors  brought  me  the 
dried  shell  of  a  cocoanut  which  he  told  me  was  full 
of  lizards.  I  at  once  plugged  the  "  eye-holes  " 
and  took  the  nutshell  on  board,  where  a  careful 
examination  showed  that  it  contained  136  lizard 
eggs,  294  empty  egg-shells,  and  13  newly-hatched 
lizards.  It  would  seem,  therefore,  that  many 
females  of  this  species*  repair  to  the  same  place 
to  deposit  their  eggs.  The  eggs  themselves  were 
found  to  be  in  all  stages  of  incubation,  from 
"  newly-laid  "  to  shells  containing  perfect  lizards. 
I  afterwards  found  several  hundreds  of  eggs  of 
this  species  in  a  hole  in  the  ground,  close  to  the 
sea,  at  Papeete.  Butterflies  were  very  scarce 
on  Tahiti ;  at  Papeete  we  met  with  only  one 
species  ;|  and  on  a  small  coral  island  some  miles 
from  Tautira,  with  but  one  more.  J  A  large 
hawk-moth,  much  resembling  the  well-known 
convolvulus  hawk-moth,  was  caught  on  board 
while  we  were  at  anchor.  Five  species  of  Micro- 
lepidoptera  were  also  caught  at  the  poop  light. 
These  have  been  determined  by  Lord  Wasingham, 
who  has  described  one  as  a  new  species  under  the 
name  of  Pyroderces  crawjordi. 

Mosquitoes§    were    extremely    troublesome    on 
shore,  but  very  few  appeared  on  the  ship  until 

*  Lygosoma  cyanurum.  f  Nipara  eleutha  var.  walkeri. 

J  Hypolimnas  bolina  var.  thomsoni.  §  Stegomyia  jasciata. 


HABITS   OF  LAND-CRABS  223 

after  we  left  the  island,  when  we  discovered  that 
they  had  been  breeding  freely  in  a  can  of  water 
containing   a  growing  ti   plant. 

Everywhere  along  the  sea-shore  and  about  the 
villages  the  ground  was  honeycombed  with  the 
burrows  of  land-crabs,  and  in  some  places  the 
whole  surface  appeared  to  be  moving  with  these 
creatures.  At  the  least  alarm  they  popped  into 
their  holes,  from  which  they  never  strayed  far 
during  the  day.  When  chased,  a  crab  would  often 
hurry  into  the  wrong  burrow,  and  be  ejected  im- 
mediately by  the  rightful  owner,  but  the  inhospi- 
tality  did  not  help  one  to  catch  them,  owing  to 
the  speed  with  which  they  vanished  ultimately 
underground.  If  one  stood  quite  still  they  would 
reappear  at  the  mouth  of  the  burrow,  waving 
their  stalk-eyes  in  all  directions  on  the  look-out 
for  danger.  I  caught  one  by  cutting  it  off  from 
its  burrow  and  driving  it  against  a  fallen  tree, 
where  it  turned  at  bay,  rolling  its  eyes  and  waving 
its  claws  in  a  formidable  manner. 

Some  of  the  smaller  species  of  land-crabs 
on  these  islands  have  yellow,  others  bright  blue, 
claws,  and  one  gains  a  striking  impression  of 
colour  when  some  hundreds  of  these  crabs  wave 
their  bright  claws  as  they  run  over  the  dried  mud 
close  to  the  sea. 

During  our  stay  at  Tautira  our  friends  arranged 
a  native  concert.  This  consisted  of  the  singing  of 
"  himinees."     About  one  hundred  natives  sat  in 


224       VOYAGES   OF  A  NATURALIST 

a  semi-circle  cross-legged  on  the  grass,  facing  a 
conductor  who  gave  out  the  words  of  the  song  in  a 
loud  voice.  The  subject  of  the  song,  usually 
chosen  on  the  spur  of  the  moment,  refers  to  some 
topic  of  local  interest ;  on  this  occasion  the  arrival 
of  the  "  Valhalla  "  was  the  chosen  theme.  The 
singing  was  somewhat  weird,  but  by  no  means 
displeasing,  and  the  entertainment  would  be 
varied  frequently  by  the  conductor,  who  would 
leave  his  seat  and  run  a  few  paces  towards  us, 
shouting  and  stamping,  before  he  turned  again 
to  the  performers  to  urge  them  to  greater  efforts. 

The  day  before  we  left  Tautira  the  ship  was 
visited  by  a  continual  stream  of  canoes,  which  came 
from  far  and  near,  bringing  gifts  of  fruit,  etc.,  to 
Lord  Crawford.  By  nightfall  the  "  Valhalla  "  had 
the  appearance  of  a  huge  vegetable  and  fruit 
market ;  there  must  have  been  at  least  a  ton  of 
bananas,  oranges,  plantain,  cocoanuts  and  other 
fruit  on  board,  as  well  as  several  Muscovy  ducks 
and  a  little  piebald  pig.  When  all  was  aboard  the 
chief  of  Tautira,  one  of  the  finest  looking  men  I 
have  ever  seen,  made  a  speech,  and  then  formally 
presented  the  gifts. 

At  ten  o'clock  the  next  morning  we  left  Tautira 
for  Papeete  again,  to  complete  our  coaling,  which 
took  a  long  time  owing  to  the  scarcity  of  lighters. 

During  our  last  day  at  Tahiti  we  were  confined 
to  the  ship  by  one  of  the  heaviest  storms  I  have 
ever  witnessed,  the  rain  falling   in   such  torrents 


HOSPITABLE   TAHITIANS  225 

that  in  a  few  minutes  the  streets  were  literally 
full  of  water. 

Early  on  the  morning  of  17th  April,  1903,  we 
left  Tahiti,  and  in  a  few  minutes  the  island  was 
completely  hidden  in  rain  clouds.  During  our 
visit  we  were  treated  with  the  greatest  kindness 
by  the  inhabitants,  who,  with  the  characteristic 
hospitality  of  the  Tahitian,  gave  up  the  whole  of 
their  time  in  order  that  we  might  see  the  many 
beauties  of  their  island  home  ;  and  our  stay,  which 
had  been  all  too  short,  will  ever  be  recollected  as 
one  of  the  most  delightful  experiences  enjoyed 
during  the  voyages  of   "  Valhalla." 

Shortly  after  leaving  Tahiti  on  the  morning  of 
17th  April  we  passed  close  to  Eimeo,  or  Morea,  as 
it  is  now  called.  We  had  made  arrangements  to 
visit  this  island,  but  our  plans  were  upset  by 
unavoidable  circumstances,  and  only  a  distant 
view  of  its  beauties  was  obtained.  It  rises  almost 
perpendicularly  from  the  sea ;  the  summit  is 
composed  of  a  series  of  peaks  so  sharp  and  even 
that  they  somewhat  resemble  the  teeth  of  a 
gigantic  comb.  Through  one  of  these  peaks 
there  is  a  large  boring  known  as  the  Giant's  Spear 
Hole,  which  is  discernible  from  Papeete  Harbour, 
some  twenty  miles  distant. 


CHAPTER    XXIII. 

TUTUILA   ISLAND,    SAMOA. 

After  leaving  Tahiti  our  course  was  laid  for 
Tutuila  Island,  one  of  the  Samoan  group,  and  six 
days  later  we  arrived  off  the  mouth  of  the  harbour 
of  Pago-Pago.*  After  waiting  in  vain  for  a  pilot 
we  entered  the  harbour  without  one,  and  steamed 
through  the  narrow  intricate  passage  which  ex- 
tends for  some  distance  towards  the  centre  of  the 
island  where  the  town  is  situated. 

Tutuila  belongs  to  the  United  States  of  America, 
and  is  used  principally  as  a  coaling  station  for  their 
ships,  and  the  harbour  of  Pago-Pago  is  undoubtedly 
one  of  the  best  anchorages  in  the  South  Pacific 
Islands,  owing  to  its  sheltered  position. 

Our  visit  was  made  solely  for  the  purpose  of 
obtaining  coal,  but,  being  unable  to  get  a  supply 
there,  we  were  forced  to  leave  almost  immediately 
for  Apia.  Thus  only  one  day  was  spent  ashore, 
and  it  was  impossible  in  the  short  time  to  do  much 
in  the  way  of  collecting. 

*  Pronounced  "  Pango-Pango." 


A  WET  CLIMATE  227 

Tutuila  is  apparently  of  volcanic  origin,  and  the 
harbour  is  the  centre  of  an  ancient  crater.  From 
information  given  to  us  I  imagine  that  the  highest 
point  in  the  island,  the  whole  of  which  is  covered 
with  dense  forest,  is  about  2500  feet  above 
sea-level.  The  climate  is  very  hot  and  damp, 
and  the  annual  rainfall  is  considerable.  During 
our  stay  rain  fell  heavily  and  without  intermission, 
so  that  collecting  under  these  conditions  was  by 
no  means  easy  or  pleasant.  A  butterfly  net  was 
soaked  through  in  a  very  few  minutes,  and 
cartridges  swelled  to  such  an  extent  that  shooting 
was  almost  out  of  the  question.  I  managed  to 
keep  a  few  dry  by  carrying  them  in  a  sponge-bag 
— a  most  useful  plan  in  a  damp  climate. 

Butterflies  and  moths  were  extremely  numerous, 
and  a  considerable  number  was  obtained  in  spite 
of  the  wet  weather.  A  large  sphinx  moth  was 
hovering  round  the  flowering  bushes,  apparently 
undisturbed  by  the  rain,  and  several  smaller 
kinds  of  moths  were  continually  beaten  out  of  the 
soaking  wet  grass.  Birds  were  fairly  abundant;  the 
most  numerous  being  a  small  greenish-coloured 
species,  with  a  moderately  long  curved  bill,  the 
gape  of  which  was  adorned  with  two  orange- 
coloured  wattles  which  extended  over  the  cheeks. 
This  bird — Ptilotis  carunculata — is  peculiar  to 
the  Samoan  Islands,  though  other  species,  more  or 
less  closely  allied,  are  found  on  the  Fijis  and  in 
Australia  and  New  Guinea. 


228       VOYAGES   OF  A  NATURALIST 

A  fine  kingfisher,*  apparently  restricted  to  the 
wooded  hillsides  but  common  there,  was  feeding 
entirely  upon  insects,  especially  the  larvce  of  some 
species  of  moth.  In  the  cocoanut  palms  a  small 
paroquet  was  seen,  but  not  obtained,  and  a  little 
sunbird,|  of  a  vivid  scarlet  and  black,  was  feeding 
among  the  blossoms  of  the  trees. 

The  most  striking  mammal  was  the  fruit  bat, £ 
numbers  of  which  were  seen  flying  about  over  the 
trees  even  in  broad  daylight,  while  at  dusk  so 
many  of  these  huge  bats  came  down  from  the  high 
forests,  that  we  judged  there  must  be  a  large 
colony  of  them  at  no  great  distance  from 
Pago-Pago. 

Dr.  Macdonald  and  I  climbed  a  pass  between 
two  high  peaks.  For  some  distance  the  path  led 
through  a  plantation  of  cocoanut  trees,  where 
one  of  the  natives  engaged  in  gathering  the  fruit 
offered  to  climb  a  tree  and  procure  nuts  for  us. 
Armed  with  a  huge  knife  he  approached  a  cocoa- 
nut  tree,  and  with  a  sudden  downward  and  side- 
ward stroke  cut  a  small  notch  in  the  bark,  into 
which  he  put  the  toe  of  one  foot  while  he  cut  another 
notch  with  great  rapidity  a  little  above  the  first, 
then  cutting  notch  after  notch  with  marvellous 
rapidity  he  ascended  the  tree. 

While  drinking  the  juice  or  "  milk "  of  the 
cocoanuts,  we  entered  into  conversation  with  this 

*  Halcyon  pealii.  f  Myzomela  nigriventris. 

%  Pteropus  ruficollis. 


FRUIT     BATS  229 

man.  He  was  a  finely  built  fellow  ;  except  for  a 
waist-cloth  of  tappa*  he  wore  no  clothing,  but 
nearly  the  whole  of  his  body  was  covered  with 
tatooing.  On  one  arm  we  noticed  a  number  of 
tatooed  stripes,  and  on  asking  the  reason  for  these 
bands  we  were  informed  that  they  signified  the 
number  of  wives  he  possessed.  He  had,  as  far  as 
I  can  remember,  seven  such  stripes. 

After  leaving  the  cocoanut  grove  we  entered  the 
forest,  and  a  short  time  afterwards  gained  the 
crest  of  the  island.  Here  a  fine  view  was  obtained. 
On  one  side  Pago-Pago  harbour,  looking  like  a 
small  pond  below  us,  on  the  other,  the  far  side  of 
the  island  sloping  gradually  downward,  towards 
a  large  village  situated  on  the  sea-shore. 

At  the  top  of  this  pass  we  saw  numbers  of  noddy 
terns,  t  also  a  few  bosun  or  tropic  birds,  but  no 
specimens  were  obtained.  Fruit  bats  were  very 
numerous,  and  were  continually  sailing  high  over 
our  heads,  evidently  disturbed  by  the  sounds  of 
the  shots  we  had  fired. 

Throughout  the  day  we  were  unable  to  get 
within  shot  of  the  fruit  bats,  and  as  I  much  wished 
to  obtain  a  specimen,  I  landed  again  late  in  the 
evening,  but,  although  they  were  then  flying  lower, 
I  did  not  secure  one.  I  afterwards  shot  one 
example  on  Upolu  Island,  and  have  no  doubt 
that   it    is   the   same   species   as   that   inhabiting 

*  A  strong,  stiff  cloth  made  from  the  bark  of  the  bread-fruit  tree. 

t  Anous  8tolidu8. 

R 


230       VOYAGES   OF  A  NATURALIST 

Tutuila,  as  these  two  islands  are  in  sight  of  one 
another,  and  fruit-bats  can  fly  great  distances. 
The  damage  these  creatures  cause  to  the  cocoanut 
and  banana  trees  must  be  very  great. 

A  number  of  natives  gathered  together  on  the 
shore  to  watch  our  departure.  The  rain  was  falling 
in  torrents,  and  removing  their  scanty  clothing 
they  carried  it  under  their  arms  rolled  up  in  banana 
leaves.  Nevertheless,  most  of  them  had  umbrellas 
to  protect  their  heads  from  the  rain — a  ridiculous 
sight  but  a  very  necessary  precaution,  for  it  is 
the  fashion  in  the  Samoan  Islands  to  dress  the  hair 
with  lime,  which,  when  exposed  to  the  rain,  runs 
down  into  the  eyes  and  often  causes  blindness. 
Most  of  the  natives  are  blind  in  one  eye  from  this 
cause,  and  consequently  considerable  care  has  to 
be  taken  to  keep  the  head  dry  during  wet  weather. 
The  men  without  umbrellas  kept  their  hair  tightly 
bound  up  and  well  covered  with  banana  leaves. 

In  Tutuila  we  first  saw  that  dread  disease 
"  Elephantiasis,''  which  is  said  to  arise  from  the 
bites  of  mosquitoes.  In  these  islands  nearly  25 
per  cent,  of  the  inhabitants  were  suffering  from 
this  disease,  some  having  enlarged  arms,  others 
legs  swollen  to  the  size  of  a  bolster,  while  others 
again  were  afflicted  in  various  parts  of  the  body. 
A  man,  apparently  strong  and  well,  but  with  one 
arm  twice  the  thickness  of  the  other,  was  no 
uncommon  sight. 


CHAPTER    XXIV. 

UPOLU    ISLAND,    SAMOA. 

About  twelve  hours  after  leaving  Tutuila  we 
entered  the  harbour  of  Apia,  the  capital  of  Upolu, 
and  the  principal  town  of  the  Samoan  group. 
Rain  was  falling  heavily  and  the  island  and  harbour 
had  a  dismal  appearance.  Much  wreckage  was 
lying  about  on  the  shore,  a  forcible  reminder  of 
the  fearful  hurricane  when  H.M.S.  "  Calliope ' 
was  the  only  vessel  to  escape  out  of  the  many 
anchored  in  the  harbour  at  the  time. 

The  anchorage  is  by  no  means  good.  Reefs 
are  plentiful,  and  some  of  them  are  just  a- wash 
at  low  water,  and  there  are  no  islets  or  pro- 
montories sufficient  to  shelter  ships  at  anchor, 
should  there  be  an  on-shore  wind. 

On  some  of  the  reefs  we  saw  some  natives 
fly-fishing.  Standing  up  to  the  waist  in  water, 
they  were  flogging  away  with  what  seemed  to  be 
indifferent  success.  We  afterwards  had  an  oppor- 
tunity of  examining  the  tackle  used  by  the  Samoans. 
It  proved  to  consist  of  a  stout  bamboo  rod,  to  the 
point  of  which  a  strong  line  was  attached  ;    at 

r  2 


232       VOYAGES   OF  A  NATURALIST 

the  end  of  the  line  a  piece  of  wood  about  six  inches 
long  was  tied  crossways  ;  and  to  each  end  of  this 
a  black  feather-fly  of  large  proportions  was  tied. 
These  two  flies,  not  to  mention  the  piece  of  wood 
to  which  they  were  attached,  seemed  quite  enough 
to  scare  away  any  fish,  but  for  all  that  we  saw  many 
small  fish  of  about  half-a-pound  weight  taken  by 
these  means. 

Wishing  to  know  the  regulations  with  regard  to 
shooting  on  the  island,  Dr.  Macdonald  and  I  visited 
the  vice-consul.  During  our  conversation  with 
him  we  learnt  that  he  had  been  many  years  in 
the  Samoan  Islands,  and  as  I  was  most  anxious 
to  see  a  living  example  of  the  tooth-billed  pigeon,* 
or  "  manu  mea,"  as  it  is  called  by  the  natives, 
I  closely  questioned  the  consul  about  it.  He  told 
us  that  it  was  not  uncommon  in  some  parts  of  the 
interior  of  the  island  where  it  appears  to  live  in 
colonies.  The  nearest  place  where  he  knew  it 
could  be  found  was,  however,  a  two  days'  journey 
from  Apia,  and  as  we  were  only  to  stay  at  the 
island  for  three  days  an  expedition  thither  was  out 
of  the  question.  I  asked  him  if  he  could  at  once 
send  a  native  to  get  a  living  example  ;  he  promised 
to  do  so,  but  the  man  did  not  return  before  our 
departure. 

The  following  morning  I  went  for  a  long  walk 
on  the  sea-shore,  returning  by  a  path  through 
the  cultivated  land.     The  sandy  beach  swarmed 

*  Diduncuhis  strigirostris. 


THE   HOSPITABLE     SAMOAN         233 

with  shore-birds,  sandpipers*  and  a  small  species 
of  golden  ploverf — the  latter  to  be  seen  in  vast 
numbers — were  the  most  conspicuous.  At  the 
mouth  of  a  small  river  I  saw  some  rails,  and 
amongst  the  birds  I  shot  was  a  brilliant  scarlet 
and  black  sunbird.  J  The  small  parrot  seen  on 
Tutuila  was  also  observed  here  in  the  cocoanut 
trees,  but  owing  to  its  extreme  shyness  no 
specimens  were  obtained. 

During  this  walk,  which  led  me  some  distance 
from  the  town,  I  was  able  to  get  an  idea  of  the 
hospitable  nature  of  the  unspoilt  Samoan  native. 
Happening  to  enter  a  village  on  the  banks  of  a 
small  river,  I  was  at  once  accosted  by  the  head- 
man, who,  by  signs,  invited  me  into  his  house 
for  refreshment.  The  house,  like  all  those  in 
Samoa,  was  little  more  than  a  roof  supported  on 
long  beams  of  wood,  the  walls  being  merely  mats, 
which  could  be  let  down  in  bad  weather.  The 
floor  was  covered  with  large  mats  which,  like  those 
of  the  walls,  were  made  of  the  leaves  of  the 
pandanus,  or  screw-pine,  most  neatly  and  strongly 
woven  together.  The  people  sleep  on  the  floor, 
their  heads,  or  rather  necks,  resting  on  a  thick 
bamboo  pillar,  raised  about  an  inch  from  the  floor 
by  means  of  long  crossed  pieces  of  wood,  shaped 
like  the  letter  X,  and  fastened  one  at  each  end  of 
the   bamboo. 

*  Totanus  incanus.  f  Charadrius  fulvus. 

X  Myzomela  nigriventris. 


234       VOYAGES   OF   A  NATURALIST 

The  kindly  chief  gave  me  oranges,  bananas, 
and  cocoanuts,  and  after  the  repast,  clapped  his 
hands  for  "  kava '  to  be  brought  in.  I  was 
then  enabled  to  have  my  first  taste  of  the  national 
drink  of  the  Samoan  and  Fiji  Islanders,  and  as  I 
have  never  seen  a  full  description  of  the  manner 
in  which  kava  is  prepared,  or  the  ceremony  of  its 
drinking,  I  will  describe  here  what  I  saw. 

A  large  wooden  bowl,  its  surface  highly  polished 
by  constant  use,  supported  on  four  short  wooden 
legs,  was  first  placed  in  position  ;  then  facing  it 
we  all  sat  cross-legged  on  the  ground  in  a  semi- 
circle, and  when  all  were  seated  the  "  taupau  " 
or  chief  dancing  girl  of  the  village,  to  whom  only 
the  preparation  of  the  kava  is  entrusted,  entered, 
and  took  her  seat  facing  us  behind  the  bowl. 
A  lump  of  kava*  was  next  produced  and  cut  up  into 
pieces  of  about  the  size  of  a  walnut ;  these  were 
beaten  into  shreds  between  two  stones,  t  and  then, 
being  placed  in  the  bowl,  were  covered  with  water 
brought  in  cocoanut  shells  from  the  nearest 
spring.  When  the  bowl  was  nearly  three  parts 
full  of  water,  a  bunch  of  fibres,  made  from  the 
inner  bark  of  the  hibiscus,  was  handed  to  the  girl, 
who  after  vigorously  stirring  the  liquid,  scooped 


* 


The  dried  root  of  a  pepper  tree. 


t  Formerly  the  shredding  of  the  kava  root  was  done  by  the  "  taupaus  ,: 
chewing  the  root,  but  this  custom  is  now  prohibited  by  law.  In  one 
village,  situated  some  distance  from  the  capital,  I  saw  kava  prepared 
in  the  original  way ;  but  so  cleverly  and  quickly  was  it  done  that,  had 
I  not  been  especially  looking  out  for  it,  I  should  not  have  noticed 
anything  unusual 


CEREMONY  OF   KAVA   DRINKING   235 

out  a  mass  of  sodden  kava  root  and  handed  the 
fibres  to  an  attendant,  who  carried  them  outside. 
This  proceeding  having  been  repeated  several 
times,  the  kava  was  declared,  amidst  a  clapping 
of  hands,  to  be  ready.  The  taupau  thereupon 
dipped  a  large  cocoanut  shell,  holding  about  a  pint, 
into  the  bowl  and  carried  it  first  to  the  most  im- 
portant guest,  and  then  to  all  the  others  in  turn. 
The  cup  is  delivered  with  a  most  graceful  down- 
ward and  then  upward  swing  of  the  arm,  and  the 
guest,  still  sitting  cross-legged,  takes  the  cup  and 
calling  loudly  "  Manuia,"  drains  it  at  a  draught. 
No  sipping  is  allowed,  and  to  anyone  not  accustomed 
to  kava  the  experience  is  by  no  means  pleasant. 
Kava  looks  like  soapy  water,  and  the  taste  of  it — 
well,  anyone  desirous  of  ascertaining  what  it 
tastes  like  can  make  a  very  good  imitation  by 
mixing  a  dessert-spoonful  of  "  Gregory  '  powder 
in  a  tumbler  of  water.  Having  drained  the 
contents,  one  passes  the  cocoanut  shell  back  to 
the  donor.  This  may  be  done  in  two  ways.  An 
experienced  drinker  throws  the  shell  in  such  a 
manner  that  it  spins  round  in  the  air  and  falls 
"  dead "  at  the  foot  of  the  bowl.  A  less  ex- 
perienced guest  had  better  hand  it  back  with  a 
bow  as  the  easiest  way  out  of  a  difficulty,  for  it 
is  considered  the  height  of  bad  manners  if  the  cup 
is  thrown  so  as  to  roll  even  a  short  way  past  the 
kava  bowl. 

Europeans  who  have  lived  for  several  years  in 


236       VOYAGES   OF  A   NATURALIST 

these  islands  assured  us  that  they  became  so 
accustomed  to  drinking  kava  that  they  acquired 
a  taste  for  it,  but  we  never  took  it  without  an 
inward  shiver. 

A  too  liberal  indulgence  of  this  drink  causes 
temporary  paralysis  of  the  legs  from  the  knees 
downwards,  as  well  as  a  numbing  sensation  of  the 
tongue,  though  we  were  told  that  even  at  this  stage 
the  brain  remains  perfectly  clear. 

The  vice-consul  had  very  kindly  invited  me  to 
visit  his  farm,  about  three  miles  from  Apia,  and 
there  I  spent  the  second  day  of  our  stay.  It  was 
very  warm  work  walking  thither,  as  the  whole  way 
was  uphill  under  a  blazing  sun.  Arriving  at  the 
farm,  I  struck  off  into  the  forest  with  a  guide  in 
search  of  birds.  The  most  numerous  and  probably 
the  most  beautifully  coloured  of  all  the  birds  in 
Samoa  is  a  small  dove,*  of  about  the  size  of  a 
turtle-dove,  with  an  emerald  green  back,  a  ruby 
red  crown,  and  a  brilliantly-coloured  breast  of 
several  shades  of  red  and  yellow. 

We  climbed  up  the  hillside  for  a  considerable 
distance,  and  from  the  highest  point  we  had  a 
distant  view  of  the  grave  of  Robert  Louis 
Stevenson,  who  was  buried  on  the  top  of  the  hill 
overlooking  Apia  Harbour.  I  was  most  anxious 
to  visit  this  spot,  but  we  were  forced  to  abandon 
the  idea  as  the  day  was  drawing  to  a  close. 

The  day  before  our  departure  from  Apia  the 

#  Ptilopus  fasciatus. 


THE  KING  OF  SAMOA  237 

King  of  Samoa,  Mataafa,  paid  a  visit  to  Lord 
Crawford  on  board  the  yacht.  He  was  quite 
unexpected,  and  at  the  time  we  were  entertaining 
a  large  party  of  native  chiefs  and  their  families, 
about  thirty  of  whom  were  sitting  in  the  saloon. 
Suddenly  the  king  was  announced,  and  we  were 
somewhat  astonished  to  see  all  our  guests  vacate 
their  chairs  and  sit  on  the  floor.  This,  however, 
so  they  told  us  afterwards,  is  the  correct  thing  to 
do  when  in  the  presence  of  their  king.  He  was 
a  very  striking  looking  old  man,  dressed  in  a 
plain  white  coat  and  kilt,  his  only  ornament  being 
a  thick  gold  chain,  which  he  wore  round  his  neck. 

The  Samoan  Islands,  with  the  exception  of 
Tutuila,  belong  to  Germany,  and  are  ruled  by  a 
Governor.  So  Mataafa  is  now  a  king  in  name 
only.  Nevertheless  he  appears  to  be  an  im- 
portant personage  amongst  his  subjects,  all  of 
whom  treat  him  with  the  greatest  respect. 

Our  last  evening  in  Apia  was  spent  at  a  native 
dance,  which  provided  one  of  the  most  picturesque 
scenes  we  witnessed  during  this  voyage.  We  sat 
in  a  semi-circle  round  a  large  covered  enclosure, 
and  faced  the  dancers,  of  whom  there  were  about 
forty,  all  in  native  dress. 

The  Samoan  "  dance,"  or  "  Siva,"  as  it  is  called, 
consists  chiefly  of  a  series  of  arm  exercises 
accompanied  by  a  weird  chanting  and  clapping 
of  hands.  The  proceedings  were  brought  to  a 
close  by  a  kava  drink,  for  which  the  most  remark- 


9 


<s 


\ 

^&  It 


4- 


«0 


s 


ADIEU  TO  THE   SOUTH   SEAS       239 

ably  beautiful  cups  were  used.  They  were  made 
from  shells  of  cocoanuts  polished  and  re-polished 
to  such  an  extent  that  they  had  become  scarcely 
thicker  than  eggshells,  and  had  darkened  to  a 
deep  black  colour.  We  were  informed  that  these 
cups  were  very  valuable  owing  to  the  great  amount 
of  labour  required  for  their  manufacture  ;  they 
were  only  used  on  very  special  occasions. 

On  3rd  May,  four  days  after  leaving  the  Samoan 
Islands,  the  "  Valhalla  "  came  to  anchor  off  the 
town  of  Suva,  the  capital  of  the  Fiji  Islands.  A 
very  short  time  was  spent  here,  and  we  conse- 
quently saw  very  little  of  interest.  The  town 
of  Suva  is  as  unlike  a  South  Sea  Island  town  as  can 
possibly   be   imagined.       Shops   of   all   kinds   are 

scattered  along  the  whole  length  of  the  sea-front, 

©  © 

and  it  is  almost  impossible  to  realize  that 
cannibalism  was  once  rampant  in  this  island. 

Sailing  from  Suva  on  6th  May,  1903,  we  bade 
adieu  to  the  South  Sea  Islands,  amongst  which 
so  many  delightful  and  never-to-be-forgotten  days 
had  been  spent.  Every  year  these  islands  are 
more  and  more  visited  by  ships  from  all  parts  of 
the  world,  and  each  year  brings  to  their  inhabit- 
ants the  very  doubtful  blessings  of  civilization. 
The  people  living  in  the  less  accessible  parts, 
although  quickly  becoming  spoiled  by  European 
influence,  are  quite  superior,  not  only  in  appear- 
ance, but  in  manners  and  physique,  to  those  of 
the  larger  towns. 


INDEX. 


mbbotti,  Cinnyri8,   111. 

76 is,   119. 

Rallus,    108. 

acunhae,  Nesospiza,   66. 
cequinoctialis,    Majaqueus,    71. 
(ethiopica,  Ibis,  78. 

alba,    Gygis,    14,    51,    56,    203,    210, 

212,    216. 
Albatroses,  158,  187. 

(Diomedea  chlororhynca),     65, 

67,  68,  71. 

(D.  exulans),  65,   158. 

(D.  fuliginosa),  65,  68,  72,  158. 

(D.  melanophrys),  72. 

albiceps,  Elainea,    166. 
Aldabra  Island,  114-124. 
aldabranus,  Dicrurus,  117. 

Nesacanthus,  116. 

Turtur,    117. 

aldabrensis,   Caprimulgus,  123. 
Ambre,  Cape,  Camp,  Foret  d',  93. 
americana,  Rhea,   167. 
americanus,  Podiceps,   185. 
amgulifer,  Dromicus,  154. 

Ani,  black,   147. 

Anjouan  (Comoro  Islands),  88. 

antarcticus,  Fagus,  163. 

Ants,  29,  31. 

Apia,   231,   236. 

aquila,  Fregata,  14,  48,  60,  102,  216. 

ardeola,  Dromas,  85,  118. 

ariel,  Fregata,   49. 

arminjoniana,   (Estrelata,  157. 

Assumption    Island,    107-113. 

assumptionis,    Centropus,     110. 

Turtur,    110. 

Astove  (coral  island),  123. 
atratus,  Cathartes,  30. 
atriceps,  Phalacrocorax,    167. 
aura,    Cathartes,    30. 
auricapUla,   Dendroeca,    147. 
auriculata,  Zenaida,    15. 

Bahia,  20-36. 

barbatus,  Chrysomitris,   167. 

barkleyi,  Coracopsis,   131. 


Barracuda  (fish),  106. 
Beeches  :      Antarctic    (Fagus    ant- 
arcticus), 163. 

evergreen  (F.  betuloides),  163. 

Bee-eaters,     green  (Merops     super- 

ciliosus),    91. 
Beri-beri  disease,  35. 
betuloides,  Fagus,  163. 
bicolor,  Euethia,   141. 
~B\a,ckh\x&(T  urdus  magellanicus),112. 
bolina,  Hypolimnas,  222. 
Boobies,  3,  4,  10. 
brachypterus,    171. 
braziliensis,   Nettion,   33. 

Scops,  30. 

Bulbul  (Ixocincla  crass irostris),  131. 
Buntings    (Zonotrichia   canicapilla). 

166. 
Butterflies,  16,  21,  27,  213,  227. 

(Hypolimnas  bolina),  222. 

(Nipara  eleutha),  222. 

"  Buzi  "    (Comoro    Islands),    87. 

cana,  Agapornis,  87,  97. 
cayiescens,    Totanus,    85. 
canicapilla,  Zonotrichia,  1 66. 
"  Cape  hen  "  (Majaqueus  cequinoc- 
tialis),  71. 
Cape  Town,  71. 
capensis,  Motacilla,  80. 

Phalacrocorax,  11. 

Caracara,   20. 

carolinensis,   Galeoscoptes,    149. 
carunculata,   Ptilotis,    227. 
Casuarina  trees,  101,  115. 
Catamarans,    19. 

Cats,  29,  203. 
"  Cavalli  "   (fish),   6. 
Cayman  Islands,  144-154. 
caymanensis,   Mdancrpes,    149. 

Quiscalus,    151. 

chihnsis,  Megalestris,   162,   167. 
clil  ovarii  yncha,     Diomedea,     65,     67, 

fis,  71. 
Churruca  Bay,    173. 
cinereus,  Tachycn rs,  163. 


242 


VOYAGES  OF   A  NATURALIST 


Cocoanut  trees,  18.  219,  228,  233. 
"  Coco  de  Mer,"  132. 
Collocalia,  2 1 6. 
comorensis,  Coracopsis,   89. 

Pteropus,   87. 

Comoro  Islands,  82-92. 

Condors    {Sarcorhamphus    gryphus), 

163. 
coppingeri,  Turtur,  102. 
Copra,  221. 
Cormorants,  71,  173. 

{Phalacrocorax   atriceps),    167. 

(P.   capensis),    77. 

(P.  neglectus),  77. 

(P.  vigua),  183. 

coronata,  Dendroeca,    147. 
corvina,  Terpsipkone,  130. 
Cosmoledo   (coral  island),    123. 
Crab -plovers  {Dromas  ardeola),   85, 

118. 
Crabs,  3,  181  ;    land-crabs,   43,    45, 

58,  91,  223  ;  robber-crabs  [Birgus 

latro),  105,  112,  122  ;  spider-crabs, 

180. 
crassirostris,  Ixocincla,   131. 
crawfordi,   Buteroides,    111. 
Corvina,    160. 

Dendroeca,  154. 

Gygis,  44. 

Pyroderces,  222. 

creatopus,    Pufflnus,    189. 
cristata,  Coryihornis,  85. 

Crows  {Corvus  scapulatus),  102,  109. 
Cuckoos  {Coccyzus  maynardi).   148. 

lark-heeled,  96,  110. 

Curieuse   (island),    130. 
Curlews,    85. 
Curlew-Sandpipers,  83. 
cyanurum,    Lygosoma,  209,   222. 

dacunhae,  Pelecanoides,  67. 
Dassen  Island,  70-81. 
delicata,  Gallinago,  33. 
demur sus,  Spheniscus,  161. 
depressa,  Nertera,  69. 
desmursi,  Sylviorthorynchus,   186. 
Diego  Suarez,  92. 
discolor,  Dendroeca,  147. 
Dolphins,  162. 

dominicanus,  Larus,  78,  190. 
Dotterel  {Eudromias  modesta),  172. 
Doves  {Turtur  aldahr anus),  117,  123. 

{T.  assumptionis),   109. 

(T.  coppingeri),  102. 

{Ptilopus  fasciatus),   236. 

(Zenaida  auriculata),   15. 


Easter  Island,  192-206. 
ecaudatus,  Centetes,  90,  98. 
Eden  Harbour,   182. 
Egrets,   sacred   (Demiegretta  sacra), 

117,  217. 
Eimeo  (island),  216,  225. 
Elephantiasis,  230. 
elephantina,   Testudo,    115. 
eleutha,  Nipara,  222. 
eminentissima,     Nesocantkis,     86. 
eremita,  Nesochicla,  65. 
Europa  Island,  82. 
exulans,  Diomedea,  65,  158. 

fasciata,  Stegomyia,  212,  222. 
fasciatus,  Ptilopus,  236. 
Fautawa,   218. 
Felicite  Island,    129. 
Fernando  de  Noronha,  11-20. 
ferox,  Gryptoprocta,  99. 

Myiarchus,  32. 

Fiji  Islands,  239. 

Finches  {Euethia  bicolor),  141,  216. 

{Nesospiza  acunhae),   66. 

Fishing  :   at  St.  Paul's  Rocks,  6,  10  ; 

at  Tahiti,  217  ;    at  Upolu,  231. 
flaviventris,   Motacilla,   96. 
Flycatchers  (Elainea  albiceps),  166. 

(E.  martinica),   141. 

{Myiarchus  ferox),  32. 

{M.  pelzelni),  32. 

{Pitangus   caymanensis),    151. 

{Terpsiphone  corvina),    130. 

{T.  lindsayi),  86. 

{Tyrannus  melancholicus),  32. 

Flying  fish,  3. 

Fossa  {Cryptoprocta  ferox),  99. 
Fowls,    domestic,  in  a  wild    state, 

103. 
franciscoe,  Astur,  95. 
franklini,  Larus,  188. 
Frigate  birds,   119,  153. 

great  {Fregata  aquila),  14,  48, 

60,  102,  216.  ' 

lesser  {F.  ariel),  49. 

Fruit  :  bananas,  208,  224  ;  cocoa- 
nuts,  18,  208,  224;  figs,  16 
guavas,  150 ;  limes,  208  ;  man- 
goes, 30 ;  oranges,  224 ;  plan- 
tains, 219,  224  ;  sapodillas,  18  ; 
water-melons,  208. 

Fruit  bats  {Pteropus  comorensis),  87. 

{P.  rufflcollis),  228-230. 

Fuegians,  174,  175,  181,  184. 

fuliginosa,  Diomedea,  65,  68,  69,  72. 

Sterna,  17,  60,  61,  104. 


INDEX 


243 


fulvus,  Charadrius,  233. 
fumosa,  Chcetura,  32. 

Gannets,  2,  152,  153. 

(Sula  hucogaster),   3. 

(S.  piscator),  47,  61,  102. 

garnoti,  Pelecanoides,  160. 
George  Town,  145. 

Glorioso  Island,  99-106. 

Goats,  41,  112,  213. 

gobio,  Aphrites,  180. 

Goby    (Periophthalmus   koebreuteri), 

91. 
Goose,203  (Chlor'phaga  poliocephala), 

183. 
kelp  (C.  magellanica),  162,  167, 

178. 
gracilirostris,  Vireo,    16. 
gracilis,   Tachornis,  91. 

Tinnunculus,  128. 

gravis,  Puffinus,  64. 
Gray's  Harbour,  185,  187. 
Grebes  (Podiceps  americaniis),   185. 
Greenshanks  (Totanus  canescens),So. 
griseus.  Puffinus,  189. 
Ground-sloth  (Mylodon),  167. 
gryphus,  Sarcorhamphus,  163. 
guildingi,  Chrysotis,  140. 
Guinea-fowls  (Numida  mitrata),  94, 

99. 
Gulls  (Larus  dominicanus),  78,  167, 
190. 

(L.  franklini),  188. 

Hawks  (ylsfwr  franciscae),  95. 

(Asturina  nattereri),  30. 

(Milvago  chimango),   179. 

(Tinnunculus  gracilis),  108. 

Hawksbill  (Chelone  imbricata),  103. 
Herons  (Buteroides  crawfordi),   111. 

(Demiegretta  sacra),   117,  217. 

Hibiscus,  107,  110,  221. 
hirundinacea,  Sterna,  167. 
Holothurians,  217. 

fa>ra,   Mirafra,   94. 
Huanacos  (Llama  huanacos),    163. 
"  Huemule,"    181. 
Hummingbirds,  27,  177. 
hypoleucus,  Totanus,  85. 

Ibises,  Abbott's  (Z6ia  abbotti),   119- 
121. 

sacred  (76i>   oethiopica),  78. 

Ice  in  Eyre  Sound,  182. 
Ice-plants,  72,  74. 

He  de  Lise,  100,  104,  105. 


imbricata,  Chef  one,  103. 
Inaccessible  Island,  63,  66. 
incanus,  Totanus,  217,  233. 
incerta,  (Estrelata,  64. 
inflexirostris,  Quiscalus,  141. 
iiiHularis,  Gymnoscops,  128. 
interpres,  Strepsilas,  4. 
Itaparica,   21-3(>. 

jacana,  Parra,  28,  33. 

"  Kava,"  234,  235. 
Kelp-weed,  66,   180,   184. 
Kingfishers  (Corythornis  cristata),  85. 

(Halcyon  pealii),  228. 

Kite3  (Milvus  migrans),   84,   102. 
Jcoebreuteri,  Periophthalmus,  91. 

Larks  (mirafra  hova),  94. 

latro,  Birgus,  105. 

Lauristinus,   52. 

Lava -images     on     Easter     Island 

(illust.),   194. 
Lemurs  (Lemur  mayottensis),   90. 
lepturus,  Phaethon,  15. 
leucocapillus ,  Micranous,  5. 
leucogaster,  Sula,  3,  100. 
leucoptera,  Prosobonia,  217. 
lindsayi,  Terpsiphone,  86. 
Lizards  (Mabuia  punctata),  '20. 
(Lygosoma     cyanurum),     209, 

222. 
Love-birds  (Agapornis  cana),  87,  (.*7. 

macrura,  Eupetomena,  27. 
maculipennis,  Plutella,  213. 
Madagascar,  93. 
madagascariensis,  Alectroenas,  97. 

Bernieria,  97. 

Foudia,  86,  96,  127. 

Ixocincla,  89. 

Zosterops,   97. 

magellanica,   ChloJphaga,    167,    178. 
magellanicus,  Mytilis,  172,  174,  180. 

Spheniscus,  161. 

T urdus,   172. 

Magnolias,  131. 

Mahe,    125-127. 

Mango  trees,  30,  32,  149. 

Mangrove  swamp-;,  85,  153. 

Marie  Louise  Bay,  132. 

Marmosets.  30. 

Martin  Vas,   58  82. 

Martins   (Todi  icincta  meyeri),    L66. 

housp   (Chelidon   urbica),    l*i»». 

Martinique,   L39   1  V.i. 


244        VOYAGES   OF   A  NATURALIST 


maynardi,  Coccyzus,  148. 
Mayotte  (Comoro  Islands),  84-92. 
mayottensis,  Cypselus,  87. 
Lemur,  90. 

Zoster  ops,  86. 

melancholicus,  Tyrannus,  32. 
meyeri,  Tachycincta,   166. 
Microlepidoptera,  222. 
migrans,  Milvus,  84,  102. 
minor,  Alectroznas,   122. 
mitrata,  Numida,  94,  99. 
Mocking-birds  (Mimus  orpheus),14:9. 
modesta,  Eudromias,   172. 

Zosterops,  128. 

Molineux  Sound,  178-181. 
Monte  Video,   157-160. 
Mont  Pelee,  141,  143. 

Moorhen,    flightless    (Porphyriornis 

nesiotis),  66. 
moquini,  Hozmatopus,  79 
Mosquitoes  :   16,  28,  29,  34  ;  (Stego- 

myia  fasciata),  212,  222. 
Moths,  51,    228  ;    (feather-feeding), 

6 ;    catching,   29. 

(Plutella  maculipennis),  213. 

Sphinx,  103,  227. 

Mouse  (Mus  musculus),   18,  29,  55. 
Mozambique    Channel,    82-92. 
Mullet,  grey,   180. 
Muscovy  ducks,  224. 
musculus,  Mus,  18,  29. 
Mussels      (Mytilus       magellanicus), 
172,  174,  180. 

(M.  patagonicus),  180. 

mydas,  Chelone,  103. 

Mylodon,  167. 

Mynahs,  Indian,  126,  127,  216. 

"  Narrows,"    184. 
natterri,  Asturina,  30. 
neglectus,  Phalacrocorax,  77. 
nesiotis,   Porphyriornis,   66. 
niger,  Centrites,  166,  167. 
Nightingale  Island,  63. 
Nightjars,  30. 

{Caprimulgus  aldabrensis),  123. 

(C.  unwini),  83. 

nigra,  Coracopsis,  95. 
nigriventris,  Myzomela,  228,  233. 
North  Cousin  (islet),  133,  134. 

Orchids,  56,  145. 

orpheus,  Mimus,  148. 

Otters  (Lutra  patachonica),   184. 

Owls  (Gymnoscops  insularis),  128. 

(Scops  brasiliensis),  30. 


Oyster-catchers,      black       (Hcema 
topus  moquini),   79. 

Pago-Pago,  226,  228,  229. 

Palm  trees,   216,   220,   228. 

pandanus,   115,  220,  233. 

Papeete,  215. 

Parroquets,  141,  228. 

Parrots,  141,  233. 

(Chrysotis   caymanensis),    149. 

(C.  guildingi),   140. 

[Coracopsis  barkleyi),  128,  131. 

(C.  comorensis),  89. 

(C.  nigra),  95. 

(C.  sibilans),  89. 

(C.  vasa),  95. 

patachonica,  Lutra,  184. 
patachonicus,   171. 
patagonicus,  Cinclodes,  178. 

Mytilus,  180. 

pealii,  Halcyon,  228. 
pecuaria,  JEgialitis,  79. 
Pelicans,  190. 

(Pelecanus   thagus),    188. 

pelzelni,  Myiarchus,  32. 
Penas,  Gulf  of,  187. 
Penguins,   72-76. 

(Sphenicus  demur sus),  161. 

(S.  magellanicus),   161. 

perdicaria,  Nothoprocta,  203. 
Petrels,  37,  38,  53,  70. 

(CEstrelata   arminjoniana),  60, 

61,  157. 

(CE.  incerta),  64. 


189. 


(CE.   trinitatis),   42. 

(CE.    wilsoni),    41,  42,   43,  60, 

61. 

(Os  si  frag  a  gigantea),   80,    158. 
). 

(Pelecanoides  dacunhae),  67. 

(P.  garnoti),   160. 

(P.  urinatrix),   160. 

Phalaropes,  grey,   188. 

Pigeons    (Alectrcenas     madagascari- 

ensis),  97. 
(A.  minor),  122. 

(A.  pulcherrima),   129. 

(A.  sganzini),  86,  89. 

(Columba  squamosa),  143. 

(Didunculus  strigirostris),  232. 

piscator,  Sula,  47,  102. 

Pitcairn  Island,  207-214. 

Plover,  golden,  203. 

(Charadrius  fulvus),   233. 

ringed    (JEgialitis     pecuaria). 

79. 


INDEX 


245 


poliocephala,  Chloephaga,  183. 
Porpoises,   69,   162. 
Port  de  France,  139. 
Praslin  Island,  130. 
Puerto  Bueno,   176. 
pugnax,  Machetes,  80. 
punctata,  Mabuia,  20. 
Punta  Arenas,  165-169. 

Quail-snipe      (Thinocorus     rumi- 
civorus),   167. 

Rafts  used  in  surf,  19. 
Rails,  66,  102. 

{Rallus  abbotti),  108. 

{R.  vigilantis),   177. 

Rano  Kao  (crater),  198,  203. 
"  Rat  Island,"   18. 

Rats  (Mu3  rattus),  18,  29,  66,  111, 

154,  203,  213. 
Rheas  {Rhea  americana),  167. 
Ribbon  fish  {Regalecus),  80. 
ridibundus,  Larus,  188. 
ridleyana,  Elainea,  18. 
rubricauda,  Phaethon,  210. 
rufficollis,  Pteropus,  228. 
Ruffs  {Machetes  pugnax),  80. 
rumicivorus,  Thinocorus,  167. 
rustica,  Hirundo,  80,  83. 

sacra,   Demiegretta,    117,    217. 
Samoan  Islands,  226-239. 
Sanderlings,  118. 

Sandpipers  {Prosobonia  leucoptera), 
217. 

{Totanus  hypoleucus),  85. 

(T.  incanus),  217,  233. 

scapulatus,  Corvus,  102. 
Screw-pines  {pandani),   115. 
Sea-serpent  (illust.),  22-26. 
"  Sea-slugs,"   217. 
Sea-urchins,    217. 
Seychelle  Islands,   125-135. 
sganzini,  Alectrcenas,  88,  89. 
Sharks,  6,  7,  10,  61,  99. 
Shearwaters      {Puffinus    creatopus), 

189. 

{P.  gravis),  64. 

(P.  griseus),  189. 

white-breasted,    61. 

Shrikes,   drongo   {Dicrurus  aldabra- 

nus),   117. 
sibilans,  Coracopsis,  89. 
Siskins  {Chrysomitri*  barbatus),  167. 
Skuas    {Megalestris    chiUnsis),    162, 

167. 


Skuas,  antarctic,  69,  70. 

Richardson's,  189. 

Smythe's  Channel,  175-187. 
Snipe  {Oallinago  delicata),  33. 

jack,  33. 

Society  Islands,  215. 
Soufriere  (volcano),  140. 
South  Sea  Islands,  191. 
South  Trinidad,  37-58. 
spinicaudata,  Oxyurus,  169. 
St.  Paul's  Rocks,   1-10. 
St.  Pierre,  139. 

St.  Vincent,  139. 

Starlings    {Quiscalua    caymanensis), 
151. 

(Q.  gundiachi),  1 51. 

{Q.  inflexirostris),  141. 

Steamer-ducks  {Tachyeres  cinereus), 

163,  164,  170-173,  179. 
Stelgidopteryx,  31. 
Stints,  little,  83. 
stolidus,  Anous,  4,  9,  40,  50,  60,  80, 

100,  104,  111,  203,  216,  229. 
Stonechats  {Pratincola  sybilla),  96. 
Straits  of  Magellan,  162-174. 
8trigirostri8,  Didunculus,  232. 
strigosus,  Orapsus,  3. 
Sucking  fish,  99. 
Sunbirds,  117,  131. 

{Cinnyris  abbotti),  111,  116. 

(C.  mah-i),  127. 

{Myzomela   nigriventris),    228, 

233. 

8upercilio8U8,  Merops,  91. 
Swallows  {Stelgidopteryx),  31,  83. 

{Hirundo  rustica),  80,  83. 

Swifts  {Chaetura  jumosa),  32. 

{Collocalia),  216. 

{Cypselus  mayotten8i8),  87. 

{Tachorni8  gracilis),  91. 

sybilla,  Pratincola,   96. 

Table  Bay,  70,  71. 
Tahiti,  215-225. 
Tanagers,  31. 
"  Tappa,"  229. 
Tautira,  217,   222. 
Teal  {Nettion  brasiliensis),  33. 
Tenrecs  {Centetes  ecaudatus),  90,  98. 
Terns  {Anous  stolidus),  4,  9,  40,  50, 
60,  80,  100,  104,  203,  216,  229. 

{Qygis  alba),    14,    40,  51,   56, 

203,  210,  212,  216. 

■  {G.    crawjordi),  44,  45. 
{Micranous    leucocapillus),    5, 


8,  61. 


246 


VOYAGES  OF  A  NATURALIST 


Terns  (Sterna  fuliginosa),  17,  60,  61, 

104. 
(S.  hirundinacea),    167. 

(S.  vittata),  67,  70. 

thagus,  Pelecanus,   188. 

Thrushes  (Ixocincla  madagascarien- 

sia),  89. 

(Nesochicla  eremita),  65. 

Carolina     (Oaleoscoptes     caro- 

linensis),  149. 

Magellan,  179. 


Ticks,  6,  29,  34. 

Tierra  del  Fuego,  176,  182. 

Tinamou    (Nothoprocta    perdicaria), 

203. 
Toads  (Nannophryne  variegata),  177. 
Tortoise,  giant  (Testudo  elephantina), 

115,  118,  123,  129. 
toulou,  Centropus,  96. 
Tree-creepers     (Oxyurus     spinicau- 

data),  169. 
Tree-ferns,  39,  55. 
Trinidad,  South,  37-58. 
trinitatis,  (Estrelata,  42. 
Tristan  da  Cunha,   63-69. 
Tropic   (or  Bo'sun)   bird   (Phaethon 

lepturus),  15,  17. 
red-tailed       (P.      rubri- 

cauda),  210. 
Turnstones  (Strepsilas  interpres),  4, 

20. 
Turtles,  39,  106,  112. 

(Chelone   mydas,   Linn.),    103. 

Tutuila  Island,   226-230. 
Tyrant-bird  (Centrites  niger),  166. 

unwini,  Caprimulgus,  83. 
Upolu  Island,  231-239. 


urbica,  Chelidon,  166. 
urinatrix,  Pelecanoides ,   160. 

Valparaiso,   187-191. 
variegata,  Nannophryne,  177. 
va8a,  Coracopsis,  95. 
vaughani,  Tatare,  209. 
vigilantis,  Rallus,  177. 
vitellina,  Dendroeca,  147. 
vittata,  Sterna,  67,  70. 
Vultures  (Catliartes  aura),  30. 

(C.  atratus),  30. 

Wagtails  (Motacilla  capensis),  80. 

(M.  flaviventris),  96. 

Warblers      (Bernieria    madagascar- 

iensis),  97. 

(Dendroeca  auricapilla),   147. 

(D.  coronata),  147. 

(D.  crawfordi),    154. 

(D.  discolor),  147. 

(D.  vitellina),  147. 

(Tatare  vaughani),  209,  210. 

(Vireo  gracilirostris),    16. 

Wasps  at  Tahiti,  216. 

Weaver   bird   (Foudia  madagascar- 
iensis),  86,  89,  96,  127. 

(Nesacanthis  aldabranus),  116. 

(N.  eminenti8sima),  86. 

Whimbrels,  83,  85. 

White-eyes    (Zosterops   madagascar- 
iensis),  97,  102. 

(Z.  mayottensis),  86. 

(Z.  mode8ta),  128. 

wilsoni,  (Estrelata,  41,  42,  43,  60. 
Woodpeckers   (Melanerpes  caynian- 

ensi8),  149. 


nil*   *?£   Botanical   Garden   Libra 


3  5185  00255  51 


24
