Notes on Hospitals
Florence Nightingale (1859)
========================================================================

PROVENANCE NOTE (Tower of Babel staging): Nightingale's 1859 hospital-design treatise: the two Liverpool papers on ward construction plus her Royal Commission evidence and Builder articles — the founding text of evidence-based hospital architecture. 1859 first edition; publisher's catalogue removed. This edition is in the public domain.

========================================================================

FOR  THE  PROMOTION  OF  SOCIAL  SCIENCE,

AT  LIVERPOOL,  IN  OCTOBER,  1858.


EVIDENCE  GIVEN  TO  THE  ROYAL  COMMISSIONERS
ON  THE  STATE  OF  THE  ARMY IN  1857.


FLORENCE  NIGHTINGALE.


LONDON:

JOHN  W.  PARKER  AND  SON,  WEST  STRAND.

1859.


LONDON :

SAVILL AND EDWARDS, PKINTEBS, CHANDOS STKEET,

COVENT  GARDEN.


CONTENTS.


PAGK

Pkeface vii

Two  Papers  read  before  the  National  Association  for  the  Pro-
motion of  Social  Science,  in  October,  1858 I

Evidence  given  before  the  Royal  Commission  on  the  Sanitaiy

State  of  the  Army 22

Three  Articles  reprinted  from  the  Builder 89


PREFACE.


rPHE  following  papers  on  the  Sanitary  Condition  of  Hospitals,  and
-'-  on  Defects  in  the  Construction  of  Hospital  Wards,  by  Miss  Night-
ingale, were  read  at  the  Liverpool  meeting  of  the  National  Associa-
tion for  the  Promotion  of  Social  Science,  in  October,  1858,  and  are
now  printed  in  terms  of  a  resolution  of  the  Association.

The  publisher  has  thought  that  it  would  further  the  objects  of  the
Association  if  the  evidence  given  by  Miss  Nightingale  before  the
Royal  Commission  on  the  Sanitary  State  of  the  Army  were  reprinted,
and  he  has  added  it  accordingly.  That  evidence  not  only  contains
information  of  public  importance,  as  regards  the  army  and  its
hospitals  during  the  late  war  with  Russia,  but  gives  the  results  of
many  years'  experience  with  regard  to  the  principles  of  hospital
construction  and  organization.

In  order  to  make  the  information  on  hospital  construction  as  com-
plete as  possible,  three  papers  from  the  Builder,  of  August  28th,  and
September  nth  and  25th,  1858,  have  been  also  reprinted,  by  the  kind
permission  of  Mr.  George  Godwin,  who  has  paid  much  attention  to
the  subject.  They  present  similar  views  on  the  architectural  ar-
rangement of  hospitals.


m^


SANITARY  CONDITION  OF  HOSPITALS


HOSPITAL  CONSTRUCTION.

Two  Papers  read  before  the  National  Association  for  the
Promotion  of  Social  Science.


PAKT I.

FEELING  very  desirous  of  continbuting  whatever  aid  I  can  to  im-
provement in  Hospital  construction  and  administration — especially
at  this  time,  when  several  new  hospitals  are  being  built — it  has  occurred
to  me  to  transmit  a  few  notes  on  defects  which  have  come  under  my
own  observation  in  an  extended  experience  of  these  institutions.

No  one,  I  think,  who  brings  ordinary  powers  of  observation  to
bear  on  the  sick  and  maimed  can  fail  to  observe  a  remarkable  differ-
ence in  the  aspect  of  cases,  in  their  duration  and  in  their  termina-
tion in  different  hospitals.  To  the  superficial  observer  there  are  two
things  only  apparent — the  disease  and  the  remedial  treatment,  me-
dical or  surgical.  It  requires  a  considerable  amount  of  experience,
in  hospitals  of  various  constructions  and  vax-ied  administrations,  to
go  beyond  this,  and  to  be  able  to  perceive  that  conditions  arising
out  of  these  have  a  very  powerful  effect  indeed  upon  the  ultimate
issue  of  cases  which  pass  through  the  wards.

It  is  sometimes  asserted  that  thex-e  is  no  such  sti-iking  difference  in
the  mortality  of  different  hospitals  as  one  would  be  led  to  infer  from
their  great  apparent  difference  in  sanitaiy  condition.  There  is,  un-
doubtedly, some  difficulty  in  arriving  at  correct  statistical  comparison
to  exhibit  this.  For,  in  the  first  place,  different  hospitals  I'eceive  very
different  proportions  of  the  same  class  of  diseases.  The  ages  in  one
hospital  may  differ  considerably  from  the  ages  in  another.  And  the
state  of  the  cases  on  admission  may  differ  very  much  in  each  hospital.
These  elements,  no  doubt,  affect  considerably  the  resvilts  of  treatment,
altogether  apart  from  the  sanitary  state  of  hospitals.

In  the  next  place  accurate  hospital  statistics  are  much  more  rai'e
than  is  generally  imagined,  and  at  the  best  they  only  give  the  mor-
tality which  has  taken  place  in  the  hospitals,  and  take  no  cognizance
of  those  cases  which  are  discharged  in  a  hopeless  condition,  to  a  much
greater  extent  from  some  hospitals  than  from  others.

We  have  known  incurable  cases  discharged  from  one  hospital,  to
which  the  deaths  ought  to  have  been  accounted,  and  received  into
another  hospital,  to  die  there  in  a  day  or  two  after  admission.

B


2  Sanitary  Condition  of  Hospitals

Again,  the  sanitary  state  of  any  hospital  ought  not  to  be  in-
ferred solely  from  the  greater  or  less  mortality.  If  the  function  of
a  hospital  were  to  kill  the  sick,  statistical  comparisons  of  this  nature
■would  be  admissible.  As,  however,  its  proper  function  is  to  restore
the  sick  to  health  as  speedily  as  possible,  the  elements  which  really
give  information  as  to  whether  this  is  done  or  not,  are  those  which
show  the  proportion  of  sick  restored  to  health,  and  the  average  time
which  has  been  required  for  this  object ;  a  hospital  which  restored
all  its  sick  to  health  after  an  average  of  six  months'  treatment,  could
not  be  considered  as  by  any  means  so  healthy  as  a  hospital  which
returned  all  its  sick  recovered  in  as  many  weeks.  The  proportion  of
recoveries,  the  proportion  of  deaths,  and  the  average  time  in  hospital
miist  all  be  taken  into  account  in  discussions  of  this  nature,  as  well
as  the  character  of  the  cases  and  the  proportion  of  different  ages
among  the  sick.

Hospital  mortality  statistics*  give  little  information  on  the  point,
because  there  are  elements  in  existence  of  which  such  statistics
take  no  cognizance.  In  one  set  of  metropolitan  hospitals,  for
example,  I  find  the  mortality  about  two  and  a-half  per  cent,  upon
the  cases  treated,  while  in  other  metropolitan  hospitals  the  deaths
reach  from  about  twelve  to  sixteen  per  cent.  To  judge  by  the
mortality  in  these  cases  would  be  most  fallacious.  Because  in  the
first  class  of  hospitals  every  ailment,  however  slight,  constitutes  a
title  to  hospital  admission,  while,  in  the  latter  class  of  hospitals,  spe-
cial diseases  only,  at  all  times  accompanied  by  a  high  rate  of  mortality,
are  admitted.  Hence  the  duration  of  the  cases  admitted,  and  the
general  course  and  aspect  of  disease  afford  important  criteria  where-
by to  judge  of  the  healthiness  or  tmhealthiness  of  any  hospital  in


*  In  Paris  an  Annual  Report  of  the  Hospitals  ('  Compte  Moral  Administi-atif )
is  published.  But  the  only  useful  statistical  information  to  be  gleaned  from  it  is
the  number  of  sous  each  patient  has  cost .  For,  although  it  gives  the  numbers  of
adults,  male  and  female,  and  of  children  who  have  been  admitted,  and  who  have
died  during  the  year,  yet  this  in  itself  tells  little.

If  the  Hospitals  of  London  and  of  Paris  would  give  us  the  information  con-
tained under  the  eight  following  heads,  so  important  would  be  the  knowledge
thereby  conveyed,  that  it  would  be  worth  while  to  go  back  for  many  years  to  con-
struct such  tables,  and  to  continue  the  same  forms  hereafter.

I. The  numbers  admitted  for  each  decennial  period  of  age  for  each  sex  per  annum.

•2.  The  numbers,  similarly  arranged,  remaining  in  hospital  at  the  end  of  the
preceding  year.

3.  The  numbers  dead  for  each  sex  at  each  decennial  period  of  age  per  annum.

4.  The  numbers  discharged  cured  similarly  arranged  per  annum.

5.  The  numbers  discharged  incurable  similarly  arranged  per  annum.

6.  The  numbers  remaining  in  hospital  at  the  end  of  the  current  year  similarly
arranged.

7.  The  diseases  remaining,  admitted,  died,  cured,  discharged  incurable,  and
remained,  arranged  for  each  sex  and  each  decennial  period  of  age  per  annum.

8.  The  duration  of  cases,  similarly  arranged.


and  Hospital  Construction,  3

addition  to  that  afforded  by  the  mortality  statistics.  Besides,  careful
observers  are  now  generally  convinced  that  the  origin  and  spread  of
fever  in  a  hospital,  or  the  appearance  and  spread  of  hospital  gangrene,
erysipelas  and  pyaemia  genex*ally,  are  much  better  tests  of  the  defec-
tive sanitary  state  of  a  hospital  than  its  mortality  returns.  But  I
would  go  further,  and  state  that  to  the  experienced  eye  of  a  careful
observing  nurse,  the  daily,  I  had  almost  said  houi'ly,  changes  which
take  place  in  patients,  and  which  changes  rarely  come  under  the
cognizance  of  the  periodical  medical  visitor,  afford  a  still  more  im-
portant class  of  data,  from  which  to  judge  of  the  general  adaptation
of  a  hospital  for  the  reception  and  treatment  of  sick.  One  insen-
sibly allies  together  restlessness,  languor,  feverishness,  and  general
malaise,  with  closeness  of  wards,  defective  ventilation,  defective
structure,  bad  architectural  and  administrative  arrangements,  until
it  is  impossible  to  resist  the  conviction  that  the  sick  are  suffering
from  something  quite  other  than  the  disease  inscribed  on  their  bed-
ticket — and  the  inquiry  insensibly  arises  in  the  mind,  what  can  be
the  cause  ?  To  this  query  many  years'  experience  of  hospitals  in
various  countries  and  climates  enables  me  to  answer  explicitly  as
the  result  of  my  own  observation,  that,  even  admitting  to  the  full
extent  the  great  value  of  the  hospital  improvements  of  recent  years,
a  vast  deal  of  the  suffering,  and  some  at  least  of  the  mortality  in
these  establishments,  is  avoidable.

What,  then,  are  those  defects  to  which  such  results  are  to  be  at-
tributed ]

I  should  state  at  once  that  to  original  defects  in  the  sites  and
plans  of  hospitals,  and  to  deficient  ventilation  and  overcrowding
accompanying  such  defects,  is  to  be  attributed  a  large  proportion  of
the  evil  I  have  mentioned.

The  facts  flow  almost  of  necessity  from  ascei'tained  sanitary  ex-
perience. But  it  is  not  often,  excepting  perhaps  in  the  case  of  intel-
ligent house  surgeons,  that  the  whole  process  whereby  the  sick,
who  ought  to  have  had  rapid  recoveries,  are  retained  week  after
"week,  or  perhaps  month  after  month,  in  hospital,  is  continuously
observed.  I  have  known  a  case  of  slight  fever  received  into  hospital,
the  fever  pass  off  in  less  than  a  week,  and  yet  the  patient,  from  the
foul  state  of  the  wards,  not  restored  to  health  at  the  end  of  eight  weeks.

The  defects  to  which  such  occurrences  are  mainly  to  be  attributed
are  four : —

1.  The  agglomeration  of  a  large  number  of  sick  under  the  same  roof.

2.  Deficiency  of  space.

3.  Deficiency  of  ventilation.

4.  Deficiency  of  light.

These  are  the  four  radical  defects  in  hospital  construction.

B\it  on  the  very  threshold  of  the  subject  we  shall  probably  be  told
that  not  to  these  defects,  but  to  '  contagion '  and  '  infection,'  is  much
of  the  unhealthy  condition  of  some  hospitals  attiibutable,  at  least  so

B  2


4


Sanitary  Condition  of  Hospitals


far  as  concerns  the  occun'ence  of  zymotic  diseases.  On  the  very
threshold,  therefore,  we  are  obliged  to  make  a  digression  in  order  to
discuss  the  meaning  of  these  two  familiar  words,  and  to  lay  these
spectres  which  have  terrified  almost  all  ages  and  nations.

This  is  the  more  necessary,  because  on  the  exact  influence  exercised
by  these  two  presumed  causes  of  hospital  sickness  and  mortality  de-
pends to  a  great  degree  the  possibility  of  our  introducing  efficient
hospital  attendance  and  nursing.  Unfortunately  both  nurses*  and
medical  men,  as  well  as  medical  students,  have  died  of  zymotic  diseases
prevailing  in  hospitals.  It  is  an  all-important  question  to  decide
whether  the  propagation  of  such  diseases  is  inevitable  or  preventible.


*  To  show  the  great  importance  of  this  point  I  give  the  following  tables,  kindly
prepared  by  Dr.  Farr,  from  returns  furnished  to  me  with  the  greatest  readiness  by
fifteen  of  the  metropolitan  hospitals.  Table  I.  gives  the  ages  of  living  and  dying
among  the  nursing  staflf.  Table  II.  gives  the  mortality  from  zymotic  diseases,  and
the  comparison  between  the  nurses'  mortality  and  the  mortality  of  the  female
population  of  London.

Table  I. — Numbers  and  Ages  of  Matrons,  Sisters  and  Nurses  {Living
and  Dying)  in  Fifteen  London  Hospitals.

(Names  of  the  Hospitals, — St.  Mary's;  St.  George's  ;  Westminster;  Charing  Cross  ;
Middlesex  ;  University  College  ;  Royal  Free  ;  King's  College  ;  St.  Bartholomew's  ;
London;  Guy's;  St.  Thomas' ;  Small  Pox ;  Fever;  and  Consumption.)

LIVING  (i8j8).


Total
of  aU
Ages.

Total.

Specified  Ages  of  the  Living,  March,  1858.

Ages
Speci-
fied.

Ages  not
Spe-
cified.

Under

20.

20.

2S-

30-

Si-

40.

4S-

So.

ii-

60.

6i-

and
up.

Matrons,  Sisters  \
and  Nurses }

Matrons  and')
Sisters S  '"

Nurses

i2i

391

130

I

10

4i

ii

93

64

i9

34

18

8

4

ii8
403

90
301

28
102

I

10

4

41

II

44

23
71

16

48

20

39

8
26

i
13

3

i

I
3

DYING  (1848— S7).


Total
of  all
Ages.

Total.

Ages  of  the  Dying.

Ages
Speci-
fied.

Ages  not
Speci-
fied.

Under
20.

20.

ii-

30.

3i-

40.

45-

io-

ii-

60.

6i.

and
up.

Matrons,  Sisters')
and  Nurses J

*  Matrons  and")
Sisters  (so  dis-  >■...
tinguished) )
Nurses

79

79

4

II

8

18

8

10

7

6

2

i

19
60

19
60

4

3
9

I

7

4
14

8

3
7

3
i

I

i

I
I

i

*  In  the  returns  of  deaths,  four  Hospitals  do  not  distinguish  the  Matrons  and  Sisters  from  the
Nurses,  and  in  this  Table  they  are  included  with  the  Nurses.


and  Hospital  Construction.


If  the  former,  then  the  whole  question  must  be  considered  as  to  whether
hospitals  necessai'ily  attended  with  results  so  fatal  should  exist  at  all.
If  the  latter,  then  it  is  our  duty  to  prevent  their  propagation.

The  idea  of  '  contagion,'  as  explaining  the  spread  of  disease,  appears


Table  II. — Table  of  the  Mortality  of  Matrons,  Sisters,  and  Nurses,  at  different
Afjes,  in  Fifteen  London  Hospitals,  compared  with  the  Mortality  of  the  Female
Population  of  London.


Ages.

Matrons,  Sisters,  and  Nurses
(1848-57).

Female  Population  of  London.

Annual  Eate  of  Mortality  to  1000  living  at  the  respective  Ages.

By  all  returned
I>itea»et.

15.89
15.80
17.80
4'5.36

By  Zymotic
Diseases.

By  Zyviotic
Diseases
(1848-S7).

By  all  returned

Diseases

(1848-54).

25  to  35
35—  45

45  —  55

55 — ^i:

9-53
10.94
11.87
14.26

2. 19

2-73

3.17
4.94

9.92
14.65
20.36
36.02

The  fatal  zj'motic  diseases  included  in  this  table  are  fever  and  cholera,  and  it
will  be  seen  that  these  two  diseases  occasioned  nearly  50  per  cent,  of  the  total
mortality  among  the  nursing  staff  as  against  16  per  cent,  among  the  Loudon  female
population.  Tliis  single  fact  is  quite  enough  to  prove  the  very  great  importance  of
hospital  hygiene.  The  calculated  total  mortality  is  also  very  much  higher  among
the  nurses,  even  if  we  assume  that  the  deaths  in  the  returns  are  all  the  deaths  due
to  hospital  nursing,  which  is  very  doubtful.  If  we  assume  that  the  nou-zymotic
mortality  among  nurses  ought  to  be  the  same  as  it  is  among  the  female  population,
and  if  to  this  we  add  the  zymotic  deaths  among  nurses,  we  find  the  total  mortality
among  nurses  to  exceed  the  total  mortality  among  the  female  population  of  the  me-
tropolis by  about  40  per  cent.  The  loss  of  a  well-trained  nurse  by  preventible
disease  is  a  greater  loss  than  is  that  of  a  good  soldier  from  the  same  cause.  Money
cannot  replace  either,  but  a  good  nurse  is  more  difficult  to  find  than  a  good  soldier.

The  data  from  which  these  tables  have  been  deduced  are  imperfect,  and  it  would
be  very  desirable  if  in  future  all  hospitals  would  keep  a  register  of  nurses.  The
following  form  would  be  one  well  calculated  to  give  the  required  information.
Tlie  subject  is  of  additional  importance  in  connexion  with  the  proper  working  of  a
Superannuation  Fund  for  nurses  : —

Form  of  Register  of  Sisters  and  Nurses  in  Hospital, Commenced

from  January  i,  1859.


■No.


Name.


Age  when
first  Ap-
pointed.


^''"'- I  State  of  Health  on

.  i Leaving  the  Ser-

' Dismissal,  ,  vjg,, .  ^n^,  if  HI,  the
Of  Appomt- Resignation,  Disease, itsDuratiou,
ment.  or  Super- ^^^  probable  Cause.


Date  of  Death,
Cause  of  Death,
and  fatal  Disease,


Jane
Jones.
(Sister.)

Mary
Evans.
(Nurse).


25


29


June  6,

1858.


April  2,
1848.


Resigned
August  6,
I 1858.


In  good  Health.


July  7,  1854,
Typhoid  Fe-
ver, after  1 1
days'  illness.


6  Sanitary  Condition  of  Hospitals

to  have  been  adopted  at  a  time  when,  from  the  neglect  of  sanitary-
arrangements,  epidemics  attacked  whole  masses  of  people,  and  when
men  had  ceased  to  consider  that  nature  had  any  laws  for  her  guidance.
Beginning  with  the  poets  and  historians,  the  word  finally  made  its
way  into  medical  nomenclature,*  where  it  has  remained  ever  since,
afibrding  to  certain  classes  of  minds,  chiefly  in  the  southern  and  less
educated  parts  of  Europe,  a  satisfactory  explanation  for  pestilence  and
an  adequate  excuse  for  non-exertion  to  prevent  its  recurrence.

And  now,  what  does  'contagion'  meanl  It  implies  the  commu-
nication of  disease  from  pei'son  to  person  by  contact.  It  pre-supposes
the  existence  of  certain  germs  like  the  sporules  of  fungi,  which  can  be
bottled  up  and  conveyed  any  distance  attached  to  clothing,  to  merchan-
dize, especially  to  woollen  stuffs,  for  which  it  is  supposed  to  have  a
particular  affection,  and  to  feathers,  which  of  all  articles  it  especially
loves — so  much  so,  that,  according  to  quarantine  laws,  a  live  goose
may  be  safely  introduced  from  a  plague  country ;  but  if  it  happen
to  be  eaten  on  the  voyage,  its  feathers  cannot  be  admitted  without
danger  to  the  entire  community.  There  is  no  end  to  the  absurdities
connected  with  this  doctrine.  Suffice  it  to  say,  that  in  the  ordinary
sense  of  the  word,  there  is  no  proof,  such  as  would  be  admitted  in
any  scientific  inquiry,  that  there  is  any  such  thing  as  '  contagion.'

There  are  two  or  three  diseases  in  which  there  is  a  sjDecific  virus,

*  The  history  of  the  doctrine  of  '  Contagion '  is  given  by  Dr.  Adams  in  his  very
learned  translation  of  the  works  of  Paulus  ^gineta,  Vol.  i,  p.  284 — (Sydenham
Society).  He  says,  in  his  comment,  '  the  earlier  ancient  authors  appear  to  have
entertained  no  suspicions  of  contagion  as  a  cause  of  febrile  or  of  other  complaints.

'  The  works  of  the  fathers  of  history,  and  of  medicine,  have  likewise  been  ran-
sacked in  vain  for  any  traces  of  the  doctrine  of  contagion.'

Thucydides,  and  after  him  several  of  the  Latin  poets  describe  the  plague  of
Athens,  which  appears  to  have  been  a  form  of  Dysentery,  as  communicable  from
person  to  person.  The  later  Greek  historians  contain  allusions  to  the  infectious
nature  of  certain  diseases  ;  but  Procopius,  though  cognizant  of  one  of  the  greatest
IDestilences  on  record,  was  a  non-contagionist.

Virgil's  allusions  to  contagious  diseases  among  cattle  will  be  found  in  Eel.  I.
Georg.  III.,  464.

Aretseus  appears  to  be  the  first  medical  author  who  believed  in  contagion.  Galen
seems  to  have  held  the  doctrine  of  infection.  Of  the  later  Greek  and  Arabian
medical  writers,  some  were  contagionists,  and  others  make  no  allusion  to  the
subject.  Dr.  Adams  states,  in  regard  to  plague,  a  disease  which,  in  later  times,
has  been  considered  as  the  very  type  of  all  '  contagious '  pestilences,  '  The  result  of
our  investigations  into  the  opinions  of  the  ancients  on  this  subject  leads  us  to  the
conclusion  that  all,  or  at  least  the  most  intelligent  of  the  medical  authorities,
held  that  the  plague  was  communicated  not  by  any  specific  virus,  but  in  conse-
quence of  the  atmosphere  around  the  sick  being  contaminated  with  putrid  eflluvia.'

The  obvious  practical  result  of  this  view  of  infection  is,  that  abundance  of  pure
air  will  prevent  infection.  All  my  own  hospital  experience  confirms  this  conclusion.
If  infection  exists,  it  is  preventible.  If  it  exists,  it  is  the  result  of  carelessness,
or  of  ignorance.  '  Contagion,'  as  a  doctrine,  on  which  distinct  practical  proceed-
ings have  been  taken,  appears  to  be  of  very  modern  invention  ;  but  it  has  been
not  the  less  injurious  to  civilization  and  humanity,  from  the  loss  of  life  which
has  from  time  to  time  followed  from  the  practices  which  it  inculcates,  and  from  the
immense  tax  which  it  has  entailed  upon  commerce.


and  Hospital  Construction.  7

which  cau  be  seen,  tasted,  smelt,  and  analysed,  and  which  in  certain
constitutions  propagates  the  original  disease  by  inoculation — such
as  small-pox,  cow-pox,  &c.  But  these  are  not  '  contagions '  in  the
sense  supposed.*

The  word  'infection,'  which  is  often  confounded  with  'contagion,'
expresses  a  fact,  and  does  not  involve  a  hypothesis.  But  just  as  there
is  no  such  thing  as  '  contagion,'  there  is  no  such  tlihig  as  inevitable
'  infection.'  Infection  acts  through  the  air.  Poison  the  air  breathed
by  individuals  and  there  is  infection.  Shut  up  150  healthy  people  in
a  Black-hole  of  Calcutta,  and  in  twenty-four  hours  an  infection  is
produced  so  intense  that  it  will,  in  that  time,  have  destroyed  nearly
the  whole  of  the  inmates.  Sick  people  are  more  susceptible  than
healthy  people  ;  and  if  they  be  shut  up  withoiit  sufficient  space  and  suf-
ficient fresh  ail',  there  will  be  produced  not  only  fever,  but  erysipelas,
pya?mia,  and  the  usual  tribe  of  hospital-generated  epidemic  diseases..

Again,  if  we  have  a  fever  hospital  with  over-crowded,  badly-venti-
lated wards,  we  are  quite  certain  to  have  the  air  become  so  infected  as
to  poison  the  blood  not  only  of  the  sick,  so  as  to  increase  their  mor-
tality, but  also  of  the  medical  attendants  and  nurses,  so  that  they  also
shall  become  subjects  of  fever.

It  will  be  seen  at  a  glance,  that  in  every  such  case  and  in  every
such  example,  the  '  infection '  is  not  inevitable,  but  simply  the  result
of  carelessness  and  ignorance.  As  soon  as  this  practical  view  of  the
subject  is  admitted  and  acted  upon,  we  shall  cease  to  hear  of  hospital
contagions.

In  certain  hospitals  it  has  been  the  custom  to  set  apart  wards  for
what  are  called  '  infectious  '  diseases,  but  in  reality  there  ought  to  be  no
diseases  so  considered.  With  proper  sanitary  precautions,  diseases
reputed  to  be  the  most  '  infectious '  may  be  treated  in  wards  among
other  sick  without  any  danger.  Without  proper  sanitary  arrange-
ments, a  number  of  healthy  people  may  be  congregated  together  so  as
to  become  subject  to  the  worst  horrors  of '  infection.'

No  stronger  condemnation  of  any  hospital  or  ward  could  be  \n-o-
nounced  than  the  simple  fact  that  any  zymotic  disease  has  originated
in  it,  or  that  such  diseases  have  attacked  other  patients  than  those
brought  in  with  them.  And  there  can  be  no  stronger  condemnation
of  any  town  than  the  outbreak  of  fatal  epidemics  in  it.  Infection,  and
incapable  management,  or  bad  construction,  are  in  hospitals  as  Avell  as
in  towns,  convertible  terms.

It  was  necessary  to  say  thus  much  to  show  to  what  hosj)ital  diseases
are  not  necessarily  due.  To  the  following  defects  in  site,  construction,
and  management,  as  we  think,  they  are  mainly  to  be  attributed.


*  Curiously  enough,  these  directly  communicable  diseases  were  excluded  from  the
operation  of  general  quarantine  law  by  the  International  Quarantine  Conference  of
Paris,  185 1,  which  restricted  the  objects  of  quarantine  to  plague,  yellow  fever,  and
cholera,  while  it  gave  a  logical  coup  cle  grace  to  the  'contagion'  hypothesis  by
abolishing  the  *  suspected  bill  of  health. '


8  Sanitary  Condition  of  Hospitals

I.  The  agglomeration  of  a  large  number  of  sick  under  one  roof.

It  is  a  well-established  fact  that,  other  things  being  equal,  the
amount  of  sickness  and  mortality  on  different  areas  bears  a  ratio  to
the  degree  of  density  of  the  population.

Why  should  undue  agglomeration  of  sick  be  any  exception  to  this
law  1  Ts  it  not  rather  to  be  expected  that,  the  constitutions  of  sick
people  being  more  susceptible  than  those  of  healthy  people,  they  should
suffer  more  from  this  cause  ?

But  if  anything  were  wanting  in  confirmation  of  this  fact,  it  would
be  the  enormous  mortality  in  the  hospitals  which  contained  perhaps
the  largest  number  of  sick  ever  at  one  time  under  the  same  roof,  viz.,
those  at  Scutari.  The  largest  of  these  too  famous  hospitals  had  at
one  time  2500  sick  and  wounded  \inder  its  roof,  and  it  has  happened
that  of  Scutari  patients  two  out  of  every  five  have  died.  In  the
hospital  tents  of  the  Crimea,  although  the  sick  were  almost  without
shelter,  without  blankets,  without  proper  food  or  medicines,  the  mor-
tality was  not  above  one-half  what  it  was  at  Scutari.  Nor  was  it
even  so  high  as  this  in  the  small  Balaclava  General  Hospital,  while
in  the  huts  of  the  Castle  Hospital,  on  the  heights  above  Balaclava,
at  a  subsequent  period,  the  mortality  among  the  wounded  did  not
reach  three  per  cent.  It  is  not  to  this,  however,  that  we  appeal,  as
the  only  proof  of  the  danger  of  surface  over-ci'owding.  It  is  to  the
fact  of  80  cases  of  hospital  gangrene  having  been  recorded  during  one
month  at  Scutari  (and  many,  many  more,  passed  unrecorded)  ;  to  the
fact  that,  out  of  44  secondary  amputations  of  the  lower  extremities
consecutively  performed,  36  died  ;  and  to  the  cases  of  fever  which
broke  out  in  the  hospital,  not  by  tens  but  by  hundreds.

All  experience  tells  the  same  tale,  both  among  sick  and  well.
Men  will  have  a  high  rate  of  mortality  in  large  barracks,  a  low
one  in  separate  huts,  even  with  a  much  less  amount  of  cubic  space.*

The  example  which  Fiance  and  Belgium  have  lately  set  us  of
separating  their  hospitals  into  a  number  of  distinct  pavilions,  con-
taining generally  not  moi-e  than  100  sick  each,  should  be  elsewhere
imitated.  It  may  be  useful,  by  way  of  illustrating  good  and  bad
hospital  structure,  to  annex  plans  of  the  newest  civil  and  military
hospitals  constructed  in  Paris,  in  contrast  with  plans  of  the  newest
civil  and  military  hospitals  constnicted  in  England.

The  Lariboisiere  as  a  civil  hospital,  the  Yincennes  as  a  military
one,  exhibit  the  latest  and  the  best  specimens  of  hospital  construction
in  Paris.

King's  College  as  a  civil  hospital,  ISTetley  as  a  military  one,  are
among  the  latest — we  would  we  could  say  the  best — plans  of  hospital
construction  in  England.

The  Lariboisiere,  as  will  be  seen  from  the  plan,  contains  600  beds,
under  six  different  roofs.

*  It  must  never  be  forgotten  that,  during  the  last  six  months  of  our  occupation
in  tlie  Crimea,  the  death-rate  among  our  men,  barracked  in  huts,  was  only  two-
thirds  of  what  it  is  among  the  men  in  barracks  at  home.


and  Hospital  Construction.  9

In  the  Vincennes  plan  the  pavilions  are  end  to  end,  two  and  a-half
in  each  wing,  and  contain  about  600  beds  in  foui-  pavilions  and  two
half-pavilions.

Netley  Hospital  is  to  contain  1 000  sick  and  invalids,  under  two  I'oofs.

2.  Deficiency  of  Space. — Wherever  cubic  space  is  deficient,  ventila-
tion is  bad.  Cubic  space  and  ventilation  will  therefore  go  hand  in
hand.  The  law  holds  good  with  regard  to  hospitals,  barracks,  and  all
inhabited  places.  Deficiency  of  cubic  space  is  confounded  by  unskilful
sanitary  statisticians  with  surface  over-crowding  in  towns,  although
the  things  are  quite  difierent,  and  lead  to  diflferent  results.  In  a
recent  paper  it  has  been  argued  that  because  the  statistics  of  disease
in  towns  of  different  densities  do  not  show  so  lax-ge  a  ^proportionate
mortality  from  consumption  as  takes  place  in  the  army,  therefore  the
allegation  that  the  army  mortality  is  caused  by  overcrowding  and  bad
ventilation  is  incorrect.  We  happen  to  know  that  deficient  external
ventilation  and  over-crowding  in  barracks,  as  regards  cubic  space,  stand
as  follows : —

The  cavalry  bari'acks,  as  a  whole,  are  the  least  o^■er- crowded,  and
have  the  freest  external  movement  of  air.  Next  come  the  infantry ;  and
the  most  crowded  and  the  least  ventilated  externally  are  the  Guards'
barracks  ;  so  that  the  mortality  from  consumption  which  follows  the
same  order  of  increase  in  the  different  arms  augments  with  increase
of  crowding,  and  difiiculty  of  ventilation.

If  ovei'-ci'owding  or  its  concomitant,  bad  ventilation,  among
healthy  people,  generates  disease,  it  does  so  to  a  far  greater  extent
among  the  sick  in  hospitals.  In  civil  hospitals  the  amount  of  cubic
space  varies  between  600  and  2000  cubic  feet  per  bed.  In  some
military  hospitals  it  is  under  300 ;  and  from  700  to  800  appear  to
be  considered  a  somewhat  extravagant  allowance.  The  army
regulation  as  to  cubic  space  in  hospitals  is  over-crowding.  At
Scutari,  at  one  time,  not  even  half  the  regulation-space  was  given  ;
and  the  great  over-crowding  consequent  thereupon  was  one  element
in  the  disastrous  result  which  followed.  Any  one  in  the  habit  of
examining  hospitals  with  different  x'elative  amounts  of  cubic  space
cannot  fail  to  have  been  struck  vi^ith  the  very  different  appearance
of  the  sick,  and  with  the  different  state  of  the  ward  atmosphere.  It
is  impossible  to  ventilate  a  wai'd  in  a  brick  or  stone  hospital  by
natural  means,  when  the  cubic  space  is  less  than  a  cei'tain  amount.
Crowded  wards  are,  in  fact,  offensive,  with  all  the  windows  open.

In  the  country  less  cubic  space  is  essential  than  in  towns.  In
detached  huts  or  pavilions,  especially  if  they  be  but  one  story  high,
less  cubic  space  is  necessary  than  where  numbers  are  massed  together.

Under  all  circumstances,  hoAvever,  the  progress  of  the  cases  ^in
solidly-built  hospitals)  will  betray  any  curtailment  of  space  much
below  1500  cubic  feet.  In  Paris  1700,  and  in  London  2000  and
even  2500  cubic  feet  are  now  thought  advisable.

The  master  of  some  large  works  in  London  lately  mentioned  the
following  fact  ; — He  was  in  the  habit  of  sending  those  of  his  work-


10  Sanitary  Condition  of  Hospitals

men  who  met  with  accidents  to  two  different  metropolitan  hospitals.
In  one  they  recovered  quickly  :  in  the  other  they  were  frequently
attacked  with  erysipelas,  and  some  cases  were  fatal.  On  inqniiy  it
appeared  that  in  the  former  hospital  a  larger  amount  of  cubic  space
was  allowed  than  in  the  latter,  which  is  also  so  deficient  in  external
ventilation  and  in  construction,  that  nothing  but  artificial  ventilation
could  effectively  change  its  atmosphere.

It  is  no  less  impoi'tant  to  have  a  sufficient  surface-area  between
the  adjoining  and  the  opposite  beds.  PDing  cubic  space  above  the
patient  is  not  all  that  is  wanted.  In  the  lofty  corridors  of  Scutari
I  have  seen  two  long  rows  of  opposite  beds  with  scarcely  three  feet
from  foot  to  foot.  Certainly  it  cannot  be  thought  too  much,  under
any  circumstances,  to  give  to  each  bed  a  territory  to  itself  of  at  least
eight  feet  wide  by  twelve  feet  long.

3.  Deficiency  of  Ventilation. — The  want  of  fresh  air  may  be  detected
in  the  appearance  of  patients  sooner  than  any  other  want.  No  care
or  luxury  will  compensate  indeed  for  its  absence.  Unless  the  air
within  the  ward  can  be  kept  as  fresh  as  it  is  without,  the  patients  had
better  be  away.  Except  in  a  few  cases  well  known  to  physicians  the
danger  of  admitting  fresh  air  directly  is  very  much  exaggerated.  Pa-
tients in  bed  are  not  peculiarly  inclined  to  catch  cold,*  and  in  England,
where  fuel  is  cheap,  somebody  is  indeed  to  blame,  if  the  ward  cannot  be
kept  warm  enough,and  if  the  patients  cannot  have  bed-clothing  enough,
for  as  much  air  to  be  admitted  from  without  as  suffices  to  keep  the  ward
fresh.  No  artificial  ventilation  will  do  this.  Although  in  badly-con-
structed hospitals,  or  in  countries  where  fuel  is  dear,  and  the  winter
very  cold,  artificial  ventilation  may  be  necessary,  it  never  can  com-
pensate for  the  want  of  the  ojDen  M'indow.  The  ward  is  never  fresh,
and  in  the  best  hospitals  at  Paris,  artificially  ventilated,  it  will  be
found  that,  till  the  windows  are  opened  in  the  morning,  the  air  is
close.  Natural  ventilation,  or  that  by  open  windows  and  open  fire-
places, is  the  only  efficient  means  for  procuring  the  life-spring  of  the
sick — fresh  aii\  But  to  obtain  this  the  ward  should  be  at  least  sixteen
feet  high,  and  the  distance  between  the  opposite  windows  not  more
than  thirty  feet.  The  amoxmt  of  fresh  air  required  for  ventilation
has  been  hitherto  very  much  underrated,  because  it  has  been  assumed
that  the  quantity  of  cai'bonic  acid  produced  during  respiration  was
the  chief  noxious  gas  to  be  carried  off.  The  total  amount  of  this  gas
produced  by  an  adxilt  in  twenty- four  hours  is  about  40,000  cubic  inches,
which,  in  a  barrack-room,  say,  containing  sixteen  men,  would  give
370  cubic  feet  per  diem.  Allowing  eight  hours  for  the  night  occupa-
tion of  such  a  room,  when  the  doors  and  windows  may  be  supposed
to  be  shut,  the  product  of  carbonic  acid  would  be 123  cubic  feet,  or

*  'Catching  cold'  in  bed  follows  the  same  law  as  'catching  cold'  when  up.  If
the  atmosphei-e  is  foul,  and  the  lungs  and  skin  cannot  therefore  relieve  the  system,
then  a  draught  upon  the  patient  may  give  him  cold.  But  this  is  the  favilt  of  the
foul  ait;  not  of  the  fresh.


and  Hospital  Construction.  11

about  fifteen  and  a-half  cubic  feet  pei-  hour.  This  large  quantity,  if
not  speedily  carried  away,  would  undoubtedly  be  injurious  to  health  ;
but  there  are  other  gaseous  poisons  produced  with  the  carbonic  acid
which  have  still  greater  power  to  injure.  Every  adult  exhales  by
the  lungs  and  skin  forty-eight  ounces,  or  three  pints  of  water  in
twenty-four  hours.  Sixteen  men  in  a  room  would  thei-efore  exhale
in  eight  hours  sixteen  pints  of  water,  and  123  cubic  feet  of  carbonic
acid  into  the  atmosphere  of  the  room.  With  the  watery  vapour  there
is  also  exhaled  a  large  quantity  of  organic  matter,  ready  to  enter  into
the  putrefactive  condition.  This  is  especially  the  case  during  the
hours  of  sleep,  and  as  it  is  a  vital  law  that  all  excretions  are  injurious
to  health  if  reintroduced  into  the  system,  it  is  easy  to  understand
how  the  breathing  of  damp  foul  air  of  this  kind,  and  the  consequent
re-introduction  of  excrementitious  matter  into  the  blood  through  the
function  of  respiration  will  tend  to  ]n-oduce  disease.

If  this  be  so  for  the  well,  how  much  more  will  it  be  so  for  the  sick  ?
— for  the  sick,  the  exhalations  from  whom  are  always  highly  morbid
and  dangerous,  as  they  are  one  of  nature's  methods  of  eliminating
noxious  matter  from  the  body,  in  order  that  it  may  recover  health.

One  would  think  that  the  first  and  last  idea  in  constructing
hospitals  would  be  to  contrive  such  means  of  ventilation  as  would  be
perpetually  and  instantly  carrying  off  these  morbid  emanations.  One
would  think  tliat  it  would  be  the  first  thing  taught  to  the  attendants
to  manage  such  means  of  ventilation.  Often,  however,  it  is  not  even
the  last  thing  taught  to  them.

A  much  larger  mass  of  air  is  required  to  dilute  and  carry  away
these  emanations  than  is  generally  supposed,  and  the  whole  art  of
ventilation  resolves  itself  into  applying  in  any  specific  case  the  best
method  of  renewing  the  air  suQiciently  without  producing  dravights,
or  occasioning  excessive  varieties  in  temperature.  Trifling  varieties
ai'e  rather  beneficial  than  otherwise  in  most  cases.  A  cooler  atmo-
sphere at  night  acts  like  a  tonic.

4.  Deficiency  of  Light. — What  is  the  proportionate  influence  of  the
four  defects  enumerated  in  delaying  recovery  I  am  not  competent  to
determine.

Second  only  to  fresh  air,  however,  I  should  be  inclined  to  rank  light
in  importance  for  the  sick.  Direct  sunlight,  not  only  daylight,  is  neces-
sary for  speedy  I'ecovery,  except,  perhaps,  in  certain  ophthalmic  and  a
small  number  of  other  cases.  Instances  could  be  given,  almost  endless,
where,  in  dark  wards  or  in  wards  with  a  northeiui  aspect,  even  when
thoroughly  warmed,  or  in  wards  with  borrowed  light,  even  when
thoroughly  ventilated,  the  sick  could  not  by  any  means  be  made
speedily  to  recover.  The  effect  of  light  on  health  and  disease  has
been  ably  discussed  in  an  article  on  light  in  the  August  number,  1858,  of
the  '  North  British  Review.'  Its  importance  has  been  long  recognised
in  the  inedical  profession,  as  may  be  learned  from  the  writings  of  Sir
Andrew  Wylie,  Dr.  Milne  Edwards,  and  Mr.  Ward. Dai'k  barrack-


12  Sanitary  Condition  of  Hospitals

rooms,  and  barrack-rooms  with  northern  aspects,  will  furnish  a  larger
amount  of  sickness  than  light  and  sunny  rooms.

Among  kindred  effects  of  light  I  may  mention,  from  experience,  as
quite  perceptible  in  promoting  recovery,  the  being  able  to  see  out  of
a  window,  instead  of  looking  against  a  dead  wall ;  the  bright  colours  of
flowers  ;  the  being  able  to  read  in  bed  by  the  light  of  a  window  close
to  the  bed-head.  It  is  generally  said  that  the  effect  is  upon  the  mind.
Perhaps  so ;  but  it  is  no  less  so  upon  the  body  on  that  account.

All  hospital  buildings  in  this  climate  should  be  erected  so  that
as  great  a  surface  as  possible  should  receive  direct  sunlight — a  rule
which  has  been  observed  in  several  of  our  best  hospitals,  but,  I  am
sorry  to  say,  passed  over  in  some  of  those  most  recently- constructed.
Window-blinds  can  always  moderate  the  light  of  a  light  ward ;
but  the  gloom  of  a  dark  ward  is  irremediable.

The  axis  of  a  ward  should  be  as  nearly  as  possible  north  and
south  ;  the  windows  on  both  sides,  so  that  the  sun  shall  shine  in
(from  the  time  he  rises  till  the  time  he  sets)  at  one  side  or  the  other.
There  should  be  a  window  to  at  least  every  two  beds,  as  is  the  case
now  in  our  best  hospitals.  Some  foreign  hospitals,  in  countries  where
the  light  is  far  more  intense  than  in  England,  give  one  window  to  every
bed.  The  window-space  should  be  one-third  of  the  wall-space.  The
windows  should  reach  from  two  or  three  feet  of  the  floor  to  one  foot
of  the  ceiliug.  The  escape  of  heat  may  be  diminished  by  plate
or  double  glass.  But  while  we  can  generate  warmth,  we  cannot
generate  daylight,  or  the  purifying  and  curative  effect  of  the  sun's  rays.


PART  II.

Considering,  then,  that  the  conditions  essential  to  the  health  of
hospitals  are  principally  these —

I.  Fresh  Air.  2.  Light.  3.  Ample  Space.  4.  Subdivision  of  Sick
into  Separate  Buildings  or  Pavilions — let  us  examine  the  causes  in  the
usual  ward  construction  which  prevent  us  from  obtaining  these  and
other  necessary  conditions.  The  principal  causes  are  as  follow,  viz.  : —

1.  Defective  Means  of  Natural  Ventilation  and  Warming.

2.  Defective  Height  of  Wards.

3.  Excessive  Width  of  Wards  between  the  Opposite  Windows.

4.  Arranging  the  Beds  along  the  Dead  Walls.

5.  Having  more  than  two  Rows  of  Beds  between  the  Opposite
Windows.

6.  Having  Windows  only  on  one  Side,  or  having  a  closed  Corridor
connecting  the  Wards.

7.  Using  Absorbent  Materials  for  Walls  and  Ceilings,  and  Washing
Floors  of  hospitals.

8.  Defective  Condition  of  Waterclosets.

9.  Defective  Ward  Furniture.


and  Hospital  Construction.  18

xo.  Defective  Accommodation  for  Nursing  and  Discipline.

11.  Defective  Hospital  Kitchens.

1 2.  Defective  Hospital  Laundries.

13.  Selection  of  Bad  Sites  and  Bad  Local  Climates  for  Hospitals.

14.  Erecting  Hospitals  in  Towns.

15.  Defects  of  Sewerage.

16.  Construction  of  Hospitals  without  Free  Circulation  of  External
Air.

1.  Defective  Means  of  Ventilation  and  Warming. — When  the
question  of  ventilation  first  assumed  a  practical  shape  in  this  country,
it  was  siipposed  that  600  cubic  feet  of  air  per  hour  were  sufficient  for
a  healthy  adult,  in  a  room  where  a  number  of  people  ai'e  congi*egated
together.  Subsequent  experience,  however,  has  shown  that  this  is  by
no  means  enough.  As  much  as  1000  cubic  feet  have  been  found
insufficient  to  keep  the  air  free  from  closeness  and  smell ;  and  it  is
highly  probable  that  the  actual  quantity  required  will  ultimately  be
found  to  be  at  least  1500  cubic  feet  per  hour  per  man.

In  sick  wards  we  have  more  positive  experience  as  to  the  quantity
of  air  requii'ed  to  keep  them  sweet  and  healthy.  It  has  been  found  iii
certain  Parisian  hosi^itals,  in  which  the  ventilating  arrangements  were
deficient^  that  pysemia  and  hospital  gangrene  had  appeared  among
the  patients.  These  diseases  disappeared,  on  the  introduction  of
ventilating  arrangements,  whereby  2500  cubic  feet  of  air  per  bed  per
hour  were  supplied  to  the  wards.  Notwithstanding  this  large  quantity,
however,  the  ward-atmosphere  was  found  not  to  be  sufficiently
pure.  In  other  wards  the  quantity  of  air  was  increased  to  as  much
as  4000  or  5000  cubic  feet  per  bed  per  hour — an  amount  which  keeps
the  wards  perfectly  sweet.  But  again  we  say,  do  not  trust  to  artificial
means ;  without  natural  ventilation  the  air  will  never  he  fresh.

In  this  country,  have  no  other  than  the  open  fireplace.  It  is  the
safest  warmer  and  ventilator.  Heated  air  from  metal  surfaces  is
especially  to  be  avoided.  It  seems  likely  that  we  shall  soon  be
enabled  to  have  open  fireplaces  in  the  middle  of  wards,  the  dx-auglit
being  carried  under  the  floor.  It  is  obvious  that  fireplaces  in  the
side  walls  are  in  the  wrong  place.  There  is  great  loss  and  unequal
distribution  of  heat  in  consequence.

2.  Defective  Height  of  Wards. — It  is  not  possible  to  ventilate  suffi-
ciently a  ward  of  ten  or  twelve  feet  high.  And  again,  it  is  not  pos-
sible to  ventilate  a  ward  where  there  is  a  great  height  above  the
windows.  A  ward  of  thirty  beds  can  be  well  ventilated  with  a  height
of  about  sixteen  or  seventeen  feet,  provided  the  windows  reach  to
within  one  foot  of  the  ceiling.  Otherwise,  the  top  of  the  ward
becomes  a  reservoir  for  foul  air.

3.  Too  Great  Width  of  Wards  between  the  Opposite  Windoios.  —  It
does  not  appear  as  if  the  air  could  be  thoroughly  changed,  if  a
distance  of  more  than  thirty  feet  intervenes  between  the  opposite
windows  :  if,  in  other  words,  the  ward  is  more  than  thirty  feet  wide.


14  Sanitary  Condition  of  Hospitals

This  is  the  true  starting-point  from  which  to  determine  the  size  of
your  ward,  and  the  number  of  beds  you  will  have  in  it.  If  you  make
your  length  too  great  in  proportion  to  this  width,  your  ward  becomes
a  tiinnel — a  form  fatal  to  good  ventilation.  This  was  the  case  witli
the  great  corridor  wards  at  Scutari.

If,  on  the  other  hand,  you  make  your  wards  too  short  in  proportion
to  this  width,  you  multiply  corners  in  a  greater  ratio  than  you  multiply
sick.  And  direct  experiment  has  shown  that  the  movement  of  the
air  in  the  centre  of  a  ward  is  three  or  four  times  as  great  as  it  is  at
the  corners.  The  movement  of  the  air  in  a  hospital  ward  should
always  be  slightly  perceptible  over  the  face  and  hands,  and  yet  there
should  be  no  draughts.

4.  Arranging  the  Beds  along  the  Dead  Walls. — This  deprives  the
patient  of  the  amount  of  light  and  air  necessary  to  his  recovery,  and
has,  besides,  the  disadvantage  that  when  the  windows  are  opened  the
effluvia  must  blow  over  all  the  intervening  beds  before  escaping.
This  arrangement  is  to  be  seen  at  Portsmouth  Military  Hospital,
Chatham  Garrison  Hospital,  in  the  new  part  of  the  Edinburgh  In-
firmary, and  is  proposed  at  Netley  Hospital.

5.  Having  more  than  Two  Rows  of  Beds  between  the  Windows. —
In  the  double  wards,  or  wards  back  to  back,  of  the  new  part  of
Guy's,  of  King's  College,  and  of  the  Fever  Hospital,  this  arrange-
ment is  seen.  It  is  objectionable  on  every  account.  These  double
wards  are  from  twelve  to  nearly  twenty  feet  wider  than  they  ought  to
be  between  the  opposite  windows  for  thorough  ventilation.  The  par-
tition down  the  middle  with  apertures  makes  matters  rather  worse  ;
complaint  has  been  made  that  it  beats  down  the  dravight  on  the
heads  of  the  inner  rows  of  patients.  It  also  prevents  the  head
nurse  from  having  that  view  of  her  whole  ward  at  once,  which  she
ought  to  have  for  proper  care  of  it.  The  only  hospital  in  which  this
arx'angement  of  four  rows  of  beds  could  be  comparatively  unobjec-
tionable, would  be  in  a  one-storied  hut  hospital,  ventilated  through
the  ceiling,  like  that  of  Dr.  Parkes,  at  Renkioi.*  But  his  were
magnificent  huts,  and  the  partition  was  little  more  than  a  bulkhead.
In  the  ordinary  huts  of  the  Sardinian  camp-hosjDitals  at  Balaclava  I
have  seen  this  arrangement  produce  pernicious  effects.

6.  Having  Windows  only  on  one  Side,  or  having  a  closed  Corridor
connecting  the  Wards. — As  it  is  a  necessity  of  hospital  construction
that  every  ward  ought  to  have  direct  communication  with  the  ex-
ternal air  by  means  of  a  sufficient  number  of  windows  on  its  opposite
sides,  it  follows  that  to  have  a  dead  wall  on  one  side,  or  to  cover  one
of  the  sides  by  a  corridor,  is  directly  to  interfere  with  the  natural
ventilation  of  the  ward.  To  join  all  the  ward  doors  and  windows  on
one  side  by  means  of  a  corridor  is  much  more  objectionable  than  even


*  On  the  Dardanelles  during  the  Crimean  War,


and  Hospital  Construction.  15

to  have  a  dead  wall,  because  the  foul  air  of  all  the  wax-ds  must  neces-
sarily pass  into  the  corridor ;  and  hence,  without  extraordinary  pre-
cautions, such  as  are  not  usually  nor  likely  to  be  bestowed  on  such
matters,  these  conidors  are  the  certain  means  of  engendering  a  hos2)ital
atmosphere.  If  any  one  had  wished  to  see  the  corridor  plan  in  all  its
horrors,  Scutai'i  would  have  shown  them  to  him  on  a  colossal  scale.  But
the  evils  connected  with  corridors  may  be  seen  on  a  smaller  scale  in
almost  every  hospital  in  London,  and  Netley  also  is  to  have  its  corridor.

This  country  is  much  indebted  to  Mr.  Roberton,  of  Manchester,  to
the  Medical  Staff  of  the  Middlesex  Hospital,  and  to  the  Army  Sanitaiy
Commission  for  their  advocacy  of  the  pavilion  system  of  hospital  con-
struction, in  opposition  to  the  corridor  system,  as  also  for  their  en-
lightened labours  in  the  cause  of  good  hospital  construction  generally.

7.  Using  Absorbent  Materials  for  Floors,  Walls,  and  Ceilings  of
Hosjntals,  and  Washing  Floors. — The  amount  of  organic  matter  given
off  by  respiration  and  in  other  ways  from  the  sick  is  such  that  the
floors,  walls,  and  ceilings  of  hospital  wards — if  not  of  impervious
materials,  become  dangerous  absorbents.

The  boards  are  in  time  saturated  with  organic  matter,  and  only
require  moisture  to  give  off  noxious  efiliivia.  When  the  floors  are
being  washed,  the  smell  of  something  quite  other  than  soap  and
water  is  perfectly  perceptible,  and  there  cannot  be  a  doubt  that
washing  floors  is  one  cause  of  erysipelas,  &c.,  in  some  hospitals.

In  Scutari,  where  the  wards  were  overcrowded,  the  cases  offensive,
and  the  floors  ill-laid,  rotten  and  dirty,  the  accumulated  saturations
of  weeks  and  months  wex'e  such  that  the  floors  could  not  be  scoui'ed
without  poisoning  the  patients.

There  is  no  remedy  for  this  but  filling  up  the  grain  of  the  wood
(which  oiight  to  be  oak)  with  bees-wax  and  turpentine,  lilce  the
French  parquet,  or  oiling  and  lackering,  i.  e.,  saturating  the  floor  with
linseed-oil,  and  then  rubbing  it  over  with  a  peculiar  laqite  varnish,
and  polishing  it  so  as  to  resemble  French  polish,  like  the  Berlin
hospital  floors.  Both  pi'ocesses  render  the  floor  non-absorbent — both
processes  do  away  with  the  necessity  of  scouring  altogether.  The
French  floor  stands  the  most  wear  and  tear",  but  must  be  cleaned  by
a,frotteur,  which  cleaning  is  more  laborious  than  scrubbing,  and  does
not  remove  the  dust.  The  Prussian  floor  requires  re-preparing
every  three  years.  But  the  wet  and  dry  rubbing,  or  process  of
cleaning  is  far  less  laborious  than  either  frottage  or  scrubbing,  and
completely  removes  the  dust,  and  freshens  the  ward  in  the  morning.
By  either  process  the  sick  would  gain  much  in  England.  The  Berlin
flooring  is  by  no  means  perfect,  on  account  of  this  deficient  durability
of  surface,  and  might  be  improved.

As  to  the  walls  and  ceilings  of  wards,  plaster,  or  brick  white-
washed, are  equally  objectionable.  Pure,  white,  polished,  non-ab-
sorbent cement  is  the  only  material  fit  for  hospital  walls.  If  any
one  has  inhabited  the  wards  of  War  Hospitals,  after  several  weeks


16  Sanitary  Condition  of  Hospitals

or  months  of  constant  occupation  by  sick  and  wounded,  where  little
or  no  attempt  had  been  made  to  lime-wash  the  uneven  dirty  plaster-
walls,  saturated  with  organic  matter,  he  will  not  wonder  at  the  stress
which  is  here  laid  upon  the  importance  of  impervious  walls.

8.  Defective  Condition  of  Waterclosets. — It  is  hardly  necessary  to
say  more  than  this.  There  can  be  no  safety  for  the  sick  if  any  but
waterclosets  of  the  best  construction  are  used,  as  also  if  they  are
not  built  externally  fo  the  main  building,  and  cut  off  by  a  lobby,
separately  lighted  and  ventilated,  from  the  ward.  The  same  thing
may  be  said  of  sinks.  I  have  known  outbreaks  of  fever  even
among  the  healthy  from  an  ill-constructed  and  ill-placed  sink  in.
this  country.

The  smell  of  latrines,  which  are  not  waterclosets,  as  used  in  French
hospitals,  although  externally  built,  is  quite  perceptible  at  the  end  of
the  ward  nearest  to  them.

9.  Defective  Ward  Furniture. — Hospital  bedsteads  should  always  be
of  iron,  the  rest  of  the  furniture  of  oak.  Hair  is  the  only  material
yet  discovered  fit  for  hospital  mattresses.  It  is  not  hard  nor  cold.
It  is  easily  washed.  \t  does  not  retain  miasma.  Straw  has  the
advantage  of  being  easily  renewed,  but  it  is  not  desirable.  It  is
too  hard  and  too  cold  not  to  render  necessary  the  use  of  a  blanket
under  the  patient,  which  use  is  likely  to  encourage  bed-sores.  I
speak  from  actual  experience  of  the  fatal  effect  of  using  the  paillasse
with  patients  much  reduced.  It  may  lower  their  vital  energy  beyond
repair.

For  all  eating,  drinking,  and  washing  vessels,  and  for  other  utensils,
the  use  of  glass  or  earthenware  is  superior  to  that  of  tin  or  any
other  metal,  on  account  of  its  greater  cleanliness.  Notwithstanding
the  greater  amount  of  breakage  and  of  expense,  glass  or  earthen-
ware is  therefore  best  wherever  possible.  Some  kinds  of  tin  vessels
cannot  by  any  amount  of  cleaning  be  freed  from  an  unclean  smell.

10.  Defective  Accovi'inodation for  Nursing  and  Discipline. — Simplicity
of  construction  in  hospitals  is  essential  to  discipline.  Effectual  and
easy  supervision  is  essential  to  proper  care  and  nursing.

Every  unneeded  closet,  scullery,  sink,  lobby,  and  staii'case  repre-
sents both  a  place  which  must  be  cleaned,  which  must  take  hands  and
time  to  clean,  and  a  hiding  or  skulking  place  for  patients  or  servants
disposed  to  do  wrong.  And  of  such  no  hospital  will  ever  be  free.
Every  five  minutes  wasted  upon  cleaning  what  had  better  not  have
been  there  to  be  cleaned,  is  something  taken  from  and  lost  by  the  sick.

In  considering  the  pavilion  plan  to  be  in  future  received  as  the
sanitary  necessity  for  hospital  construction,  we  must  look  upon  it  as
susceptible  of  many  modifications.  In  deciding  which  of  these  shall  be
adopted,  there  are  four  essentials  to  be  considered  as  regards  the  head
of  nursing  and  discipline.  i.  Economy  of  attendance.  2.  Ease  of
supervision.  3.  Convenience  as  to  number  of  sick  in  the  same  ward
and  on  the  same  floor,  so  as  to  save  extra  attendants  and  unneces-


and  Hospital  Construction.  17

sary  waste  of  time  and  sti'ength  on  the  stairs.  4.  Efficiency  as  to
accommodation  for  nurses  so  as  to  overlook  their  wards.

Fii'st.  Economy  as  to  attendance. — I  would  rather  not  enumerate
the  instances  where  I  have  seen  that,  often  from  the  most  various
causes,  one  result  arises,  viz.,  that  more  time  and  care  are  given  to
passages,  stairs,  &c.  &c.,  than  to  the  sick.  Extreme  simplicity  of
construction  and  of  detail  is  essential  to  obviate  this.  A  convenient
arrangement  of  lifts,  and  the  laying  of  hot  and  cold  water  all  over  the
building  economize  attendance — certainly  as  much  as  one  attendant
to  every  thirty  sick.

Secondly.  Ease  of  Supervision. — The  system  of  scouts,  watch,
alarm,  is  well  understood  in  many  wards  where  patients  would  be
puzzled  to  give  the  tilings  names.  Some  patients  will  know  both
things  and  names.  Attendants  require  inspection  as  well  as  patients.
Whatever  system  of  hospital  construction  is  adopted  should  provide
for  easy  supervision  at  unexpected  times.  The  Vincennes  plan  is
better  adapted  for  this  than  the  Lariboisiere  plan,  inasmuch  as  there  is
a  greater  number  of  patients  on  the  same  level,  and  stairs  are  spared.

Third  and  Fourth.  Distribution  of  Hick  in  convenient  numbers  for
attendance,  and  Position  of  Nurses^  Rooms. — Four  wai'ds  of  ten
patients  each,  taking  the  average  of  patients  as  in  London,  cannot  be
efficiently  overlooked  by  one  liead  nurse.  Forty  patients  in  one  ward
can  be  fully  overlooked  by  one  head  nurse.  She  ought  to  have  her
room  so  placed  that  she  can  command  her  whole  ward,  day  and  night,
from  a  window  looking  into  the  ward.  This  cannot  be  the  case  if  she
has  four  wards.  If  she  has  two,  they  ought  to  be  built  end  to  end,
with  her  room  placed  between  and  looking  into  both  wards.

Four  wards  of  ten  patients  each  cannot  be  attended  by  one  night
nurse,  taking  the  average  of  London  cases.  Forty  patients  in  one
ward  can  be  fully  attended  by  one  night  nurse.

Small  wards  are  indeed  objectionable  in  woi-king  a  hospital.

If  we  are  to  be  guided,  however,  by  the  results  of  recent  experience
in  hospital  building,  we  shall  probably  come  to  the  conclusion  that,
taking  sanitary  and  administrative  reasons  together,  thirty- two  patients
is  a  good  ward-unit.

Let  us  see  what  we  do  in  our  military  hospitals  at  home.  The
first  thing  that  will  strike  any  one  in  most  of  our  regimental  hospitals
is  the  extraordinary  number  of  wards,  and  of  holes  and  corners  in
comparison  with  the  number  of  sick.  In  a  hospital  for  a  battalion
500  or  600  strong,  yoii  find  eight  or  ten  little  bed-rooms,  miscalled
wards,  a  little  kitchen,  everything,  in  fact,  on  a  little  scale,  like  a
collapsed  French  hospital.  How  much  more  sensible  would  it  be  to
have  one,  or  at  most  two  large  wai"ds  for  thirty  tick  each,  with
a  small  '  casualty '  ward  !  How  much  less  the  expense  of  ei'ection
and  administration,  how  much  easier  the  discipline  and  over-
sight, how  much  better  the  ventilation  !

To  return  to  lai-go  general  hospitals. These  '  casualty '  wards,  as

c


18  ■ Sanitary  Condition  of  Hospitals

they  are  called,  for  noisy  or  offensive  cases  are  much  better  placed
apart,  with  a  completely  appointed  staff  of  their  own,  than  attached
one  small  wai-d  to  each  larger  one.  Patients  requiring  much  atten-
tion, whose  condition  fits  them  the  most  for  the  small  wards,  cannot
be  put  there,  because  either  they  are  njore  or  less  neglected  or  they
unduly  monopolize  the  service  of  the  ward  attendants.  If  convalescent
patients  are  put  into  them,  they  are  comparatively  removed  from
inspection,  and  often  play  tricks  there.  If  separate  '  casualty  '  wards  are
provided  as  they  ought  to  be,  the  small  ward  (often  seen  in  French
hospitals),  at  the  end  of  the  larger  ward,  is  only an  incubus.

II.  Defective  Hosjntal  Kitchens. — Two  facts  every  careful  ob-
server can  establish  from  experience.

1.  The  necessity  for  variety  in  food,  as  an  essential  element  of
health,  owing  to  the  number  of  materials  required  to  preserve  the
human  frame.  In  sickness  it  is  still  more  important,  because,  the
frame  being  in  a  morbid  state,  it  is  scarcely  possible  to  prescribe
beforehand  with  certainty  what  it  will  be  able  to  digest  and  assimilate.
The  so-called  '  fancies '  of  disease  are  in  many  cases  valuable  indications.

2.  The  importance  of  cooking  so  as  to  secure  the  greatest  digesti-
bility and  the  greatest  economy  in  nutritive  value  of  food.

Yet  so  little  was  either  of  these  elements  of  health  understood  in
the  late  Crimean  war,  so  little  is  either  understood  up  to  this  hour
in  the  diets,  rations,  and  cooking  of  either  sick  or  well  in  the  army,
that  we  still  see  the  everlasting  sameness  of  ration,  the  eternal  boiled
meat  of  the  '  full,'  '  half,'  and  '  low '  diet  of  the  hospital  kitchen.  As
the  present  Quartermaster-General  says,  'the  men  live  upon  boiled
meat  for  twenty-one  years.'

In  the  war  hospitals  of  the  East  it  was  practically  learnt,  though
never  theoretically  acknowledged,  that  in  order  to  make  the  patient
eat  at  all,  he  must  not  be  fed  on  this  hard  boiled  never-varying  meat
of 'full'  or  'half  diet.

Hence  the  wasteful  and  violent  expenditure  of  '  extras,'  as  they  are
called,  which,  in  the  hands  of  inexperienced  surgeons,  left  to  their
own  unassisted  inventions,  often  laid  them  open  to  criticism.

But  no  attempt  was  made  to  compose  a  better  or  more  varied  diet,
hardly  any,  till  the  arrival  of  Soyer,  to  improve  the  system  of
cooking.

Some  few  improvements  have  lately  been  made  in  the  hospital
kitchens  of  the  army  at  home  ;  what  variety  of  cooking  there  is  even
now  in  the  barracks  is  often  done  at  the  expense  of,  and  by  the  men
themselves.  A  proper  system  of  hospital  diets  will  ere  long  be  intro-
duced in  the  army  hospitals.

I  have  often  been  surprised  by  the  primitive  kitchens  of  some  of
our  civil  hospitals,  with  which  little  variety  of  cooking  is  possible.

These  things  show  how  little  diet  and  cooking  are  even  yet  thought
of  as  sanitary  and  curative  agents.  There  still  exists  a  confusion  of
ideas  about  '  spoiling'  the  sick,  about  '  too  much  indulgence '  of  the


and  Hospital  Construction.  19

patients,  and  even  yet  comparatively  little  is  practically  known  as  to
what  is,  and  what  is  not,  essential  for  restoration  to  the  iitmost
vigour.

1 2.  Defective  Hosjnt^d  Laundries. — It  is  hardly  necessary  to  go  back
to  the  time  in  the  Crimean  war  when  in  a  Scutari  hospital  six  shirts
were  washed  in  a  month  for  a  number  of  2000  patients,  which  was
constantly  changing  ;  when  the  number  per  man  per  month  of  all
articles  of  all  descriptions  washed  was  less  than  three.  The  pesti-
lential filth  of  that  time  is  known  now  to  all.  But  it  is  not  so  well
known  that  even  now  there  is  scarcely  an  ai'my  hospital  which  has
such  a  thing  as  a  laundry.  The  bedding  is  generally  washed  by  tlie
barrack  department ;  no  one  appears  to  know  how.  It  is  done  by
contract.  And  the  body  linen  is  generally  washed,  if  such  a  term
ought  to  be  used,  in  a  small  wash-house,  or  lean-to  shed,  with  or
without  a  boiler,  and  without  any  means  for  drying,  getting-up,  or
airing  linen.  The  linen  is  taken  out  of  the  damp  wash-house,  possibly
into  the  damp  air,  and  there  hung  up  for  a  longer  or  a  shorter  time  ;
and  if  the  '  orderly'  be  careful  of  his  patients,  he  will  complete  the
process  by  drying  the  linen,  before  it  is  put  on,  in  front  of  the  ward  fire.

A  great  deal  has  been  said  about  the  communication  of  'infectious'
disease,  both  in  civil  and  military  hosjiitals,  from  patients'  linen  to
washerwomen.  The  usual  conclusion  arrived  at  on  such  occasions
is  that  such  and  such  a  disease  is  '  very  infectious ;'  e.  g.  I  was
lately  told  in  a  civil  hospital  that  the  washerwomen  became  infected
with  fever  from  the  patients'  linen.  Have  those  who  put  forward
this  docti'ine  of  inevitable  '  infection'  among  washerwomen  ever
examined  the  process  of  washing,  the  appliances  by  which  it  is  done,
and  the  place  where  the  women  wash  1  If  they  will  do  so,  they  will
very  generally  find  a  small,  dark,  wet,  unventilated,  and  overcrowded
little  room  or  shed,  in  which  there  is  hardly  space  to  turn  about — so
full  of  steam  loaded  with  organic  matter  that  it  is  hardly  possible  to
see  across  the  room.  Is  it  surprising  that  the  linen  is  badly  washed,
that  it  is  imperfectly  dx'ied,  and  that  the  washerwomen  are  poisoned
by  inhaling  organic  matter  and  foul  air  1  An  ordinary  hospital  wash-
house  is  a  very  likely  place  indeed  to  conti-act  disease  in,  but  it
supplies  equal  reason  for  demurring  in  toto  to  the  doctrine  that  the
occurrence  is  inevitable,  or  that  the  disease  is  to  blame.  Ignorance
and  mismanagement  lie  at  the  root  of  all  such  presumed  cases  of
'infection.'  And  it  would  better  serve  the  cause  of  humanity  if,
instead  of  citing  such  facts — if  they  be  facts — as  illustrations  that
such  and  such  a  disease  is  infectious,  people  would  reform  these
washing  establishments  and  convert  them  into  proper  laundries,  from
which  properly  cleansed  and  prepared  linen  coiild  be  supplied  to  the  sick,
and  in  which  the  health  of  the  servants  could  be  preserved  from  injury.

Let  laundries  be  constructed  with  svifficient  area  and  cubic  space
for  each  washer,  with  abundance  of  water,  with  proper  means  of
drainage,  and  of  ventilation  for  removing  the  vapour,  and  with  pro-

c  2


20  Sanitarij  Condition  of  Hospitals

perly-constructed  drying  and  ironing  rooms,  and we  shall  cease  to
hear  of  washerwomen  'catching'  fever.

13.  Selection  of  Bad  Sites  and  Bad  Local  Climates  for  Hospitals. —
As  the  object  to  be  attained  in  hospital  construction  is  to  have  pure
dry  air  for  the  sick,  it  will  be  evident  that  this  condition  cannot  be
fulfilled  if  a  damp  climate  be  selected.  It  is  a  well-known  fact,  e.g.,
that  in  the  moi'e  damp  localities  of  the  south  of  England,  certain
classes  of  sick  and  of  invalids  linger,  and  do  not  recover  their  health.
Again,  retentive  clay  subsoils  keep  the  air  over  entire  districts  of  the
country  always  more  or  less  damp.  And  soils  of  this  character  should
not  be  selected  as  sites  for  hospitals.  Self  draining,  gravelly,  or
sandy  subsoils  are  best.  River  banks,  estuary  shores,  valley.s,  marshy
or  muddy  ground,  ought  to  be  avoided.  It  may  seem  sujierfluous
to  state  that  a  hospital  should  not  be  built  over  an  old  graveyard,  or
on  other  ground  charged  with  organic  matter.  Although  hospitals
are  intended  for  the  recovery  of  health,  people  ai'e  very  apt  to  forget
this,  and  to  be  guided  in  the  selection  of  sites  by  other  considera-
tions— such  as  cheapness,  convenience,  and  the  like ;  whereas,  the
professed  object  in  view  being  to  secure  the  recovery  of  the  sick  in
the  shortest  time,  and  to  obtain  the  smallest  mortality,  that  object
should  be  distinctly  kept  in  view  as  one  which  must  take  precedence
of  all  others.

A  doctrine  has  recently  been  promulgated  in  a  Government  Report,
that  we  are  only  to  consider  what  is  best  for  the  majority  of  the  sick
in  a  hospital.  If  we  cannot  do  the  best  possible  for  all  the  sick,  by
all  means  let  us  leave  the  rest  at  home.  In  practice  a  hospital  may
be  found  only  to  benefit  a  majority,  and  to  inflict  suffering  on  the
remainder.  Let  us  use  our  intelligence  to  see  whether  we  cannot
have  hospitals  constructed  so  as  to  be  of  equal  benefit  to  all.

14.  Erecting  Hospitals  in  Towns. — Nearly  all  that  has  been  said
under  the  last  head,  miUatis  mutandis,  may  be  repeated  here.  If
the  recovery  of  the  sick  is  to  be  the  object  of  hospitals,  they  will
not  be  built  in  towns.  If  medical  schools  are  the  object,  surely  it
is  more  instnictive  for  students  to  watch  the  recovery  from,  rather
than  the  lingering  in,  sickness.  Twice  the  number  of  cases  would
be  broiight  under  their  notice  in  a  hospital  in  which  the  sick  recovered
in  half  the  time  necessary  in  another.

According  to  all  analogy,  the  duration  of  cases,  the  chances  against
complete  recovery,  the  rate  of  mortality,  must  be  greater  in  town
than  in  country  hospitals.

Land  in  towns  is  too  expensive  for  hospitals  to  be  so  built  as
to  secure  the  conditions  of  ventilation  and  of  light,  and  of  spread-
ing the  inmates  over  a  large  surface -area,  instead  of  piling  them  up
three  or  four  stories  high — conditions  now  known  to  be  essential  to
recovery.

15.  Defects  in  Drainage. — Sewers  may  become  cesspools  of  the  most
dangeroiis  description,  if  improperly  made  and  placed. At  Scutari,  if


and  Hospital  Construction.  21

the  wind  changed  so  as  to  blow  np  the  open  mouths  of  the  sewers,  such
change  was  frequently  marked  by  outbreaks  of  fever  among  the  patients,
and  hy  relapses  among  the  convalescents  from  fever.  Where  there  are
no  means  for  externally  ventilating  the  sewers,  no  means  for  cleansing
or  flushing  them,  and  where  the  bottoms  ai-e  rough  and  uneven,  such
occurrences  cannot  fail  to  take  place.  The  emanations  from  the
deposits  in  the  sewers  were  blown  back  through  the  pipe-drains  into
the  privies,  and  thence  into  the  corridors  and  wards  where  the  sick
wei'e  lying.  Where  sewers  pass  close  to  or  under  occupied  rooms,
the  walls  or  cover's  being  defective,  exhalations  will  infallibly  escape
into  those  rooms.  Such  could  be  distinctly  perceived  in  Scutari  hos-
pitals, and  cases  of  cholera  distinctly  traced  to  such  a  cause.

Not  very  long  ago  five  fatal  cases  of  fever  occurred  in  rapid  suc-
cession among  the  nurses  in  one  of  our  civil  hospitals,  which  were
traced  to  a  defective  drain.

Where  a  main  sewer  is  too  lai'ge,  as  is  the  case  at  Netley  Hospital,
mischief  may  also  ensue.

i6.  Gonstructw)i  of  Hospitals  lolthout  Free  Clrculal'ioa  of  External
Air. — To  build  a  hospital  with  one  closed  court  with  high  walls,  or
what  is  worse,  with  two  closed  courts,  is  to  stagnate  the  air  even
before  it  reaches  the  wards.

All  closed  corners  stagnate  the  air,  even  where  the  building  forms
but  three  sides  of  a  square,  unless  the  wings  are  so  short  that  they
can  hardly  be  called  wings.  The  only  safe  plan  is  to  leave  the
corners  entirely  open,  as  at  "Vincennes,  where  they  are  connected
only  by  an  arcade  on  the  ground  floor.

Even  in  the  pavilion  structure,  unless  the  distance  between  the
pavilions  be  double  the  height  of  the  walls,  the  ventilation  and  light
are  seriously  interfered  with.

For  this,  among  other  reasons,  two  stories  ai'e  better  than  three
and  one  is  preferable  to  two,  provided  it  be  ei'ected  upon  an  arched
basement.

To  build  a  hospital  in  the  midst  of  a  crowded  neighbourhood  of
narrow  streets  and  high  houses,  is  to  insure  a  stagnation  of  the  air
v.-ithout,  which  no  ventilation  within,  no  cubic  space,  however  ample,
will  be  able  to  remedy.

I  have  here  given  the  defects  ;  few  have  had  so  sad  or  so  large
an  experience  of  their  results  as  T  have  had.  I  appeal  to  those  who
are  wiser,  and  have  more  practical  power  than  I  have,  for  the  remedies
• — to  architects,  to  hospital  committees,  to  civil  and  roj^al  engineers,
to  medical  ofiicers,  to  oflicers  of  health,  to  all  the  men  of  science
and  benevolence  of  whom  our  country  is  so  justly  pi-oud.  It  is
hard  that  in  a  country  where  everything  is  done  by  a  despotic
Government,  such  advances  in  the  sanitary  construction  of  hospitals
should  have  been  made,  and  that  our  England,  which  ought  to  take
the  lead  in  everything  good,  should  be  left  behind.


22  Sanitary  Condition  of  Hospitals.

Note  on  the  Hospital  Plans.

These  four  plans,  two  English  and  two  French,  may  be  taken  as  representing
the  degree  of  constructive  ability  directed  to  the  planning  of  hospitals  in  the  two
countries. The  contrast  presented  by  them  is  certainly  very  striking.

Compare,  for  example,  the  extreme  simplicity  of  the  plan  of  the  Military  Hos-
pital at  Vincennes  with  the  great  complication  of  that  at  Netley.  The  former
consists  of  a  centre  and  two  wings,  detached  but  connected  by  a  corridor  one  story
high  running  along  the  basement.  The  centre  contains  the  offices,  and  the  wards
are  in  the  wings.  Each  wing  consists  of  two  pavilions  for  sick  soldiers,  and  one
small  pavilion  for  sick  officers.  The  pavilions  are  completely  cut  off  from  each
other  by  a  large,  specially  ventilated  staircase,  carried  above  the  roof.  Each  ward
has  a  profusion  of  windows  opposite  each  other,  abundance  of  light  and  of  ventila-
tion, quite  independent  of  the  ventilation  of  the  adjoining  pavilions.  The  wards,
moreover,  run  nearly  north  and  south,  and  receive  the  sunlight  freely  throughout
the  day.

Netley  Hospital,  on  the  other  hand,  presents  a  perfect  rabble  of  wards  and
offices,  thrown  together  as  if  by  accident.  All  the  sick  wards  in  each  flat  have
their  ventilation  connected  by  a  corridor  running  along  and  covering  the  whole
south-west  face  of  the  building,  as  if  designed  to  obstruct  natural  ventilation,  to
keep  out  sunlight,  and  to  ensure  the  equal  diffiasion  of  a  hospital  atmosphere
tbroughout  the  entire  line  of  wards.  It  is  true  that  a  complicated  system  of  venti-
lation is  proposed  to  remove  this  latter  defect,  but  there  should  have  been  no  such
defect  to  remove.  It  will  also  be  seen,  that  the  only  ward  windows  opening  to  the
external  air  are  on  the  north-east  and  coldest  side  of  the  building.

Netley  may  be  fairly  described  as  a  hospital  without  sufficient  sunlight  or  natural
ventilation.

The  Vincennes  Hospital  has  an  obvious  defect  in  the  position  of  part  of  the
administrative  offices  ;  but  even  in  this  respect  it  is  better  than  Netley,  while  in  all
that  pertains  to  the  welfare  of  the  sick  it  is  very  greatly  superior.

Let  us  next  compare  the  Civil  Hospital  Plans :  —

One  of  these  is  that  of  an  unfinished  metropolitan  hospital ;  the  other  is  the  plan
of  the  noble  Lariboisifere  at  Paris.  The  English  hospital  plan  presents  an  epitome
of  almost  every  defect  in  hospital  construction.  It  is  an  involved  Netley  plan  with
sick  in  the  corridors,  for  not  only  have  the  wards  windows  only  on  one  side,  but
there  are  four  rows  of  beds  between  the  opposite  windows.  Moreover,  the  arrange^
ment  of  wards,  corridors,  chapel,  &c.,  seems  as  if  intended  to  stagnate  the  air  out-
side. All  is  complicated,  and  there  is  a  want  of  that  simplicity  of  plan  which  is
essential  to  the  free  circulation  of  air  wdthout  as  well  as  within  the  sick  wards.

Turn  next  to  the  Lariboisifere.  The  corridor  running  round  the  central  garden  is
only  one  story  high,  so  as  not  to  impede  the  free  flow  of  the  air  and  sunlight.  The
sick  pavilions  are  all  detached  from  each  other.  They  are,  in  fact,  separate
hospitals,  with  only  one  hundred  sick  under  one  roof.  Like  the  "Vincennes  pavilions,
they  have  a  profusion  of  windows,  and  abundant  means  of  natural  ventilation  within
as  well  as  without.  In  the  much  brighter  and  hotter,  as  well  as  colder  climate  of
Paris,  a  large  proportion  of  the  hospital  wall  is  glass,  and  the  sick  are  ranged
between  the  windows,  so  that  the  ward  effiuvia  can  readily  escape.

The  English  plans,  on  the  contrary,  show  that  in  our  duller  and  milder  climate,
in  both  senses,  our  hospital  architects  do  their  best  to  shut  out  our  rare  and  im-
perfect sunlight,  and  to  keep  pure  air  out  of  the  wards  as  much  as  possible,  while
they  provide  for  the  sick  being  so  arranged  that  the  effluvia  must  pass  over  a  suc-
cession of  beds  before  escaping.

Any  one  making  even  a  cursory  examination  of  these  four  plans  can  hardly  fail
to  arrive  at  the  conclusion  that  the  French  plans,  with  certain  obvious  defects,  show
a  high  appreciation  of  the  importance  of  hospital  hygifene ;  while  the  English
plans,  on  the  contrary,  prove  that  we  have  hardly  yet  begun  even  to  study  this
branch  of  knowledge.


ANSWERS  TO  WRITTEN  QUESTIONS

ADDEESSED TO MISS NIGHTINGALE BY THE COMMISSIONERS
APPOINTED  TO  INQUIRE  INTO  THE

llcgulatiuns  affecting  \\n  ^miin^  €mWm\  Df  tl]c  grniir,

Ee2>rinted  {with  some  alterations)  from  the  Report  of  the  Royal  Commission.


I. — Sanitary  State  of  the  Army  and  Hospitals.

TTAVE  you,  for  severed  years,  devoted  attention  to  the  organization
of  civil  and  military  hosjntals  ?

Yes,  for  thii'teen  years.

What  British  and  foreign  hospitals  have  you  visited  ?

I  have  visited  all  the  hospitals  in  London,  Dublin,  and  Edinburgh,
many  county  hospitals,  some  of  the  naval  and  military  hospitals  in
England ;  all  the  hospitals  in  Paris,  and  studied  with  the  '  soeurs  de
charite  ;'  the  Institution  of  protestant  deaconesses  at  Kaiserswerth,
on  the  Rhine,  where  I  was  twice  in  training  as  a  nurse  ;  the  hospitals
at  Berlin,  and  many  others  in  Gei-many,  at  Lyons,  Rome,  Alexandria,
Constantinople,  Brussels ;  also  the  war  hospitals  of  the  French  and
Sardinians.

When  loere  you  sent  out  to  the  British  war  hosjntals  at  Constan-
tinople ?

We  arrived  at  Constantinople  on  November  4,  1854,  the  eve  of  the
Battle  of  Inkermann.

What  hospitals  did  you  find  occupied  there  by  the  British  ?

Two  large  buildings  on  the  Asiatic  side,  near  Scutari,  viz.,  a  Turkish
barrack  and  a  Turkish  military  general  hospital,  both  of  which  had
been  given  over  by  the  Turkish  government  for  the  use  of  the  British
troops.

How  many  patients  did  they  contain  at  that  date  ?

The  Barrack  contained  1500,  the  General  hospital  800  patients,
total  2300.

By  how  many  nurses  and  ladies  were  you  accompanied  ?

By  20  nurses,  8  Anglican  'sisters,'  10  nuns,  and  i  other  lady.

Where  did  you  take  up  your  residence  ?

We  were  quartered  the  same  evening  in  the  Barrack  hospital,  and
two  months  afterwards,  a  reinforcement  of  47  nurses  and  ladies  having
been  received  from  England,  we  had  additional  quarters  assigned  us
in  the  general  hospital,  and  later  at  Koulali.


24  Evidence  given

How  long  did  you  reside  in  those  hospitals  ?

Till  the  evacuation  of  Turkey  by  the  British,  July  28,  1856.

Did  you  visit  the  hospitals  in  the  Crimea  ?

Three  times.  I  visited  the  regimental  hospitals  ;  I  remained  in  the
Crimean  general  hospitals  about  six  months.

For  lohat  2>ur2wse  did  you  visit  tlie  Crimea  ?

Each  time  to  place  or  to  reinforce  nurses  in  the  Crimean  general
hospitals.  The  first  time,  for  the  General  and  Castle  hospitals  at
Balaclava ;  the  second,  for  the  Castle  and  Monastery  hospitals ;  the
third,  for  the  two  land  transport  general  hospitals,  for  which  nurses
had  been  '  required'  by  the  principal  medical  oflficer  of  the  army  in
the  east.

Was  that  jiurpose  ejffected  ?

Yes  j  although  difficulties  sometimes  interrupted  the  work.

To  ascertain  the  efficiency  of  the  sanitary  or  medical  organization  0/
the  army,  it  shoidd  be  tested  by  its  residts  in  peace  and  in  loar  ?

Certainly,  in  both.

W/iat  tests  tinder  those  two  conditions  exist,  and  are  available  for  our
instruction,  2^articularly  in  reference  to  the  state  of  war  ?

The  barrack,  and  the  military  hospital  exist  at  home  and  in  the
colonies  as  tests  of  our  sanitaiy  condition  in  peace  ;  and  the  histories
of  the  Peninsular  war,  of  Walchereu,  and  of  the  late  Crimean
expedition,  exist  as  tests  of  our  sanitary  condition  in  the  state  of
war.

Is  it  necessary  that  you,  shoidd  refer  at  all  to  the  hospitals  of  Scutari,
or  to  the  Crimea,  as  inquiries  on  these  subjects  have  already  been
instituted  ?

We  have  much  more  information  on  the  sanitary  history  of  the
Crimean  cauipaign  than  we  have  on  any  other.  It  is  a  complete
example — history  does  not  afford  its  equal — of  an  army,  after  a  great
disaster  arising  from  neglects,  having  been  brought  into  the  highest
state  of  health  and  efficiency.  It  is  the  whole  experiment  on  a  colossal
scale.  In  all  other  examples,  the  last  step  has  been  wanting  to  com-
plete the  solution  of  the  problem.

We  had,  in  the  first  seven  months  of  the  Crimean  campaign,  a  mor-
tality among  the  troops  at  the  rate  of  60  per  cent,  per  annum  from
disease  alone, — a  i-ate  of  mortality  which  exceeds  that  of  the  great
plague  in  the  population  of  London,  and  a  higher  ratio  than  the  mor-
tality in  cholera  to  the  attacks;  that  is  to  say,  that  there  died  out  of
the  army  in  the  Crimea  an  annual  rate  gi-eater  than  ordinarily  die  in
time  of  pestilence  out  of  sick.

We  had,  during  the  last  six  months  of  the  wax*,  a  mortality  among
our  sick  not  much  more  than  that  among  our  healthy  Guards  at  home,
aud  a  mortality  among  our  troops  in  the  last  five  months  two-thirds
only  of  what  it  is  among  our  troops  at  home.

The  mortality  among  troops  of  the  line  at  home,  when  corrected  as
it  ought  to  be  according  to  the  proportion  of  different  ages  in  the


before  the  Royal  Commission.  25

sei-vice,  has  been,  on  an  average  of  lo  years,  187  per  1000  per  annum  ;
and  among  the  Guards,  20-4  per  1000  per  annum.  Comparing  this
with  the  Crimean  mortality  for  the  last  six  months  of  our  occupation,
we  find  that  the  deaths  to  admissions  were  24  per  1000  per  annum;
and,  during  five  months,  viz.,  January — May,  1856,  the  mortality
among  the  troops  in  the  Crimea  did  not  exceed  1 1  "5  per  1 000  per
ann.um.

Is  not  this  the  most  complete  experiment  in  army  hygiene  ?

We  cannot  try  this  experiment  over  again  for  the  benefit  of  in-
quii'ers  at  home,  like  a  chemical  experiment.  It  must  be  brought
forward  as  a  historical  example.

Will  you  noiv  state  as  nearly  as  you  can  how  inany  sick  and  wounded
soldiers  loere  received  in  the  hospitals  lohich  you  have  named  at
Scutari .?

From  June,  1854,  to  June,  1856,  about  31,000  are  said,  according
to  the  Adjutant-General's  Returns,  made  up  at  the  time,  41,000,
according  to  the  Director-General's  Returns,  made  up  subsequently,
to  have  been  admitted  at  the  two  hospitals  at  Scutai'i  above  mentioned,
to  which  a  third  and  a  smaller  one  was  added,  the  palace  of  the  Sultan
at  Haida  Pacha,  near  Scutari,  also  two  ships  for  convalescents  in  the
Golden  Horn  at  Constantino2:tle,  a  very  small  hospital  for  the  artillery
stationed  at  Pera,  and  a  ward  over  a  cavalry  stable  at  Scutari.  A
certain  number  of  cases  also  went  to  the  hospitals  of  Smyrna,  Koulali,
Abydos,  and  Renkioi,*

Wliat  was  tlie  j)revailing  character  of  the  diseases  1

The  types  of  disease,  with  their  causes,  may  be  arranged  as  follow : —


*  In  1858, the  Director- General  sums  up the  admissions  and  deaths  at  the
several  general  hospitals  in  the  East,  as  follows: —


Name. ' Period.

Admissions.

Deaths.

Scutari . . . :  June, 18^4  to  June,

1856

41.325

4,923

Koulali  1

February,  1855  — June,

185.=;

1,963

509

Varna ,

June, 1854  — January,

l«.S.S

2,846

374

Balaclava

October, 18^4  —  June,

1856

5,686

438

Castle .

March 1 855  —  June,

i8=;6

2,554

96

Camp .

April, 1855 — April,

1856

1,083

204

Monastery

July, 1855  — June,

1856

911

28

Abydos  .

December,  1854  —  September,

i«5.S

814

82

Smyrna

February,  1855  —  November,

i8s6

1,887

154

Renkioi

October, 1855  — June,

1856

1,330

50

See  Note  F.,  after  page  88.


1  The  five  months  from  February  to  June,  1855,  are  the  only  months  for  which
the  returns  of  Koulali  are  distinguished  from  those  of  Scutari.


26


Evidence  given


1854.
November
December

January
Half  February


Exposure

Bad  food

Deficient  clothing

Fatigue

Damp


Diarrhoea.

Dysentery.
Rheumatism.
Frost-bite*
Scurvy.


Fever.

„ Typhoid.

„ Continued.

„ Remittent.
Diarrhoea.
Dysentery.
Cholera.


Bad  drainage
Half  February  „ ventilation

Overcrowding
March  V Nuisances  \  3

Organic  effluvia
April  Malaria

Damp

Did  it  appear  to  yoxt,  that  many  diseases  were  induced,  and  others
were  aggravated  in  those  hos2ntals  1

Typhus  attacked  both  sick  and  well  in  hospital.  During  the  month
of  November,  1854,  alone,  we  had  80  recorded  cases  of  hospital
gangi-ene.  Out  of  44  secondaiy  amputations  of  the  lower  extremities,
36  have  died.  Cholera  broke  out  frequently  both  among  sick  and
well.  Also,  there  were  frequent  relapses  of  fever  and  diarrhoea,  and
the  wounded  suflfered  much  from  both,  and,  having  come  in  for
wounds,  they  frequently  died  from  fever  or  diarrhoea.

How  many  British  soldiers  died  in  those  hospitals  during  the  period
of  your  residence  ?
About  4600.

Can  you  state  the  number  of  deaths,  month  by  month,  in  those  hos-
pitals ;  and  the  maximum  of  deaths  on  any  one  day  /

The  following  is  the  head  roll  of  burials  for  Scutari  alone,  not
including  civiliana : —


November,  1854 . . <.  368

December 667

January,  1855 ....  1473

February 1151

March 418


April
May  .
June  .
July  .
August


169
76

49
6.3
60


October 46

tNovember 25

December 7

January,  1856 ....  4

February 4

March 3

April 2

May I

June o

Julv I


September 47

4634

*  The  cases  called  frost-bite  were,  according  to  the  sufferers'  own  account,  con-
tracted undercircumstances  showing  no  sufficient  reason,  in  the  degree  of  cold,  for  the
effect.  They  should  rather  have  been  called  gangrene,  from  a  scorbutic  tendency,
aggravated  by  cold.

+  This  does  not  include  the  mortality  from  cholera  in  the  month  of  November,
1855,  in  the  German  Legion  and  Osmanli  Horse  Artillery  (which  were  then
quartered  in  the  Barrack  Hospital).


before  the  Royal  Commission.


27


The  greatest  number  of  burials  on  any  one  day  was  on  January  25,
viz.,  71.  On  January  26,  it  was  70.  The  bui-ials  took  place,  as  a
rule,  within  twenty-four  houi'S  of  the  deaths.

You  had  the  best  opportunities  for  observing  the  condition  of  the
soldier  when  he  entered  the  Itospitals  ;  while  he  resided  in  them  ;  lofien
he  died  and  was  sent  to  the  cemeteries ;  when  lie  loas  sent  home  an
invalid  ;  a)id  lohen  he  rejoined  the  army  1

Yes  ;  I  was  never  out  of  the  hospitals.

Will  you  describe  briefly  his  cortdition  under  those  various  circum-
stances ?

(I.)  The  sick,  from  the  landing  in  the  Crimea,  September,  1854,
to  the  end  of  January,  1855,  were  brought  to  Scutari  in  56  transports,
some  of  which  were  sailing  vessels  and  others  steamers.

The  sick  were  received  on  board,  and  sometimes  detained  for
several  days  before  the  vessel  sailed.  The  voyage  for  sailing  ships
was  usually  six  days,  and  for  steamships  under  two  days,  but  the
average  time  the  sick  were  detained  on  board  was  eight  days  and  a
half  from  the  time  of  their  embarkation  at  Balaclava  till  they  were
disembarked  at  Scutari.  The  numbers  which  died  on  board  are
variously  stated,  but  they  are  probably  in  every  instance  undei-stated.

It  appears  that  about  13,093  sick  were  embarked  during  the  four
months  and  a  lialf,  of  whom  about  976  died.  This  is  a  mortality  of
no  less  than  74}^^  per  1000  in  the  short  space  of  eight  days  and  a
half.  Had  the  embarkation  of  sick  gone  on  for  12  mouths,  and  the
same  high  rate  of  mortality  jirevailed  among  them,  the  jiroportion  of
deaths  v.'ould  have  amounted  to  3182  jier  1000.  In  other  words,
the  population  of  the  sick  transports  would  have  perished  on  the
Black  Sea  upwards  of  three  times.

The  following  table  gives  the  monthly  details  of  this  catastrophe.

Arrived  at  Scutari.


Months.


1854.
September  15-30

October

November ....
December

1855-
January

February

3  weeks  ending  March  1 7
Ending  April  7 . . .


Sick  em-
barked ar-
riving at
Scutari
during  the
month.


Died  on
Voyage.


Deaths  per

1000
embarked.


Deaths  per

1000  on  cases

treated  at

Scutari.


3,987

567

2,981

2,656

2,902


3"

15

162

226

262


78
26-4
54  3

85

90


321'


13,093

2,178

1,067

860


976

41

5
4


74"5

19
47
4-6


198+

427

315
144


Viz.,  from  Jan.  7  to  Jan.  31,  1855.


+  Oct.  I,  1854— Jan.  31,  1855.


28  Evidence  given

On  a  voyage  no  longer  than  from  Tynemouth  to  London  there
died  74  out  of  every  looo  sick  embarked  during  four  months  and  a
half.  The  loss  in  individual  transports  was  much  greater  than  this
average.  The  "  Caduceiis"  embarked  430  sick  September  23,  1854,
and  disembarked  the  sui'vivors  at  Scutari  September  29.  During  the
six  days  the  sick  were  on  board  there  died  no  fewer  than  114  men,
being  26 J  per  cent,  of  the  total  number  embarked,  or  in  the  ratio  of
16.160  per  1000  per  annum.

Either  these  six  transports  were  in  a  state  uttei'ly  unfit  for  sick,
as  regards  overcrowding,  ventilation,  cleanliness,  and  attendance  ;  or
sick  were  shipped  in  a  condition  utterly  unfit  for  such  a  voyage.  Of
cholera  cases,  those  who  lived  to  arrive  at  all  often  arrived  in  a  state
of  collapse  only  to  die.

The  superficial  space  allowed  in  these  transports  was  fixed  by  a
board  of  inspection,  formed  at  Balaclava,  December  12,  1854,  at
6  feet  by  2^^  feet  for  sick,  and  6  feet  by  3  feet  for  wounded  men.
The  height  between  deck  varied  from  6  to  8  feet.  One  vessel  only
had  a  height  of  9  feet  in  some  parts,  and  one  a  height  of  8|  feet.

(II.)  During  February,  it  will  be  seen  that  the  mortality  among
the  cases  from  the  Crimea  declined.  The  per-centage  of  mortality
upon  those  embarked  on  board  the  transports  fell  from  90  to  19  per
1000.  But  the  mortality  at  Scutari  rose,  viz.,  from  321  to  427.
And,  even  duiing  the  three  weeks  ending  March  17,  when  the  mor-
tality on  board  the  transports,  which  had  been,  from  September  15,
1854,  to  January  31,  1855,  above  74  per  1000,  fell  to  under  5,  the
mortality  at  Scutari  still  maintained  its  fatal  preponderance,  and
continued  at  315  per  1000,  half  as  much  again  as  it  had  been  for  the
four  months,  October  i,  1854,  to  January  31,  1855,  which  was  198.

(III.)  The  burial-ground  at  Scutari  was  overcharged,  and  sanitary
precautions  were  not  suflS.ciently  observed.

(IV.)  The  adjutant's  table  below  gives  the  numbers  of  men  sent
home  for  the  months  of

October,  1854 90

November 302

December 559

January,  1855 507

February 489

March 11 20

It  will  probably  be  inferred  from  this  that  there  were,  at  first,  no
sufficient  arrangements  for  relieving  the  hospitals  of  invalids,  who
consequently  took  up  accommodation  required  for  sick  ;  invalids  not
likely  to  return  to  duty  are  those  for  whom  transport  is  required,
(Upon  the  sick,  removal  may  have  a  doubtful  i-esult.)  It  is  a  well-
known  fact  that,  had  it  not  been  for  sources  of  private  supply,  these
invalids  would  have  been  badly  off"  for  clothing,  going  home.

(V.)  The  destitution  of  the  men  rejoining  their  regiments,  ot
whom  so  many  had  lost  their  kits,  would  have  been  great,  had  it  not


before  the  Royal  Commission.


29


also  been  for  sources  of  private  supply.  It  is  well  kuowu  that  they
arrived  in  hospital  during  the  first  part  of  the  winter  with  '  little  or
no  clothing.'  I  have  seen  men  brought  in  with  nothing  on  but  an
old  pair  of  regimental  trousers,  not  their  own,  a  dirty  blanket,  and  a
foi-age  cap.  In  December,  1854,  a  quartermaster-general's  store,  for
supplying  the  men  going  out  of  hospital  with  clothing,  was  esta-
blished. But  it  was  still  found  necessary  to  supply  the  men  with  some
articles  from  private  sources,  upon  requisition  from  the  medical  officers.

To  what  do  you  mainly  ascribe  the  mortality  in  the  hosjntals  ?

To  sanitary  defects.

Will  you  now  state  what  the  rate  of  inortality  was  ?  A  nd  hoiv  you
have  calculated  it  ?

I  have  calculated  it,  (i.)  on  the  cases  treated  ;  (2.)  on  the  sick
population  of  the  hospitals.

I  beg  to  put  in  a  Table.

Average  of  Weekly  States  of  Sick  and  Wounded,  from,  October  1st  to
January  3  is^,  deduced  from  those  given  by  R.  W.  Lawson,  Deputy
Inspector-General,  Principal  Medical  Officer,  Scutari.


Sick  Popu-

Cases

Mortality.

lation  of

treated

jVo.

the  H03.

(mean  of

Annual

Date.

of

pitals

admissions

rate  per

Days.

(mean  of

and  dis-

cent, per

weekly

charges
including

annum  on

numbers

the  sick

remaining)

Deaths.)

population

1854-

Oct.  1st  to  Oct.  14th . .

14

i>993

590

113

148

I9"2

Oct.  15th  to  Nov.  nth  . .

28

2,229

2,043

173

lOI

8-5

Nov.  i^th  to  Dec.  9th . .

28

3,258

1,944

301

121

15 '5

Dec.  loth  to  Jan.  6th  (1855)

28

3,701

3,194

572

202

17-9

1855.

Jan.  7th  to  Jan.  31st . .

25

4.520

3,072

986

319

32-1

123

3,140

'0,843

2,145

203

19-8

February,  1855.*


Hospitals.

Sick
Population.

Cases
treated.

Deaths.

Rate  of  Mortality
per  cent.

Annually

on  sick

Population.

On  cases
treated.

Scutari  and  Koulali
Koulali  alone .

4,178
648

3,112
581

1,329
302

4'5
608

42-7
52-0

*  This  mortality  is  considerably  understated.  If  to  the  Adjutant's  Head  Eoll  of
Burials  for  Scutari,  page  26,  which  is  probably  the  correct  return,  had  been  added  the
Medical  OflBcer's  Return  of  Deaths  for  Koulali,  here  given,  which  is  the  only  one  we
have,  the  total  deaths  would  have  been,  not  1329,  but  1453  ;  and  the  rate  of  deaths
on  cases  treated,  not  42 "7,  but  46' 7  per  cent.


30


Evidence  given


Statistics  of  the  Barrack,  General,  Palace,  and  Koulali  Hospitals  on  the
Bosjylioribs  for  periods  of  21  days,  commencing  February  24th  and
ending  June  '^oth,  1855.


Sick  Popula-

Mortality. |

tion  of  the
Hospitals

Time.

(mean  of

Cases

Deaths.

Annual  Rate

Numbers  re-

treated.

per  cent,  per

Per  cent,  on

maining  at

Annum  on

Cases

beginning  and

the  Sick

treated.

end).

Population.

1855.

February  25,  _i  „•

3,779

1,621

Sio

235

3i'5

March 18  1  =2  |.

3.306

1,650

237

125

144

April 8  I  S  -^

2,803

1,190

127

^9

107

April ci9f^g=

2,018

»>350

70

60

5-2

May 20  pS  1
June 10^  g  -2

1,504

996

48

56

4-8

1,442

1,266

28

34

2^2

126  days . .

2,501

8,070

1,020

118

I2'6

I  must,  however,  state  that  the  statistical  returns  made  at  various
times  are  very  discordant.

Then  I  find  that  some  of  the  methods  of  calculation  ■which  I  have
seen  employed  give  an  imperfect  idea  of  the  mortality  to  persons  who
have  not  closely  studied  these  matters.

I  give  an  illustration  : —

I  take  a  hospital  of  1000  beds,  constantly  occupied  during  one  year,
into  which,  during  the  year,  10,000  sick  are  admitted,  and  10,000
discharged — viz.,  1260  dead,  and  the  rest  cured.  Then,  if  we  divide
the  deaths  in  the  year  by  the  average  strength,  as  is  ordinarily  done
in  determining  the  mortality  of  the  whole  army,  it  will  be  found  that
the  1260  deaths  in  a  year  out  of  a  mean  strength  of  1000  imply  that
the  mortality  was  at  the  rate  of  126  per  cent,  per  annum.  If  this
method  be  employed,  it  will  show  the  comparative  sanitary  condition
of  the  sick  in  two  or  more  such  hospitals.

Again,  as  the  number  of  deaths  (1260)  took  place  among  10,000
cases,  the  mortality  was  at  the  rate  of  12  "6  deaths  in  every  100
cases.

In  the  case  supposed,  one  of  the  imperfect  methods  of  calculation
in  use,  to  which  I  have  referred  above,  if  consistently  applied,  would
make  the  cases  62,000,  out  of  which  the  1260  deaths  occurred,  and
the  mortality  of  these  cases  woiild  be  stated  at  2  per  cent.

The  way  in  which  this  would  happen  is  sufficiently  simple.  1000
cases  would  remain  in  the  hospital  at  the  beginning  of  every  week ;
the  method  objected  to  counts  the  cases  remaining  every  week,  or
fifty-two  times  in  a  year,  and  adds  to  them  the  cases  admitted,  so  that,
in  addition to the 10,000  cases  really  treated, it obtains 52,000


before  the  Royal  Commission.  31

fictitious  cases,  simply  by  counting  the  same  man  rather  moi-e  than
six  times;  that  is,  by  counting  the  patients  remaining  52  times
annually,  and  adding  them  to  the  new  patients  admitted.

If  the  number  remaining  at  the  beginning  of  every  month  were
counted,  12,000  would  be  added  to  the  10,000  real  cases  treated.

It  is  evident  that,  by  counting  the  cases  remaining  at  the  beginning
of  every  day,  or  oftener,  the  cases  may  be  multiplied  to  any  conceivable
extent.

Again,  by  dividing  the  weekly  deaths  by  the  force  in  the  Crimea,  as
was  done  in  the  published  returns,  the  high  mortality  in  the  Crimea
appeared  to  be  exceedingly  low.  For  people  naturally  took  the  mor-
tality per  cent,  per  loeek  for  the  mortality  per  cent,  per  annum.

For  the  purposes  of  accurate  comparison  it  is  necessary  to  reduce
all  our  facts  (i)  to  unity  of  time,  (2)  to  unity  of  strength,  or  numbers
under  observation.

I  find,  after  consulting  the  best  statistical  authorities,  that  the
mortality  of  hospitals  can  be  compared  in  two  ways,  which  mutually
check  and  confirm  each  other:  (i)  by  dividing  the  deaths  by  the
mean  'strength'  of  the  sick  in  hospital,  and  reducing  the  mortality  to
that  which  would  obtain  if  the  time  of  observation  were  a  year.  By
this  method,  it  will  be  seen  in  the  table  I  give  in,  that  the  mortality
in  the  Bosphorus  hospitals  fell  from  415  jDer  cent,  per  annum  in
February  to  235  per  cent,  per  annum,  in  the  three  weeks  ending
March  17,  1855,  to  125,  79,  60,  56,  and  34,  in  six  successive  periods
of  three  weeks  each.

By  the  second  method  the  deaths  are  divided  by  the  number  of
cases  treated.  Where  the  niimber  of  sick  is  stationary,  the  numbers
(i.)  admitted  and  (2.)  discharged  (including  deaths)  must  be  equal  in
a  given  time.  The  number  of  cases  treated  will  be  represented  by
the  numbers  either  admitted  or  discharged,  as  they  are  equal.  When
the  number  of  sick  increases  or  decreases,  the  numbers  admitted  and
discharged  will  differ;  but  the  number  of  cases  treated  will,  in  all
ordinary  cases,  be  nearly  represented  by  taking  the  mean  of  the
numbers  admitted  and  dischai'ged.  Thus  6751  patients  were  ad-
mitted into  the  Bosphorus  hospitals  in  the  126  days:  Febi'uary  25  —
June  30,  1855,  ^^^  ^^  ^^®  same  period  9392  patients  were  discharged.
The  cases  treated  are  represented  by —

6,751
9.392


2)16,143
8,072


As  the  deaths  wex'e  1020,  the  mortality  on  the  cases  treated  was
126  i)er  cent.


Per  cent,  of  cases  treated


32  Evidence  given

By  this  method  the  mortality  of  the  cases  was  at  the  I'ate  of  3 1*5  in
the  first  three  weeks,  and  fell  progressively  to

'  14-4
10-7

5-2

48

2'2

As  2501  were  under  treatment  T26  days,  the  days  of  sickness  were
2501  X  126  =  315,126  days,  which  allows —

315^126

— 7: — -—  =  ^0  days
8,073 ^^ ^

to  the  treatment  of  each  case  on  an  average.

In  the  first  period  the  cases  were  under  treatment  about  49  days;
in  the  last,  24  days.

While  the  mortality  fell  from  31  "5  to  2*2,  the  duration  of  the  cases
fell  from  49  to  24  days.

Note.  (Showing  the  reason  why  the  cases  treated  are  represented
by  the  mean  of  the  numbers  (i.)  admitted  and  (2.)  discharged  in  a
given  time.)

The  number  of  cases  treated  (  =  C)  is  the  number  of  cases  admitted
and  followed  from  their  commencement  to  their  discharge  from  the
hospital,  dead  or  alive.

When  the  hospital  is  (i.)  opened  and  (2.)  closed  empty,  the  number
of  cases  treated  is  the  same  as  the  number  admitted.

But  the  hospitals  of  the  Bosphorus  contained  3975  sick  soldiers  on
February  25,  1855;  6751  sick  soldiers  were  admitted  in  126  days,
and  on  the  30th  June  1334  remained  under  treatment.

Now  some  of  the  3975  cases  in  the  hospital  at  first  (  =  F)  had  just
entered ;  others  had  been  one,  two,  three  days  under  treatment,  and
others  were  just  on  the  point  of  leaving.  On  an  average  it  may  be
assumed  that  they  had  been  treated  during  half  the  average  term  of
treatment,  and  it  may  be  assumed  that  3975  treated  for  a  half  term
• — as  respects  the  mortality — may  be  held  to  represent  half  that
number,  or  19B7  cases  treated  for  the  full  term.  To  obtain  the  cases
treated,  we  therefore  add  1987  to  6751,  the  new  cases  admitted,  thug
making  8738,  from  which  half  the  number  of  1334  cases  remaining
on  Jxme  30,  or  667,  must  be  deducted,  leaving  8071.  to  represent  the
number  of  cases  treated.  Half  the  1334  cases  remaining  (  =  667)
(  =  5)  are  deducted,  because  those  1334  cases  have  been  already
counted  in  the  admissions  as  whole  cases,  although  they  have  only  been
half  their  time  under  treatment,  and  are  fully  represented  by  667.

The  equation  will  stand  thus,  putting  A  for  new  cases  admitted,
F  for  cases  remaining  on  the  first  day,  and  L  for  cases  remaining
on  the  last  day : —

AF L /~.
+  — -  —  =  C.


before  the  Royal  Commission.  33

But,  by  putting  D  for  cases  discharged,  it  may  be  shown  by  similar
reasoning  that

D  -  il  +  ii  =  C.

2  2

And,  on  adding  these  two  equations  together,  we  have
A  +  D  -  2  C  . .  C  -  ^  +  ^

2

The  cases  treated  are  nearly  represented  by  the  mean  bejtween  the
new  cases  admitted  (A)  and  the  cases  discharged  (D)  dead  or  alive.
It  is  here  assumed  that  the  mortality  is  at  the  same  rate  in  the  latter
half  as  it  is  in  the  first  half  of  its  sickness.  If  it  be  greater  or  less,
the  result  will  be  slightly  affected,  according  as  the  numbers  remain-
ing at  the  beginning  and  end  of  the  period  of  observation  are  in
excess.

From  your  experience  of  the  great  mortality  of  the  hospitals  at
Scutari,  and  the  manner  of  estimating  it,  do  you  consider  the  weekly
state  of  the  army  likely  to  give  a  correct  idea  of  the  disease  and
mortality  ?

From,  the  extracts  given  in  Note  A,  page  74,  which  are  taken
from  the  letters  of  the  principal  medical  officer  to  the  commander  of
the  forces,  it  will  at  once  be  seen,  that  what  the  commander  of  the
forces  and  the  war  department  want  to  know  and  ought  to  know
about  the  health  of  an  army  in  the  field  was  not  supplied  them.

What  they  want  to  know  is  (i.)  how  long  the  army  will  last  at  the
then  rate  of  mortality.

(2.)  Whether  the  diseases  are  preventable  from  which  the  mortality
arises.

(3.)  What  proportion  of  the  army  is  inefficient  from  sickness.

I.  The  mere  information  that  '  the  admissions  to  strength  have
been  in  the  ratio  of  3'93  per  cent.'  dui'ing  'the  present  loeek,'  and  'the
deaths  to  strength  o'38  per  cent,'  {see  Note  A,  2oage  75),  is  simply  mis-
leading to  the  aiithorities,  unless  indeed,  which  is  hardly  likely,  they
are  thoroughly  au  fait  at  statistical  inquiries.

The  standard  of  comparison  all  over  the  civilized  world  is  the  per-
centage of  deaths  per  annum  ;  also  the  per-centage  of  admissions  into
hospital  in  the  same  time.

And,  without  reference  to  the  same  standard,  it  is  impossible  for  the
most  experienced  man  to  judge.

°'52,  3'93  per  cent,  look  nothing.

But  multiply  3*9  by  52  —  2028,  in  order  to  get  the  annual  admis-
sions per  1000  ;  and  it  will  be  found  that  the  whole  force  will  go
twice  thi'ough  hospital  in  a  year,  at  that  rate.  And  multiply  14-3
{see  Note  A,  page  74)  by  52  =  7436  per  1000  per  annum ;  and  the  whole
force  will  go  seven  times  through  hospital  in  a  year.

It  is  not,  however,  said  whether  this  'sickness'  of '  i4*3i  per  cent.'
is  admissions,  or  remaining  and  admissions,  or  sick  population. Pio-

D


34


Evidence  given


bably  it  is  the  second.  But  is  this  a  state  of  things  to  congratulate
a  commander  of  the  forces  upon,  as  being  'pleasing'  to  him  'to
learn  T

Multiply  0*52  by  52  in  the  same  way,  and  it  will  be  found  that
the  mortality  is  270  per  1000  per  annum.  In  other  words,  that  more
than  one  fourth  of  the  whole  population  of  the  army  will  perish  in  a
year.

2.  At  a  time  when  every  one  in  the  Crimea  was  expecting
cholera,  which  actually  did  come,  and  is  shortly  after  recorded  by
the  inspector-general  himself,  the  commander  of  the  forces  is  con-
gratulated on  the  '  steadily  improving'  state  of  the  '  health  of  the
army.'

During  the  10  weeks  intervening  between  May  5  and  July  14,
1855,  g6  per  cent,  of  all  the  deaths  from  disease  were  of  the  classes
usually  considered  mitigable  and  zymotic.  That  is  to  say  that,  grant-
ing that  the  four  per  cent,  were  not  preventible,  thei-e  might  have
been  saved  to  the  commander  of  the  forces  a  large  part  of  the  g6  out  of
every  hundred  men  he  lost  from  disease.

Is  not  this  important  to  him  to  know  from  his  returns  at  a  glance  ?

3.  For  a  commander  in  the  field,  the  number  of  deaths  among  his
men  is,  after  all,  not  so  necessary  to  him  to  know  as  the  i-ate  of  ineffi-
cient men  from  sickness  he  has,  and  how  far  the  sickness  can  be  miti-
gated or  prevented.

In  January,  1855,  more  than  half  the  infantry  "were  sick  in  hospital,
and  three  fourths  of  all  that  sickness  was  zymotic,  and  so  it  con-
tinued from  October,  1854,  till  July,  1855.  Nay,  even  in  that  di-eadful
week  which  included  the  attack  on  the  Redan,  June  i8th,  1855,  even
in  that  week  nearly  65  per  cent,  of  all  the  deaths  in  hospital  were
zymotic.

Of  what  vital  importance  it  is  to  a  commander  and  a  government  to
know  this  1

Now  take  the  unit  of  per  1000  of  the  force  per  annum,  and  let  the
advantage  of  a  comparison  be  shown,  viz.,  of  the  mortality  at  different
periods  of  our  history  in  the  Crimea.


Deaths  per  1000  per  annum  at  different  periods.


Janmty . . . .  j  ;^p

M-y i;*-^^

January  i  to  May  31,  1855
January  i  to  May  31,  1856


"73i

•203
8

628


Crimea,  May,  1856.


Line  at  home.
187


Guards  at  home.

20'4


before  the  Royal  Commission,  35

Thus  we  were  losing  in  theCrimeaj  in  May,  1856,  less  than  half  of
what  we  lose  in  the  line  at  home,  and  little  more  than  two-fifths  of
what  we  lose  in  the  Guards  at  home.

It  is  obvious  that  what  is  wanted  is  for  the  commander  of  the
forces  in  the  field  and  the  Secretary  of  State  for  War  to  he  made
instantly  and  continuously  acquainted,  (both  as  to  an  army  at  home
and  in  the  field)  with  not  only  (i)  the  real  proportion  of  mortality,
(2)  the  real  proportion  of  disease  ;  but  also  (3)  the  kind  of  disease  and
mortality.

Therefore —

1.  Present  strength.

2.  Sick  in  hospital  at  a  given  date.

3.  Total  admissions  since  last  report.

4.  Total  deaths  since  last  report.

5.  Per-centage  of  sick  to  present  force.

6.  Pei'-centage  of  deaths  to  pi*esent  foi'ce  per  annum.

7.  Per-centage  of  admissions  from  zymotic  disease  to  total  ad-
missions.

g  8.  Pei'-centage  of  zymotic  cases  in  hospital  to  total  sick.

9.  Per-centage  of  deaths  from  zymotic  disease,  to  total  deaths  from
disease.

10.  Admissions  from  wounds  and  deaths  from  wounds.

At  short  periods,  both  departments  should  be  furnished  with  a  state-
ment of  these  10  points,  so  as  to  appreciate  them  at  a  glance.

It  may  easily  be  ascertained  what  the  weekly  states  for  an  army  in
the  field  are  now,  as  furnished  to  the  commander  of  the  forces  by  his
principal  medical  officer,  and  what  the  daily  states  furnished  by  his
adj  utant-general .

Something  of  the  following  I  have  seen  : —

Weekly  State.

1.  Strength  in  field  as  given  by  adjutant-general  this  morning.

2.  Admissions.

3.  Deaths.

4.  Present  sick.

5.  Admissions  to  strength.

6.  Deaths  to  strength.

7.  Sick  to  strength.

8.  Decrease  of  mortality  this  week.

But  nothing  as  to  '  per  annum,'  or  as  to  zymotic  disease.

Now,  is  it  surprising  that  the  mortality  of  the  army  was  high  in
the  Crimea  1  Is  it  not  a  fact  that  the  mortality  of  the  army  in  peace
exceeds  that  of  men  of  corresponding  ages  in  the  general  population  ?
At  home,  the  Guards  and  infantry  of  the  line  suffer  more  from  con-
sumption and  chest  diseases  than  men  in  civil  life,  at  the  same  ages,
from  all  diseases  put  together.

The  Guai'ds  suffer  twice  as  much  from  fever — more  from  fever  in

D  2


36  Evidence  given

some  barracks  than  in  others,  and  more  from  epidemics  in  epidemic
years  than  civil  life.

There  is  no  d,  2)'>^ori  reason  for  this.  The  mere  statement  of  it
would  excite  inquiry  into  its  causes  and  remedies,  if  it  were  generally
made  known.

This  may  be  summed  up  in  a  very  few  words  with  the  aid  of  the
following  data  supplied  by  Dr.  Farr : —

No.  I.  Rate  of  Mortality  per  looo  per  annum.

Effective  men  of  the  I  ^ ,  ' ' ' '  ^

,  ,  <  Guards . .  20-4

army  at  home. |  j^.^^  ^g.J

EngdTa^nd  Wales  i  P^^lf^t""'  l ^^
Army  ages. (_  population,  j "


Manchester,  one  of  the  unhealthiest )
cities J


12*4


No.  2.  Relative  Mortality of  the Army  at  home,  and  of  the
English  Male  Population  at  corresponding  Ages  : —

Deaths  annually
Ages.  to  1000  living.

J  Englishmen 8*4

^  (  English  soldiers
j  Englishmen .
^ ^ (  English  soldiers
j  Englishmen .
2° ^^  (  English  soldiers

j  Englishmen .
35 40  I  English  soldiers


17*0

92

i8-3

IO*2
18-4

II-6

I9"2


That  is  to  say,  that  if  the  army  were  as  healthy  as  the  population
from  which  they  are  drawn,  they  would  die  at  one-half  the  raro  they
die  at  now.

The  army  are  picked  lives,  and  the  inferior  lives  are  thus  thrown
back  among  the  mass  of  the  population.

The  health  of  the  army  is  continually  kept  up  by  an  influx  of  fresh
lives,  while  those  which  have  been  used  up  in  the  service  are  also
thrown  back  into  the  general  population,  and  give  a  very  high
mortality.

The  general  population  includes,  besides  those  thus  rejected  by  the
army  itself  (whether  in  recruiting  or  invaliding)  vagrants,  paupers,
intemperate  persons,  the  dregs  of  the  race,  over  whose  habits  we  have
little  or  no  control.

The  food,  clothing,  lodging,  employment,  and  nearly  all  that  con-
cerns the  sanitary  state  of  the  soldier  are  absolutely  under  our  control,
and  may  be  regulated  to  the  minutest  particular.

Yet,  with  all  this,  the  mortality  of the  army,  from  which  the


before  the  Royal  Commission.


37


injured  lives  are  subtracted,  is  double  that  of  the whole  population,
to  which  the  injured  lives  are  added.

But,  with  regard  to  armies  in  the  field,  where  half  an  army  may
melt  away  from  zymotics  alone,  or  be  rendered  inefficient  just  when
its  services  are  most  wanted,  not  by  wounds,  but  by  disease,  of  how
far  more  vital  importance  is  it,  then,  for  the  authoi'ities  to  be  furnished
with  such  information  1

The  projjortion  of  admissions  and  deaths  from
Scurvy,
Cholera,
Dysentery,
Diarrhoea,  and

Fevers  of  each  class,  should  be  distinctly  stated.
For  an  example  of  the  importance  of  this,  take  the  following,  cal-
culated from  official  returns  for  January,  1855.

Per  1000  per  annum
to  StreD<;tli.


Total  admissions
„ Deaths


.  11,290
.  3,168
Admissions.

Scurvy 542 •

Scorbutic  dysentery . 181


hence


4,176
1, 173*6
Deaths.

31

44


723  75

The  deaths  from  scorbutic  disease  in  that  month  are  put  down  at
75  ;  a  month,  when,  as  is  well  known,  two-thirds  of  all  the  deaths
and  admissions  in  the  army  were  due  to  the  scorbutic  type  of  disease  ;
for,  see  the  following : —

Admissions.  Deaths.

865  ) .  .... 210  )

*I43J 578  J

181 44

4,191 ^^'^99

342 58

84 9

I;413 124

542 31


Acute  dysentery
Chronic „
Scox'butic „
Diari'hffia
Acute  rheumatism
Chronic „
Frostbite . .
Scorbutus


7,761  2,253

The  larger  part,  if  not  all,  of  these  2,253  deaths  may  be  ascribed
to  the  scorbutic  type  of  disease.  For  '  scoi'butic'  read  '  bad  food/  <fec.,
and  you  have  the  caiise.


*  Tlie  per-cenlage  of  mortality  on  acute  and  chronic  dysentery  was  perhaps  greater
than  ever  has  been  known  in  any  disease  except  the  worst  form  of  epidemic  plague.
It  was  no  less  than  7S  per  cent,  of  the  cases.  The  reason  why  the  deaths  from
chronic  dysentery  exceed  the  admissions  appears  to  be,  that  many  cases  of  acute
dysentery  passed  into  the  chronic  state  before  death.


38  •  Evidence  given

Yet  this  is  not  brought  forward  at  all  at  the  time,  nor  prominently
at  any  subsequent  time  in  our  returns.

Again  with  an  army  in  the  field,  to  give  the  admission  and  deaths
for  the  field  hospitals  is  to  give  no  just  idea  of  the  mortality,  because
it  is  not  stated  how  many  of  those  admissions  were  sent  to  and  died
in  the  general  hospitals  at  the  base  of  operations.

In  the  case  of  the  Crimea,  till  the  spring  of  1855,  ^^  account  was
rendered  of  these.

U.  g.  Published  Return.

Crimea.

October  i,  1854 — April  i,  1855.

Average  strength.  Admissions.  Deaths.

28,623.  52,548.  5,359-

General  Return.

Crimea  and  Scutari.

October  i,  1854 — April  30,  1855.

Average  strength.  Admissions.*  Deaths.

28,939.  56,057.  10,053.

This  mortcdity  is  much  higher  in  the  early  periods  than  it  was  in  the
later  j)eriods — higher  than  it  is  in  civil  hospitals,  and  much  higher,  too,
than  the  mortality  of  cases  treated  in  the  homes  of  artisans.  Will  you
state  in  what  respects  the  sanitary  co7ulitions  of  the  soldiers  before  and
after  March  17,  1855,  differed  from  the  sanitary  conditions  of  patients
in  civil  liospitals,  and  of  the  sick  tohom  you  have  no  doitbt  visited  in
their  own  humble  homes  1

The  sanitary  conditions  of  the  hospitals  of  Scutari  were  inferior  in
point  of  crowding,  ventilation,  drainage,  and  cleanliness,  up  to  the
middle  of  March,  1855,  ^o  any  civil  hospital,  or  to  the  poorest  homes
in  the  worst  parts  of  the  civil  population  of  any  large  town  that  I
have  seen.

After  the  sanitary  works  undertaken  at  that  date  were  execated,  I


*  The  admissions  at  Scutari  were  not  given,  because  they  were  nearlj'  all  re-
admissions  from  the  Crimea.

"When  we  see  the  loss  tkni  given,  the  real  extent  of  it  strikes  us. It  stands
thus : —

Strength.  Deaths.

Infantry 23,775  9,oi5

Cavalry J,9iS  280

Artillery  and  Engineers 3,249  568

Undistinguishable  . .  190

28,939  10,053

Sir  Alexander  Tulloch  gives  the  mortality  for  those  7  months,  at  a  per-centage
for  the  7  months. I  give  it  now  per  anmim  : —

Strength  of  the  army 28,939

Deaths  in  7  months 10,053

Mortality  per  1,000  per  aniluto 600


before  the  Royal  Commission,  39

know  no  buildings  in  the  world  wliicli  I  co\ilcl  compare  with  them  in
these  points,  the  original  defect  of  construction  of  course  excepted.

What  sanitary  defects  did  you  observe  in  the  hospitals  at  Scutari,  in
regard  to  over-crovxling,  ventilation,  cleanliness,  and  drainage  ?

(i.)  With  regard  to  over-crowding  both  for  barracks  and  hospitals,
the  regulation  in  our  service  is  over-crowding.  But  at  Scutari  from
the  battle  of  Inker  man  till  the  middle  of  Febiniary,  even  the  regula-
tion space  was  not  adhered  to.  The  men  were  laid  on  paillasses  on
the  floor  as  close  as  they  could  lie ;  there  were  two  rows  of  beds  in
the  Barrack  hospital  corridors,  where  two  persons  could  hardly  pass
abreast  between  foot  and  foot.  I  have  seen  7  2  patients  for  a  short
time  in  a  ward  calculated  by  the  inspector-general  himself  to  hold  30.

For  full  six  weeks  we  had  in  the  Barrack  hospital  2000  patients  in
the  space  allotted  by  regulation  for  1220;  and  for  six  weeks  more,
2200  in  the  space  allotted  for  1600.

The  regulation  space  is  no  more  than  one-half  of  the  space  required,
if  the  hospital  were  in  a  good  sanitary  state,  but,  as  the  regulation
space  was  actually  reduced  by  one  half,  we  have  the  following  condi-
tion of  matters : —

1.  The  space  for  each  patient  one-fourth  of  what  it  ought  to  have
been.

2.  The  sanitary  condition  of  the  buildings  extremely  defective.
Can  we  wonder  at  the  high  rate  of  mortality  ]

(2.)  With  regard  to  ventilation,  the  hospitals  were  so  insufficiently
heated  that  the  inspector-general  was  of  opinion  that  the  men  would
catch  cold  by  opening  the  windows.  Scarcely  any  other  means  of
ventilation  existed  or  were  provided.  It  is  impossible  to  describe  the
state  of  the  atmosphere  in  the  Barrack  hospital  at  night.  I  have  been
well  acquainted  with  the  dwellings  of  the  worst  parts  of  most  of
the  great  cities  in  Europe,  but  have  never  been  in  any  atmosphere
which  I  could  compare  with  it.  I  have  produced  statistics  to  the
commission,  showing  that  the  mortality  on  the  sick  population  in
January  was  at  the  rate  of  319  per  cent,  per  annum,  the  mortality  in
February  at  the  rate  of  415  per  cent,  per  annum,  while  that  on  board
the  transports  had  fallen  from  90  per  1000  in  Januaiy  to  19  in
February,  showing  the  improved  character  of  the  cases.  There  is
only  cause  for  wonder  that  the  mortality  in  Scutari  was  not  moi-e,  as
such  an  atmosphere  as  there  prevailed  was,  pei-haps,  worse  than  that
known  to  produce  cholei'a  and  typhus  epidemics  among  healthy
persons .

Both  ventilation  and  cubic  space  were  better  managed  in  the  General
than  in  the  Barrack  hospital,  but  the  other  causes  of  disease  were
the  same  in  both.

(3).  The  ground  about  the  Palace  hospital  was  very  wet,  from
insufficient  draining.

With  regard  to  sewerage,  the  privies  poured  their  poisons  into  the
corridors  and  wards ;  the  sewers  being  loaded  with  filth,  untrapped,


40  Evidence  given

and  without  ventilating  openings,  the  tubes  of  the  privies  were  their
only  ventilators,  and  the  sewer  gases  blew  into  the  wards  and  cor-
ridors. A  change  of  wind  so  as  to  bloAv  up  the  open  mouths  of
the  drains,  was  therefore  not  unfrequently  marked  by  outbreaks
of  fever  among  the  patients.  And  the  state  of  the  privies  of  the
Barrack  hospital  for  several  months,  more  than  an  inch  deep  in  filth,
is  too  horrible  to  describe.

With  regard  to  cleanliness,  the  ground  about  the  hospitals,  with
the  exception  of  the  General  hospital,  was  extremely  dirty.  I  have
counted  as  many  as  six  dead  dogs  just  under  one  ward  window.  And
the  Bai-rack  hospital  yard,  of  great  extent,  was  so  uneven,  muddy,
and  filthy,  as  to  cause  a  most  unwholesome  atmosphere.

The  drinking  water  was  not  free  from  organic  matter ;  and  on  one
occasion  the  dirty  hospital  dresses  have  been  seen  in  the  tank  which
suj)plied  watei-.

A  dead  horse  also  lay  for  some  weeks  in  the  aqueduct.

The  state  of  the  floors  was  such,  from  want  of  repaii',  that  the
medical  officer  had  to  choose  between  leaving  them  dirty  and  washing
them,  which  produced  erysipelas.

The  wai'ds  washed  in  the  morning  have  been  seen  quite  wet  at  the
evening  visit.

The  walls  and  ceilings  were  saturated  with  organic  matter,  and
should  have  been  lime-washed  for  safety  at  least  once  in  three  weeks,
notwithstanding  the  inconvenience  of  such  a  jiroceeding  for  cases
which  could  hardly  be  moved.  The  rats,  vermin  of  all  kinds,  accu-
mulations of  dirt  and  foul  air,  which  harboured  under  the  wooden
divans  on  which  the  men  were  laid,  rendered  the  atmosphere  still
more  dangerous  to  them.

There  was  a  great  absence  of  utensils,  and  tubs  were  used  for
several  months  in  some  of  the  wards,  the  eflfect  of  which  on  the
atmosphere  in  which  the  men  were  need  hardly  be  described.

The  burial  of  tlie  dead  was  conducted  in  such  a  manner,  and  so
close  to  the  General  hospital  as  to  affect  the  purity  of  the  air.

I  would  refer  to  our  statistics,  which  show  that  the  mortality  rose
from  17 '9  per  cent,  in  Decembei-,  on  cases  treated,  to  32-1  per  cent,
in  January,  427  per  cent,  in  February;  although  in  Febmary  we
could  scarcely  be  said  to  be  much  over-crowded,  and  the  character  of
the  cases  from  the  Crimea  had  improved.  What  else  could  this
increase  be  due  to  but  to  onr  defective  sanitary  condition  ?

How  were  the  sick  jirovided  with  bedsteads,  bedding,  ward  fwniture,
utensils,  and  clothing  ?

The  bedsteads  in  the  General  hospital  were  sufficient,  some  of  theirs
having  been  left  by  the  Turks.

In  the  BaiTack  hospital,  only  a  small  proportion  of  the  patients  had
bedsteads  in  the  month  of  November.  There  never  was  a  sufficiency
of  iron  bedsteads.  Boards  and  tressels  were  gradually  introduced,  till
all  the  patients  were  raised  from  the  gi'ound.


before  the  Royal  Commission.  41

We  had  always  a  sufficiency  of  blankets,  although  often  covered
with  filth  and  vermin.  We  never  had  anything  but  paillasses,  except-
ing for  the  worst  cases,  to  whom  some  hair  mattresses  were  given
out.  The  sheets  were  of  canvas,  so  coai-se  that  the  men  begged  to  be
left  in  their  blankets.  It  was  indeed  impossible  to  put  men  in  such  a
state  of  emaciation  into  those  sheets.

Generally  speaking,  I  have  no  hesitation  in  saying  that,  with  the
exhausted  constitutions  of  our  men,  the  consequences  were  fatal  of
laying  them  on  paillasses,  only  separated  from  the  floor  by  the  wooden
divans  in  the  wards,  and  by  mats  in  the  corridors,  which  were
flagged  with  limestone,  Maltese  stone,  or  unglazed  tile.  At  the  same
time,  I  wish  to  say  that  none  of  our  men  ever  made  a  comjilaint  to
nie  of  the  hardness  of  their  beds,  but  the  revei-se ;  and  I  derive  my
opinion  solely  from  a  long  habit  of  watching  the  sick.  Never  should
a  padlasse  be  seen  in  a  military  hospital  again  without  a  mattress
over  it.  Any  number  of  mattresses  could  have  been  had  in  an
Eastern  capital  like  Constantinople,  any  day,  where  every  man
carries  about  his  bed  with  him.  These  would  of  course  have  been
cotton.

With  regard  to  ward  furniture  and  utensils,  there  Avas  in  the
Barrack  hospital  an  absolute  deficiency  of  these  things.  A  soldier  is
expected  by  our  regulations  almost  to  fui-nish  his  own  hospital,  with
some  slight  assistance  from  the  barrack  department.  Now,  at
Scutari,  we  had  neither  barrack  department  nor  soldier's  kit,  for  the
men  had  to  abandon  their  kits,  as  is  well  known,  and  did  not  recover
them  till  a  later  period.  The  consequence  was,  that  when  we,  on  two
successive  occasions,  oi:)ened  newly-repaired  divisions  of  the  Barrack
hospital  to  an  influx  of  some  hundreds  of  patients,  there  was  no
furniture  whatever  in  the  wards  but  the  beds.  And  all  utensils,
Avhether  for  eating  and  drinking,  taking  medicine,  cleaning,  washing,
or  other  purposes,  were  deficient.  There  were  also  neither  chairs,
tables,  benches,  nor  any  other  lamp  or  candlestick  but  a  bottle.  In
Januaiy,  I  mentioned  this  to  the  then  principal  medical  officer,  and
he  answered,  '  I  perceive  jow  are  not  awai'e  that  these  things  are
found  by  the  barrack  department.'  I  also  mentioned  it  in  the
presence  of  the  inspector-general  to  the  purveyor-general,  and  he
answered,  that  he  did  not  intend  to  supply  the  things,  having  no
warrant  to  that  eflect,  which  was  true.

I  will  put  in  a  list  of  what  was  in  store  on  January  i,  1855,  in  the
way  of  ward  furniture.

January  i,""'  1855.

Plates  (tin) none  j  Tin  drinking  clips . . . none

Candlesticks none  1  Urinals  (metal)  ....  plenty

*  On  this  day,  the  number  of  patients  who  had  arrived  in  the  hospitals  of  the
Bosphorus  during  the  last  fortnight  amounted  to  ■2532,  and  were  followed  by  1044
in  the  next  six  days.


43


Evidence  given


Bed-pans some

Close  stools plenty

[but  frames  wanted

Tin  pails  for  tea  .... none

[at  present

Bolsters none

Night-cai)s a  few


Slippers none

Knives  and  forks . . .  none

Spoons none

Flannel  shirts ....  none

Socks,  pairs none

Drawers,  pairs ....  none
Some  tea-pots  and  coffee-pots.


With  regard  to  clothing,  a  limited  quantity  of  very  good  hospital
dresses  was  in  use  among  the  patients.  But  many  of  the  men  came
down  almost  without  shirts,  or  indeed  any  kind  of  clothing,  but  a
blanket  and  a  pair  of  trowsers.  From  November  till  after  the
winter  clothing  was  served  out,  the  supply  was  very  deficient,  in
hospital,  either  of  shirts,  socks,  or  other  articles  of  underclothing.

The  want  of  shirts,  and  indeed  of  almost  all  clothing,  on  the  part  of
the  men,  being  2)roved  beyond  the  ^iossibility  of  disi^ute  by  tlie  statement
of  almost  every  official, — in  General  Airey' s  loords  '■the  army  loas  almost
vnthout  clothes,^ — What  was  the  'enormous  supphf  which,  as  Com-
missioner Maxioell  states,  '  co-existed  with  constant  complaints  of  tlie
want  of  the  articles  in  question  V

The  number  of  shirts  issued  from  the  quartermaster-general's  store
at  Scutari  was,  up  to  15  Februaiy,  4387,  a  number  eqiial  to  the  men
discharged  from  hospital  between  December  5,  the  period  when  these
issues  commenced,  and  January  31,  viz.,  4349. {See  Note  D,  page  83.)


The  purveyor  states  that  he  issued  from  October  i  to  February  1 5,
1 1,234  shix'ts,  of  which  he  says  2500  were  delivered  to  Miss  Nightingale.
Now,  800  only  were  delivered  to  hei',  the  2500  having  been  made
requisition  for  by  her,  but  800  only  received.  As  usual,  the  amount
of  the  requisition  and  not  of  the  actual  issue  was  debited.  Another
example  of  the  fallacy  of  requisitions  as  vouchers  for  receipt,
although  there  is  no  shadow  of  suspicion  of  dishonesty.  {See  Note  D,
page  83.

The  800  appear  again  in  Miss  Nightingale's  schedule ;  therefore
deducting  from  1 1  >  2  3  4

2500


8734  remain

Miss  Nightingale  issued  from  November  10,  1854,  up  to  February
i5>  1855 — (AS'ee  Gumming -Maxwell  Report,  p.  35)
10,537  cotton  shirts.
6823  flannel  shirts.


17,360


Of  which  400  and  400  respectively  were,  as  just  stated,  from  pur-
veyor's store.


before  the  Royal  Commission,

Therefore,  there  were  issued —
Shirts.

4,387  from  quartermaster-general,
8,734  from  purveyor,
17,360  from  Miss  Nightingale.


30,481

Up  to  December  4,  it  appears  that  the  number  found  in  patients'
knapsacks  was  22  ! {See  Note  D,  page  82.)

Surely,  in  the  above  issues  there  can  be  found  nothing  extravagant
or  unnecessary,  but,  on  the  contrary,  they  must  be  thought  absolutely
indispensable,  being,  as  they  were,  issued  upon  requisition  from  the
medical  officer ;  the  quartern! aster-genei'al's  issues  only  excepted,
which  were  made  upon  inspection  of  the  men's  kits.

How  were  the  sick  j)i'ovided  ivith  medical  comforts,  diets,  and  extra
diets  ?

I  do  not  consider  the  supply  of  these  things  to  have  been  ever
deficient  in  quantity.  In  quality  the  bread  and  meat  were  good,
the  eggs,  fowls,  and  milk  generally  very  bad  ;  the  arrowroot  and  port
wine  sometimes  bad.  At  the  same  time  the  cooking  was  what  was
chiefly  to  be  complained  of  The  waste  in  the  wards  was  enormous,
because  the  men  were  really  unable  to  eat  diets  so  cooked.

Were  the  kitchens  and  extra-diet  kitchens  stifficie?it  ?

There  were  no  extra-diet  kitchens  at  all  till  those  of  the  female
nurses  were  constructed,  which  were  followed  by  the  construction  of
one  by  the  excellents  taff-surgeon  of  one  of  the  divisions  of  the  Barrack
hospital.  The  genei'al  kitchens  simply  consisted  of  boilers  and  tin
pots  on  Turkish  braziers  till  M.  Soyer  improved  them  in  April,  1855.
Practically,  although  not  theoi*etically,  it  was  acknowledged  by  the
medical  officers,  that  in  order  to  make  the  men  eat  at  all,  it  was
necessary  to  feed  them  almost  exclusively  on  extras.  It  need  hardly
be  stated  that  the  extra-diet  system  is  cumbrous,  wasteful,  inefficient,
expensive. {See  Note  C,  2yage  80.)

Were  any  difficulties  experienced  in  obtaining  food,  clothing,  bedding,
medical  comforts,  or  extra  diets,  lohen  prociorable  ?

Difficulties  wei'e  experienced  in  obtaining  some  articles  of  extra
diet,  shirts,  clean  linen,  and  bedding,  ward  furniture  and  utensils,
light  and  fuel,  even  when  procurable  in  the  market  or  actually  exist-
ing in  store.  I  could  mention  many  siich  examples.  After  May,
1855,  howevei",  no  such  difficulties,  or  very  few,  occurred  at  Scutari;
but  in  that  summer,  in  the  Crimea,  and  even  at  a  later  period,  they
still  existed.

What  appeared  to  be  the  cause  of  such  difficulties  ?

I  would  mention  : —

(i.)  The  system  of  requisition.

(2.)  That  of  i-equiring  the  soldier  to  bring  the  contents  of  his  own
kit  into  hospital,  which,  in  war  time  especially,  the  time  when  most
required,  must  oftenest  be  wanting.


44  Evidence  given

(3.)  The  fear  of  being  called  a  '  troublesome  fellow,'  which,  to  my
positive  knowledge,  deterred  medical  officers  from  making  repeated
requisitions  for  articles  which  they  knew  to  be  necessary  for  their
men,  or  for  repairs,  because  they  feared  that  such  conduct  would  injure
their  prospects.

This  will  be  denied. But  it  is  true  for  all  that.

(4.)  And  chiefly,  the  total  want  which  existed  and  does  exist  of
any  scheme  of  organization  for  general  hospitals.

Our  system  has  always  been  regimental ;  and  the  only  theory  of  a
general  hospital  which  exists  in  our  service  is  that  of  an  aggregate
of  regimental  hospitals.  This  will  not  be  denied,  because  the  theory
was  and  is  still  maintained  by  many  senior  medical  officers.

How  were  they  overcome,  and  what,  in  your  ojnnion,  wotdd  be  the
best  way  0/ preventing  them  in  future  ?

(i.)  The  sanitary  defects  were  first  overcome  by  the  Sanitary  Com-
mission, which  arrived  only  March  6,  1855.

(2.)  With  regard  to  stores,  I  can  best  answer  the  question  by
putting  in  an  abstract  of  some  of  the  principal  articles  supplied  from
private  sources  to  the  hosjutals,  &c.,  at  Scutari,  on  requisition  from
medical  officers,  as  well  as  to  those  in  the  Crimea,  and  only  after
ascertaining,  in  most  instances,  that  the  articles  did  not  exist  in  the
purveyor's  store  or  were  not  to  be  issued  thence.

*  Shirts  (flannel  and  cotton) 50,000

Pairs  of  socks  and  stockings 23,743

*  Pairs  of  drawers 6,843

*  Towels 5,826

*  Handkerchiefs 10,044

*  Comforters 91638

Flannel yards 1,384

Pairs  of  slippers 3,626

Knives  and  forks 856

Spoons 2,630

Night  caps 4',524

*  Gloves  and  mits pairs 4,545

Drinking  cups 5,477

Tin  plates , 2,086

*  Basins,  zinc,  &c 624

Dressing  gowns 1,004

Air  beds  and  pillows 232

Thread  and  tape packages  74

*  Lanterns,  candle  lamps,  and  lamps 168

Preserved  meats cases  253

Meat  biscuit barrels  2

Isinglass  and  gelatine lbs.  148^

India  rubber  sheeting  .... pieces,  325  yds.  26

Camp  kitchens,  cooking  stoves,  and  canteens ...  55

Boilers  and  stewpans 68


before  the  Royal  Commission.  45

Tables  and  forms,  Brooms  and  scrubbers,

Baths,  Bedpans,

Soap,  *  Tin  pails,

Games,  *  Combs,  scissors.  &c.  &c.

were  supplied  with  and  without  requisition. t

The  issues  of  clothing  were  principally  made  before  the  issues  of
warm  clothing  took  place  in  the  Crimea ;  and  even  when  these
latter  issues  were  being  made,  a  letter  dated  January  27,  1855,  was
addressed  by  the  Director-General  to  the  Deputy  Secretary-at-War,
recommending  a  clothing  store  to  be  formed  at  Scutari,  for  men  dis-
charged from  hospital,  which  had,  however,  been  done  December  5,
1854.

It  is  but  fair  to  add,  for  those  who  do  not  know  the  regulations  of
the  service,  that  the  articles  marked  with  an  asterisk  form  no  part
of  hospital  furnishing  according  to  the  regulations,  and  that,  there-
fore, the  fault  was  not  in  those  who  did  not  provide  them.  For  the
purveyor  purveys  according  to  his  '  warrants,'  but  the  soldier  wants
according  to  his  circumstances.  The  absurdity  lies  in  attempting
to  provide  for  war,  an  abnormal  state  of  society,  by  normal  rules,  non-
expansive.

(3.)  With  regard  to  system,  I  do  not  consider  that  the  difficulties
were  ever  overcome  at  all ;  all  that  was  done  was  done  by  a  violent
expenditure,  and  the  relaxation  of  all  rule.

No  deficiency  existed  in  the  purveyor's  stores  after  May,  1855,  ^t
Scutai'i ;  although  I  cannot  say  the  same  for  some  of  the  general  hos-
pitals of  the  Crimea.  But  this  arose  not  so  much  from  the  non-
existence as  from  the  non-supply  of  the  stores.

A  far  more  serious  question,  however,  than  the  want  of  stores
which,  with  the  Anglo-Saxon  race,  will  always  be  supplied,  in  such
cases,  by  private  interposition,  is,  the  non-organization  of  a  system  of
general  hospital  government.  For  the  clash  of  departments  which
now  constitutes  that  system  cannot  be  called  a  hospital  government
at  all.  It  is  a  division  with  grounded  arms.  i.  The  general  officer
commanding  ;  2,  the  quartermaster-general ;  3,  the  adjutant-general  ;
4,  the  engineer's  department  ;  5,  the  paymaster  ;  6,  the  commissariat ;
7,  the  contractor  ;  8,  the  purveyor  ;  9,  the  medical  department  :  these
nine  departments  all  step  in  and  appeal  to  one  another  to  do  what
each  can  to  make  a  general  hospital  march  upon  regimental  con-
trivances.

Will  you  state  your  opinion,  as  to  the  best  manner  of  organizing  a
general  hospital,  so  as  to  make  such  hospital  thoi'oughly  efficieiit  ?


+  A  manufacture  of  stump-pillows,  bed-sore  pillows  — to  the  number  of  many
thousands,— of  arm-slings,  and  such  like  surgical  needlework,  was  always  being
carried  on  by  the  nurses.  But  as  this  is  properl)'  women's  work,  and  it  is  hoped
will  always  in  future  be  done  by  them  in  general,  and  especially  in  war  hoHpitals,
no  further  mention  of  it  is  here  made.


46  Evidence  given

I  will  reply  to  this  question  under  the  three  following  heads. In
general  terms^  the  organization  needed  is,
(i.)  One  for  sanitary  purposes.
(2.)  One  for  government.
(3.)  One  for  supply.

I.  Sanitary  Purposes.

The  first  is  really  the  most  important  question.  The  sick  might
have  been  loaded  with  medical  comforts,  attended  by  the  first  medical
men  of  the  age  ;  under  such  sanitary  conditions  as  existed  at  Scutari,
they  had  not  a  chance.  And  yet  it  does  not  appear  that  any
adequate  means  had  been  applied  for  remedying  the  defects,  after  Dr.
Burrell's  unfortunate  retirement  from  the  service.  Nay,  what  is
more,  at  the  time  most  easy,  rather  the  only  time  to  prevent  these
evils — viz.,  in  October,  1854,  the  hospitals  in  the  East  were  reported
'  satisfactory.'  This  shows  the  low  standard  of  excellence  with  which
our  medical  ofiicers  were  then  satisfied  ;  afterwards  it  was  too  late.
The  evils  were  remedied  when  the  mischief  was  done.  How  mixcli
easier  it  would  have  been  to  prevent  them  !

I  may  quote,  in  corroboration  of  this  statement,  one  made  by  the
principal  medical  officer  of  the  army  in  the  East  himself,  in  the  pub-
lished despatches.

'Br.  Hall  to  Lord  Raglan,  March  2,  1855.

'****.  Out  of  442  patients  treated  in  the  General  hospital  at
Balaclava,  between  February  18—24,  only  three  casualties  have  oc-
curred, which  I  think  may  fairly  be  termed  a  low  rate  of  mortality,
considering  the  class  of  patients  that  are  generally  sent  in  there  for
treatment,  men  brought  down  from  camp,  and  found  too  ill  to  embark
when  they  arrive  at  Balaclava.'

The  above  mortality  is  12  per  month,  or  27  per  1000  per  month.
If  these  men  had  been  sent  to  Scutari  in  February,  there  would  have
died  not  1 2  but  189.  The  deaths  to  cases  treated  at  Scutari  in  February
being  427  per  1000,  instead  of  27  per  1000,  and  from  February  25  to
March  17,  315  per  1000,

And,  according  to  Dr.  Hall's  statement,  these  cases  treated  at
Balaclava  were  kept  there,  because  they  were  in  a  worse  state  than
those  sent  down  to  Scutari.

The  distinction  between  personal  and  public  hygiene  must  not  be
overlooked.  It  is  acknowledged  in  civil  life.  The  officer  of  health  of
towns,  who  was  first  proposed  by  Mr.  Martin,  does  not  do  the  work
of  the  physician  or  sux'geon  ;  and,  on  the  other  hand,  you  do  not  send
for  your  physician  or  surgeon  to  drain  your  street.  Had  an  officer  of
health  been  attached  to  the  quartermaster-general's  department  at  the
base  of  operations,  who  would  have  put  to  rights  those  buildings
befoi'e  we  occupied  them,  how  much  life  would  have  been  spared  !  This
officer  should  have  full  powers,  through  the  quartermaster-general's
department,  to  see  i,  to  the  draining  of  sites  ;  2,  to  the  sewerage ;  3,  to


before  the  Royal  Commission,  47

the  cleansing  of  outskirts ;  4,  to  the  ventilation ;  5,  to  the  water  sup-
ply; 6,  to  the  lime-washing  and  cleanliness  of  the  buildings;  7,  to  the
allotment  of  cubic  space  ;  8,  to  the  sanitary  conduct  of  burials.

There  is  quite  enough  for  one  man  to  do  here.  There  is  no  more
need  for  this  administration  of  the  hygiene  of  buildings  to  clash  with
that  of  the  personal  hygiene  of  the  patients,  which  must  be  left  to  the
medical  officers,  than  in  precisely  the  analogous  case  of  civil  life,  where
no  man  ever  thinks  of  confounding  the  two.

Before  and  after  the  works  executed  by  the  sanitary  commissionei's,
begun  in  March,  1 855,  the  hospitals  at  Scutari  bore  a  similar  sanitary
difference  to  that  which  the  gaols  of  the  last  century,  which  were  pest-
houses,  did  to  Colonel  Jebb's  prisons  of  1857,  the  most  healthy  build-
ings in  existence.

The  rate  of  mortality  in  the  hos^jitals  was  higher  in  February  than
in  January,  although  the  mortality  on  board  the  sick  transports  had
fallen  off  from  90  per  1000  in  January  to  19  in  February,  proving
that  the  sanitary  condition  of  the  hospitals  was  deteriorating  (although
the  number  of  sick  had  diminished),  while  the  sanitary  state  of  the
transports  and  the  condition  of  the  sick  was  improving.  The  mor-
tality, even  to  March  17,  continued  higher  in  these  hospitals  than  it
had  been  during  the  average  of  the  four  months,  October,  1854,  No-
vember, December,  and  January,  1855.  The  sanitary  works  were
then  begun,  and,  after  their  completion,  the  mortality  fell  to  less  than
one-sixth  of  what  it  was  when  the  Barrack  and  General  hospitals  were
first  occupied  together  in  October,  1854,  and  to  one-nineteenth  of
what  it  was  in  Februaiy,  1855.  What  other  inference  can  be  drawn
from  such  statistics  and  conditions  but  this,  that,  had  nothing  been
done,  before  four  months  were  out,  or  as  soon  as  the  hot  weather  set
in  to  give  fresh  strength  to  the  seeds  of  epidemic  disease  buried
among  us,  the  hospital  population  of  the  Bosphorus  would  have  been
swept  from  the  face  of  the  earth,  and  there  would  have  been  no  one
left  in  those  lazar-houses  to  tell  the  tale  ?  Civil  life  is  full  of  similar
lessons.

I  am  bound  to  say  that  the  military  hospitals  I  have  seen  in  Eng-
land, Portsmouth,  Chatham,  Brompton,  are  almost  as  much  in  want
of  certain  sanitary  works  as  Scutari.

2.  Government.

One  executive  responsible  head,  it  seems  to  me,  is  what  is
wanted  in  a  general  hospital,  call  him  governor,  commandant,  or  what
you  will ;  and  let  it  be  his  sole  command.  Let  him  be  military,
medical,  or  civilian  officer,  as  the  possession  of  administrative  talents
point  out  a  man  for  the  work.

The  departments  should  not  be  many  : —

1.  A  governor,  solely  responsible  for  evexy thing  but  medical  treat-
ment.

2.  A  principal  niedical  officer  and  his  staff,  relieved  of  all  adminis-
trative, and  strictly  confined  to  his  professional  duties.


48  Evidence  given

3.  A  steward,  who  should  fulfil  the  duties  of  purveyor,  commissary,
and  barrackmaster,  and  supply  everything,  subject  to  the  governor.

4.  A  treasurer,  who  should  be  banker  and  paymaster.

5.  A  captain  of  hospital  attendants,  who  should  undertake  the  direc-
tion of  the  cooking,  washing,  care  of  hospital  furniture  and  govern-
ment of  orderlies.

All  these  officers  to  be  appointed  at  home  by  the  War  Department.

According  to  this  plan,  the  governor  would  cumulate  the  functions
of  quartermaster-general  and  adjutant-general,  and  therefore  the  sani-
tary officer  mentioned  before  would  be  attached  to  him  instead  of  to
the  quartermaster-general.  The  governor  would  be  solely  responsible
for  carrying  out  the  works  advised,  and  for  engaging  the  labour
requisite  to  do  so.

3.  Supply.

With  regard  to  the  mode  of  supply,  let  the  steward  furnish  the
hospital  according  to  a  fixed  scale,  previously  agreed  upon.  The  mode
of  supply  by  requisitions  is  faulty  both  ways,  both  in  pretending  to
supply  that  which  is  not  in  store,  and  in  not  supplying  that  which  is.
For  the  requisition  remains,  although  the  supply  has  never  been
given. And  the  supply  is  often  not  given,  although  it  is  in  store.

With  regard  to  food,  let  the  steward  make  contracts,  siibject  to  the
governor's  apjjroval,  and  with  power  to-  buy  in  the  market  at  the  con-
tractor's expense,  if  the  contractor  fails.

A  scheme  of  diets  should  be  constructed,  according  to  the  most  ap-
proved authorities,  in  order  to  save  the  cumbrous  machinery  of  extra
diet  rolls.

Equivalents  might  be  laid  down,  so  as  to  afford  the  necessary  choice,
depending  on  the  natiire  of  the  climate,  the  season  of  the  year,  the
state  of  the  market,  the  productions  of  the  country,  &c.

To  what  extent  andinwhat  manner  could  female  nursing  he  rendered
available  in  general  hospitals  attached  to  an  army  in  the  field  or  at  home  ?

Female  nursing  might  be  introduced  in  general  hospitals  both  at
home  and  in  the  field,  if  only  women  of  the  efficiency,  responsibility,
and  character  of  head  nurses  in  civil  hospitals  be  appointed.  Say  one
to  not  less  than  25  bad  cases  ;  the  orderlies  doing  under  the  head
female  nurse  the  duty  done  in  civil  hospitals  by  assistant- nurses.

But  the  head  female  nurse  must  be  in  chai-ge  of  all  that  pertains  to
the  bed-side  of  the  patient,  of  his  cleanliness,  that  of  his  bed  and
utensils,  of  the  administration  of  medicine,  of  food,  of  the  minor  dress-
ings not  i)ei'formed  by  the  surgeon,  in  short,  of  all  that  concerns  the
personal  obedience  of  the  patient  to  the  orders  of  the  surgeon.  She
must  accompany  the  surgeon  on  his  visits,  and  receive  his  orders.
She  must  also  be  in  charge  of  the  ventilation  and  warming  of  the  ward.
She  must  report  any  disobedience  of  the  orderlies,  as  far  as  regards
the  patient's  personal  treatment.

There  need  be  no  clashing  with  the  wai'd-master  or  hospital  ser-


before  the  Royal  Commission.  49

jeant.  On  the  contrary,  it  would  be  the  duty  of  these  to  enforce  the
nurse's  authority.  They  will  have  enough  to  do,  besides,  with  returns
and  accounts,  and  with  enforcing  discipline  as  to  hours,  meals,  clotliing,
&c.,  among  the  orderlies  out  of  ward.

The  female  nurses  should  be  of  course  under  a  female  head,  whose
duties  must  be  carefully  arranged  so  as  to  be  in  accordance  with  the
code  of  hospital  regulations.

Are  you  of  ojnnion  that  female  nursing  could  he  employed  advan-
tageously in  regimental  hospitals  ?

I  am  not.

What  was  the  method  hi  use  at  Scutari,  when  you,  went  there,  for
receiving  and  admitting  sick  and  registering  their  admissions  and
diseases,  and  how  were  the  results,  deaths,  and  burials  recorded  ?

Up  to  the  middle  of  February,  1855,  the  method  said  to  exist  was  the
following: — The  adjutant  or  his  serjeant  stood  at  the  landing-place
or  hospital  gate  and  took  the  names  of  those  who  were  able  to  speak,
receiving  a  verbal  report  from  the  officer  in  charge  of  the  number  who
had  died  during  the  voyage.  At  first,  there  was  no  arrangement  for
registering  the  sick  when  they  were  received  into  hospital.  And  the
erasure  of  the  man's  name  from  the  diet  roll  was  at  one  time  the  only
recoi'd  of  his  death,  excepting  the  adjutant's  head  roll  of  burials.

I  believe  that  the  medical  officer  in  charge  always  endeavoured  to
make  a  nominal  roll  on  the  voyage  fi'om  Balaklava  to  Scutari ;  more
than  one  has  stated  that  it  took  him  half  a  day  fi'om  his  professional
duties  about  the  sick  to  do  so.  But,  whatever  this  nominal  roll  was,
it  went  to  the  principal  medical  officei"'s  office,  and  not  into  the  wai'ds  ;
one  copy  was  given,  I  have  been  told,  to  the  deputy  assistant  quarter-
master-general on  landing.  But  at  what  period  this  was  first  done  I
am  not  aware.  It  has  been  stated  to  me  by  several  medical  officers
that,  even  as  late  as  March,  1855,  the  inspecting  medical  officer  of
transports,  upon  going  on  board,  frequently  found  this  list  imperfect,
owing  to  the  illness  of  the  medical  officer  in  charge,  or  other  unavoid-
able cause,  and  had  to  complete  it  then  and  there.

Till  the  middle  of  February,  or  later,  we  had  no  bed-tickets,  and
no  regular  death,  returns.  It  is  well  known  that  the  sick  were  put
on  board  at  Balaclava  without  nominal  or  numerical  lists  up  to
February,  1855.  Upon  their  admission  at  Scutari,  an  assistant-
surgeon  has  been  charged  late  in  the  evening  to  take  the  names,  regi-
ment, regimental  numbei',  &c.,  and  to  make  the  diagnosis  of  above
100  patients  before  nine  the  next  morning.  One-twentieth  have
been  known  to  die  before  they  could  give  their  names.

After  the  end  of  March  all  this  confusion  ceased.  But  it  was  not
till  the  end  of  April  that  a  census  of  the  hospitals  was  taken,  and
returns  "  squared"  with  the  adjutant-general  in  the  Crimea.

Returns  possibly  existed  of  which  I  knew  nothing.  I  am  speaking
only,  first,  of  what  I  saw  ;  second,  of  what  I  was  informed  of  by  wit-
nesses on  the  spot  and  at  the  time.

E


50  Evidence  given

The  conclusion  I  draw  from  all  this  is,  not  that  any  one  was  in
fault,  for  all  were  burdened  with  work  beyond  their  strength,  but
that  there  was  at  first  no  system  of  registration  for  general  hospitals,
and  that  a  registrar  is  an  essentially  necessary  officer  for  such  an
institution.

In  consequence  of  the  great  confusion  of  the  hospitals  from  the
battle  of  the  Alma  till  a  late  period  of  the  winter  of  1854-55,  a
number  of  men  were  buried  from  the  hospitals,  exceeding  in  six
months  the  deaths  reported  in  the  orderly  room  by  530.  But  the
deaths  reported  in  the  orderly  room  exceed  those  reported  in  the
hospital  books.

In  November  by 12

„  December „ 143

„  January „ 125

280

while,  as  if  to  make  up  the  lost  ground,  the  medical  returns,  which
had  exceeded  the  orderly  room  returns

by 12  deaths  in  October,  exceed  again

l>y  253 „  February,


265

bringing  the  sum  of  deaths  very  nearly  equal.  The  adjutant  having
buried  280  men  more  than  the  total  number  reported  by  the  inspector-
general  as  dead,  the  account  had  to  be  balanced  at  a  subsequent
period.

By  the  census  taken  of  the  hospitals,  April  30,  1855,  it  appeared
that  517  non-commissioned  officers  and  soldiers  had  been  buried
whose  deaths  were  unrecorded.  An  official  report  was  then  sent  up
to  the  adjutant-general  in  the  Crimea,  and  they  were  struck  off  the
strength  of  the  army.  The  names  and  regiments  of  28  others
remained  unknown.

I  have  carefully  compared  the  statistics  from  six  different  official
sources,  and  none  of  them  agree.

It  is  possible  that,  in  some  of  these  cases,  the  numbers  of  deaths
may  be  the  numbers  occurring  in  the  several  months,  in  other  cases
the  numbers  recorded  in  those  months.  At  the  same  time,  the  great
discrepancies  in  the  several  numbers  shake  confidence  in  their  accuracy,
and  render  it  difficult  to  make  any  use  of  them  for  statistical  purposes.

From  details  given  in  Note  B,  page  77,  it  will  be  seen  (i.)  that
there  are  three  different  returns  of  the  deaths  on  board  the  transports
from  Balaclava  to  Scutari,  and  that  the  number  reported  is  different
in  each  separate  return.  Nay,  there  is  scarcely  a  single  ship  for  which
the  returns  agree.

2.  The  adjutant's  head-roll  of  burials,  the  most  trustworthy  record
of  deaths,  exceeded  in  six  months  by  upwards  of  500  the  number


before  the  Royal  Commission.  51

reported  as  having  died  in  the  hospitals.  And  the  adjutant  states
that  this  list  of  burials  does  not  include  civilians.  (See  Note  B,
page  78.)

3.  The  director-general  himself  represents  the  very  numbers  in  the
'  return  of  total  sick  treated  in  Lord  Raglan^s  army  as  having  been
'  treated  at  Scutari  alone  in  November,  December,  i8'j4,  and  January,
1855. (See  Note,  page  78).

4.  The  returns  of  dead  at  Scutari  from  October  i  to  December  31,
1854,  vary  as  follows  : —

Keported  Principal

Adjutant's  return deaths,  Medical

of  burials. Orderly  Officer's

Room.  return.

I30I 1046  910

Smyrna  hospital  did  not  then  exist.  And  Koulali  did  not  exist
till  December,  and  contained  then,  as  a  maximum,  but  240  patients.

These  sources  of  discrepancy  are  therefore  eliminated.

The  result  of  my  examination  of  these  statistics  is  simply  this,  that
however  satisfactory  they  may  be  to  the  departments  who  have  put
them  forth,  and  whichever  of  them  may  be  correct,  exhibiting  as  they
do  such  palpable  diversity,  still,  to  any  one  not  in  the  secret  as  to  how
things  which  apparently  differ  so  widely  are  nevertheless  identically
the  same,  they  convey  no  trustworthy  idea  as  to  the  sickness  and
mortality  of  the  army  in  the  East,  and  that,  for  any  practical  purpose,
they  are,  as  put  forth  to  the  public  who  are  most  interested  in  the
matter,  not  absolute  truths,  but  only  approximations.

The  calculations  which  I  give  unquestionably  understate  the  mor-
tality actually  experienced.*

Hoio  were  discijjUne  and  obedience  to  medical  and  hospital  orders
enforced  among  the  2)atients  and  orderlies  of  the  hospitals  in  the  East  ?

In  the  sense  in  which  discipline  is  understood  in  the  army,  i.e.,  of
teaching  or  learning  how  intelligently  to  obey  orders  (which  we  saw


*  Our  total  loss  in  the  Crimean  War  (of  all  arms),  from  first  to  last,  was —

Meu  killed 2,598  according  to  adjutant-general.

„ died  in  hospital .... 18,058  ,,  director-general.

20,656
Officers  killed  (157),  died  (233) . 390  ,,  adjutant-general.

But  in  making  up  this  total  of  18,058,  died  in  hospital,  the).Scutari  mortality  given
by  Dr.  Andrew  Smith  for  the  six  months,  October,  1854,  to  March,  1855,  exceeds
by  nearly  500  the  mortality  reported  to  him  by  his  own  medical  officers  at  the  time,
as  cited  at  pages  29,  30.  And  Dr.  Andrew  Smith  gives  the  numbers  who  died  on
board  the  transports  for  the  five  months,  October,  1854,  '■o  February,  1855,  as  ex-
ceeding by  1 7  7  the  numbers  reported  officially  by  the  surgeons  on  board  at  the
time,  see  page  27.  So  that  I  have  understated  the  Scutari  and  transport  mor-
tality by  at  least  a  number  of  nearly  700  men  ;  something  like  a  whole  regiment,
of  which  we  may  say  that  we  shall  never  know  the  how,  the  wlien,  nor  the  where
of  its  perishing.

E  2


52  Evidence  given

carried  to  the  higliest  perfection  in  the  Crimea),  there  was  little  or
none  in  the  hospitals.

It  is  not  meant  by  this  that  the  men  made  a  '  shindy'  whenever
they  were  left  alone,  or  that  they  did  not  stand  at  attention  when  the
medical  officers  went  into  the  ward.  There  was,  in  fact,  a  little  too
much  of  this.  It  is  meant  that  hospital  discipline  consists  in  enforcing
hospital  treatment,  and  hospital  treatment  consists  in  the  administra-
tion of  medicine,  of  diet,  the  application  of  the  minor  dressings,  the
cleanliness  of  the  ward,  that  of  the  patient,  his  bedding,  and  his
utensils,  his  personal  obedience  to  the  surgeon's  orders  as  to  keeping
his  ward,  his  bed,  or  his  position,  &c.  &c.  To  enfoi'ce  in  all  these
matters  obedience  to  the  surgeon's  ordei's  is  to  enforce  hospital  dis-
cipline.

Another  branch  of  discipline  consists,  no  doubt,  in  the  man's
respectful  demeanour  to  his  officers,  in  the  accuracy  of  diet  rolls,
returns,  accounts,  &c.  &c.  This  is  not  here  spoken  of,  because  it  is
not  sti'ictly  hospital  work.  In  hospital  work,  the  meaning  of  the
words  to  be  '  in  charge'  is,  we  presume,  to  receive  the  medical
officer's  orders,  to  see  them  obeyed,  and  to  take  measures  so  that  they
cannot  be  disobeyed  without  its  being  known  and  remedied.

Now,  in  military  hospitals,  there  is  no  one  thus  '  in  charge.'

The  ward-master  or  hospital-serjeant  has  duties  so  multifarious  that
three  men  could  not  perform  them  all  with  any  satisfaction,  and  the
nursing  work  is  generally  sacrificed  to  the  writing  work,  unless  the
ward-master  be,  as  sometimes,  but  rarely,  happens,  a  very  good  nurse.

The  orderlies  do  not  bring  '  skilled  labour'  to  the  work,  and  the
medical  staff  corps  far  less.  There  is  little  or  no  training ;  it  is  a
truism  that  less  work  is  done  less  well  in  the  same  time  by  unskilled
than  by  skilled  labour.

The  cleaning  and  airing  of  the  wards  in  the  morning  would  make
a  housemaid  laugh  ;  at  Scutari  each  orderly  worked  at  it  in  his  own
way,  and  then  the  patients  undid  it  all,  and  it  had  all  to  be  done  over
again.*

Except  when  the  medicines  were  given  by  the  medical  officers


*  The  above  remarks  by  no  means  apply  to  the  war-hospitals  alone.  They  apply
often  as  much  to  many  military  hospitals  at  home  and  in  peace.  It  is  true  that
the  'outside  of  the  platter'  is  sometimes  licked  tolerably  clean  for  inspection.  But
has  the  visitor  ever  pulled  out  the  dirty  linen  crammed  under  the  patient's  mat-
tress ?  or  ever  found  under  the  patient's  pillow  his  tobacco,  his  pipe,  sometimes
lighted,  his  clasp-knife,  dirty  shirt,  spoon,  and  towel,  if  he  has  one  ?  These  are
pulled  out  by  the  medical  officer,  who  is  obliged  to  confiscate  them  for  the  time
being,  and  desire  the  hospital  Serjeant  '  to  take  them  away,'  well  knowing  that
neither  he  nor  the  patient  has  anywhere  else  to  put  them.

Cleanliness  may  be  attained  by  extraordinary  exertions  for  an  occasion  in  the
military  hospital  as  it  is  now  ;  but  order  could  only  be  obtained  by  a  miracle,  since
hardly  one  of  the  appurtenances  which  are  necessary  for  order  is  ever  to  be  found
in  a  military  hospital.  The  institution  of  the  ward-scullery  is  one  almost  entirely
unknown  ;  and  there  are  appliances  of  civilization  considered  too  advanced  for  the


before  the  Royal  Commission.  53

themselves  or  by  the  women,  they  were  taken  by  the  patient  or  not,
at  his  own  discretion.

The  meals  were  at  first  irregular,  and  throughont  the  patients
scrambled  for  tliem.  It  occurred  frequently  that  the  bad  cases,  when
unable  to  feed  themselves,  were  not  fed  at  all,  except  by  the  women ;
that  a  great  mess  of  cold  arrowroot  and  wine  stood  by  the  bedside  the
whole  day,  till  it  was  tin-own  away;  that  the  poultices  were  put  on
cold,  or  left  on  till  they  wei-e  hard,  and  then  not  washed  off;  that  the
bed-sores  were  iinattended  to  till  they  had  become  so  bad  that  the
medical  officers'  attention  was  called  to  them  ;  that  the  patients  were
left  dirty  unless  tliey  asked  to  be  washed ;  that  the  utensils  were
never  emptied  more  than  once  a  day;  that  the  keeping  certain  very
bad  cases  constantly  dry  and  clean  was  almost  wholly  nnattended  to  ;
that  the  patients  ox'dered  to  remain  in  bed  were  as  often  out  of  bed,
or  even  out  of  the  ward,  or  smoking  in  the  privies  when  these  were
cleansed  and  ventilated.  The  position  of  surgical  cases  in  bed  was
generally  not  attended  to.

Many  orderly  medical  officers  were  so  zealous  in  their  duties  that
they  would  drudge  through  all  these  details,  and  see  them  carried  out
themselves  ;  but  this  is  not  discipline,  nor  can  it  be,  unless  the  medical
officer  were  in  his  ward  through  the  whole  24  hours.

If  these  things  ai'e  denied,  I  say  I  speak  from  personal  experience,
and,  with  regard  also  to  the  military  hospitals  at  home,  I  have  seen
and  heard  of  the  same  things  there.

It  would  be  easy  for  me,  in  all  these  assertions,  to  cite  the  parti-
cular instances,  but  I  am  not  disposed  to  bring  upon  individuals  cen-
sure for  defects  which  I  believe  to  be  inherent  in  th?  system.

The  medical  staff  corps  are,  for  the  most  part,  nothing  but  sweeps
and  ration  carriers.  There  are  some  first-rate  subjects  among  them,
but  the  endowments  of  most  of  them  were  first-rate  ignorance  of  the
details  of  nursing.

If  all  the  nurses  were  turned  out  of  civil  hosjiitals  and  men  engaged
promiscuously,  without  character,  to  do  their  work,  we  should  see  the
same  results.

Uoio  loere  the  inspections  conducted,  as  far  as  tliey  concerned  hospital
order  1

The  medical  inspections,  as  far  as  I  saw  them,  with  some  very
brilliant  exce]itions,  regarded  only  hospital  order,  and  were  conducted
with  little  reference  to  the  state  of  the  patients.

I  will  describe  the  state  of  the  General  hospital  at  Balaclava  when
I  came  into  it,  April  nth,  1856,  a  time  wlien  there  was  by  no  means
any  pressure.

soldier,  such  as  the  ward-press,  lockers,  properly  fitted-up  lavatories,  &c.  &c.  It
appears  to  be  supposed  that  the  men  will  be  more  orderly  and  cleanly  abroad,
where  they  cannot  have  all  these  appliances,  for  having  been  subjected  at  home  to
the  want  of  them ;  the  English  soldier  is  always  desirous  to  be  clean  where  he  can.


54  Evidence  given

The  first  night  I  found  from  ten  to  twenty  men  of  an  Irish  regimen
talking  and  drinking  in  the  extra-diet  kitchen.

A  quantity  of  extra  bedding  and  clothes  were  cumbering  the  wards,
instead  of  being  in  store.

Under  the  beds  and  under  the  mattresses  were  the  patients'  private
clothes,  large  boxes,  carpenters'  tools,  wood,  coals,  dusters,  brooms,
stones  used  in  cleaning  the  wards,  boots,  shoes,  and  slippers.  These
things  were  concealed  by  the  bedclothes.

One  patient,  suffering  from  frost-bite,  who  subsequently  died,  had
not  been  moved  for  a  week.  Being  unable  to  leave  his  bed,  and
having  been  neglected,  he  was  found  in  a  state  indescribably  horrible.

The  excellent  second-class  staff  surgeon,  who  came  on  duty  the  same
day  I  did,  immediately  set  to  work  to  introduce  real  order  and  clean-
liness. On  April  14,  the  principal  medical  officer  of  the  army  visited
the  hospital  without  requiring  this  staff  surgeon,  who  was  in  charge,
to  accompany  him  ;  ancl  on  the  subsequent  day  the  principal  medical
officer  censured  this  officer  for  '  the  state  of  dirt  and  disorder,'  which
was  the  removal  of  '  dirt  and  disorder,'  in  which  he  had  '  found
the  whole  establishment.'

In  that  hospital,  when  going  over  at  night  the  whole  of  the  wards,
of  which  seven  were  in  the  building,  and  fourteen  were  huts,  I  have
not  found  a  single  orderly  perfectly  sober  who  was  sitting  up  in  the
huts,  and  one  or  two  in  the  building  not  sober  either.  This  was  the
medical  staff  corps.

Can  you  state  why  the  homes  of  the  poor  in  the  country  are  kept  com-
paratively clean  and  healthy,  on  very  moderate  means  1

I  think  that  the  woman  is  superior  in  skill  to  the  man  in  all  points
of  sanitary  domestic  economy,  and  more  particularly  in  cleanliness
and  tidiness.  I  think  great  sanitary  civil  reformers  will  always  tell
us  that  they  look  to  the  woman  to  carry  out  practically  their  hygienic
reforms.  She  has  a  superior  aptitude  in  nursing  the  well  quite  as
much  as  in  nursing  the  sick.  At  the  same  time,  I  am  bound  to  say  that
nothing  can  be  more  perfect,  at  least  to  outward  appearance,  than  the
cleanliness  of  a  ship. But  the  sailor  is  a  race  ci  part.

Is  it  tJie  p)eculiar  skill  and  industry  of  the  English  labourers  wife  to
which  this  is  referable  in  the  one  case,  and  to  the  incomj)etency  of  men
on  the  other  to  conduct  the  domestic  economy  of  a  home  or  a.n  hospital  ?

I  think  so.  I  think  the  Anglo-Saxon  would  be  very  sorry  to  turn
women  out  of  his  own  house,  or  out  of  civil  hospitals,  hotels,  institu-
tions of  all  kinds,  and  substitute  men-housekeepers  and  men-matrons.
The  contrast  between  even  naval  hospitals,  where  there  are  female
nurses,  and  military  hospitals,  where  there  are  none,  is  most  striking
in  point  of  order  and  cleanliness.*


*  I  should  perhaps  state  that  there  is  a  great  difference,  generally  speakings
among  the  women  of  Great  Britain  and  Ireland  in  this  respect.
I  would  put  the  Anglo-Saxon  race  in  the  eouthem  and  north-western  counties


before  the  Royal  Commission.  55

Are  there  not  matrons  in  all  the  best  civil  hosj)itccls?
In  all  that  I  am  acquainted  with.

II. — Hospital  Construction.

Will  you  state  to  the  Commission  ivliat  you  consider  to  he  the  best  plan
of  hosjiital  construction,  for  fulfilliny  the  requisites  of  good  sanitary
condition  and  facility  of  administration,  with  your  reasons  for  pre-
ferring any  jjlan  or  2}lans  to  others  ?

The  best  principle  of  hospital  consti'uction  is  that  of  separate
pavilions,  placed  side  by  side,  or  in  line.  The  former  is  preferable.
It  diminishes  the  distance  to  ti'a verse  from  block  to  block.

The  distance  between  the  blocks  should  be  not  less  than  double  the
height.

There  should  not  be  more  than  two  flats  to  the  block,  nor  more
than  one  ward  to  each  flat.

There  is,  however,  no  objection  to  having  70  to  80  sick  under  one
roof,  if,  for  the  sake  of  economy,  it  be  necessary  to  build  each  pavilion
with  three  flats  instead  of  two,  although  two  flats  are  more  convenient
for  administration.

For  the  purposes  of  administration,  the  building  ought  to  be  in  a
square  ;  the  basement  story  connected  all  round  by  an  arched  corridor,
with  an  open  terrace  above.

The  whole  hospital  should  be  erected  upon  an  arched  basement.

A  hospital  formed  of  separate  pavilions  could  be  built  in  line,
provided  large,  roomy,  well-ventilated,  and  well-lighted  staircases
intervened  between  each  two  pavilions.

This  is  the  plan  of  the  new  military  hospital  at  Vincennes,  which,
however,  forms  three  sides  of  a  square.

This  principle  would  have  been  illustrated  in  Netley,  had  it  been
made  so  thin  as  only  to  have  admitted  two  rows  of  beds  between  the
windows,  in  the  breadth  of  the  ward,  had  there  been  no  corridors,
and  had  the  pavilions  been  separated  by  staircases.  It  would  then
have  been  perfectly  healthy  ;  but  administration  would  have  been
very  difficult  in  so  long  a  line.

As  it  is,  there  are  to  be  two  complete  and  different  administrations,
with  two  kitchens,  two  sets  of  offices  complete  ;  it  is  the  most  expen-
sive and  least  admhiistrable  form.

There  is  only  one  kitchen  to  Vincennes.

That  not  more  that  too  patients  can  with  safety  and  facility  of
administration  be  massed  under  one  roof,  has  come  to  be  an  acknow-
ledged principle  of  hospital  construction.

Buildings  of  two  flats  are  most  compatible  with  perfect  sanitary


first  in  point  of  domestic  management ;  far  below  these  come  the  Danish  race  in
the  eastern  counties  and  the  mixed  race  in  the  manufacturing  counties,  and  laat^
the  Irish  and  Highland  Celt.


56  Evidence  given

conditions  and  facility  of  administration. Even in  emigrant  ships
the  occupation  is  limited  now  to  one  deck.*

Will  you  state  what  you  consider  the  number  of  sick  which  a  ward
should  contain,  for  health,  disciiyline,  and  administration,  with  your
reasons  for  preferring  one  number  to  another  ?

The  best  size  of  wards  for  ensuring  the  two  conditions  of  health
and  facility  of  discipline,  is  from  20  to  32  sick.

Wards  smaller  than  of  20  beds  multiply  both  the  attendance,  unne-
cessaril)^,  and  the  coi'ners,  unfavourably  for  ventilation,  in  proportion
to  the  number  of  patients.  Wards  larger  than  of  32  beds  are  unde-
sirable, because  more  difficult  and  expensive  to  ventilate.

Wards,  again,  smaller  than  of  20  beds  are  more  difficult  to  ventilate
by  natural  means  alone.  A  certain  amount  of  space  is  requisite  for
diffusion,  in  order  to  secure  perfect  natural  ventilation.

The  mode  of  construction  in  hospitals  is,  it  is  presumed,  to  be  deter-
mined by  that  which  is  best  for  the  recovery  of  the  sick.  If  any
other  consideration  is  taken,  such  or  such  a  per-centage  of  mor-
tality is  to  be  sacrificed  to  that  other  consideration.

But  it  so  ha])pens  that  the  safest  for  the  sick  is  the  most  economical
mode  of  construction.

Take  the  example  of  Poi-tsmouth  hospital,  or  Netley,  where  the
windows  are  at  each  end  of  the  ward.  There  should  not  pi'operly
be  more  than  four  beds  in  each  of  those  wards.  For  it  is  unde-
sii'able  ever  to  allow  moi-e  than  two  beds  between  each  two  win-
dows ;  otherwise,  when  the  windows  are  opened,  the  effluvia  blow
over  all  the  intervening  row  of  beds  before  escaping.

Wards  of  a  small  size  are  also  decidedly  objectionable,  because
unfavourable  to  discipline,  inasmuch  as  a  small  number  of  men,
when  placed  together  in  tlie  same  ward,  more  readily  associate
together  for  any  breach  of  discipline  than  a  larger  number.

It  has  been  proved  by  experience  that  the  presence  of  head
nui-ses,  whether  male  or  female,  one  to  each  ward,  is  essential  to
discipline,  and  a  sufficient  number  of  such  nxirses  cannot  be  allotted
in  smaller  wards.  One  head  nurse  can  easily  overlook  40  patients
in  one  large  ward. In  four  small  ones  it  is  almost  impossible.

In  the  event  of  a  death  taking  place  in  the  wai-d,  the  survivors,
when  they  are  few  in  numbei',  are  far  more  likely  to  be  affected
by  it  than  a  larger  number.


*  The  utmost  simplicity  of  plan  is  an  essential  of  good  hospital  construction.
Complication  of  plan  interferes  with  light,  ventilation,  discipline,  facility  of  super-
vision. Every  hole  and  corner,  every  passage,  every  small  ward,  which  need  not
have  been  there,  interferes  with  these  four  vital  conditions  of  a  good  hospital.
Every  skulking  place  which  can  be  spared  must  be  avoided.  As  an  invariable
hospital  rule,  rather  more  than  elsewhere  in  military  hospitals,  publicity  may  be
considered  as  the  best  police  and  the  best  protection.  It  is  far  better  that  30
patients  should  see  the  nurse's  door  than  one  or  none.  It  is  quite  necessary  that
the  chief  ward  attendant  should  be  able  to  see  the  whole  of  his  patients  at  once.


before  the  Royal  Commission.  57

It  is  very  desirable,  for  the  purposes  of  discipline,  that  men  of
the  same  regiment  should  not  be  placed  together  in  the  same  small
Avards  of  general  hospitals.

Disci])line. — There  needs  only  a  comparison  between  the  disci-
pline of  civil  and  military  hospitals  to  substantiate  the  above  asser-
tions. If  discipline  mean  the  enforcing  obedience  to  orders  by
teaching  how  they  are  to  be  obeyed,  there  is  little  or  none  in  a
military  hospital.

In  the  administration  of  food,  of  medicine,  in  the  cleanliness  of
the  patient's  person,  bedding,  and  \itensils,  in  the  patient's  personal
obedience  to  medical  orders,  as  to  rising  or  remaining  in  bed — all
of  these  being  matters  about  which  there  is  no  question  or  demur
in  a  civil  hospital,  the  discipline  in  a  military  hospital  is  far  inferior.

How  can  it  be  otherwise  1  Unless  the  medical  oflScer  is  converted
into  nurse,  cook,  and  housemaid,  he  cannot  see  to  all  these  things.
The  ward-master  or  hospital-serjeant  is  necessarily  absent  from  his
ward  a  great  deal,  on  account  of  returns  and  accounts.  The  orderly
cannot  enforce  obedience.  There  is  no  one  in  charge  to  enforce  the
medical  orders,  i.e.,  without  whose  knowledge  no  disobedience  can
take  place,  as  there  is  in  a  civil  hospital,  where  one  '  ward  sister  '  is
daily  seen  in  absolute  control  of  30-40  men,  as  far  as  obtaining  abso-
lute obedience  to  medical  orders  goes ;  there  is  no  rebellion,  tacit  or
open.

Two  other  considerations  are  involved  in  that  of  the  size  of  wards,
ecoiiomy  and  clinical  instruction.*

It  may  be  asked,  why  should  not  all  the  sick  be  placed  in  one  ward,
provided  there  be  cubic  space  enough  ?  The  answer  is,  with  from
20-32  sick  a  height  of  15-17  feet  is  enough,  but  it  would  not  be
enough  for  more,  and  height  always  involves  expense.

The  greatest  economy  and  the  greatest  safety  to  patients  is  in  the
above  number.

Also,  without  the  most  perfect  ventilation,  there  is  always  more
danger  of  effluvia  being  driven  by  a  draught  till  it  accumulates  in  one
part  of  a  very  large  wai'd,  as  was  the  case  in  the  long  corridors  of
Scutari.

Wards  of  a  moderate  size,  like  those  indicated,  are  better  for  the
purposes  of  ventilation  than  wards  half  the  size  ;  and  are  less  subject


*  The  question,  what  is  the  best  number  of  beds  in  a  ward  ?  has  been  but  little
considered  in  England  in  regard  to  economy  and  efficiency  of  service — hardly  at
all  in  military  hospitals.  The  more  beds  in  one  ward,  the  fewer  the  attendants
necessary  in  proportion,  and,  within  a  certain  limit,  the  greater  the  facility  of
supervision.  But  the  sanitary  necessities  of  cubic  space  per  bed,  &c.,  impose  the
limit.  You  may  make  your  ward  too  large  for  the  chief  attendant  to  overlook  the
whole  at  a  glance,  which  he  and  still  more  she  ought  to  be  able  to  do.  Allotting
a  sufficiency  of  superficial  area,  &c.,  32  beds  per  ward  seems  to  be  this  limit  as-
signed by  European  experience.  See,  for  further  details  on  economy  of  hospital
nursing,  Note  E,  page  85.


58  Evidence  given

to  a  hospital  atmosphere  than  wards  of  double  the  size.  But  a  ward
of  this  latter  size  may  be  rendered  perfectly  healthy  by  having  a
height  in  proportion  to  its  width.

Where  clinical  instruction  is  intended,  to  admit  even  a  class  of  six
students  into  a  ward  of  12  sick  is  increasing  the  population  in  the
cubic  space  by  one-half.  There  is  more  than  twice  the  room  propor-
tionally for  students,  in  a  ward  of  double  the  size.  On  the  other
hand,  if  the  number  of  students  be  very  large,  a  ward  of  20  patients,
it  must  be  at  once  admitted,  is  too  small.  The  ward  must  be  increased,
and  with  it  its  height  and  its  cubic  space  ;  for,  be  it  remembered,  the
whole  of  the  proportions  of  the  ward,  not  only  its  length,  must  in-
crease with  its  number  of  beds ;  for,  if  the  ward  be  very  long,  in  pro-
portion to  its  height  and  breadth,  it  becomes  not  a  ward  but  a  corridoi',
and  all  corridors  are  objectionable  for  sick,  becaiise  it  is  impossible  to
ventilate  them  safely ;  because,  in  admitting  air,  the  effluvia  may  be
driven  from  one  end  and  be  accumulated  at  the  opposite  end  faster
than  it  can  be  taken  out.  The  right  proportion  is  a  fixed  one.  But
in  a  ward  for  40  patients,  20  bad  cases  will  be  disturbed  while  20  slight
cases  are  being  examined.  If  20  sick  only  be  put  in  each  ward,  the
slight  cases  may  be  put  together.

What  amount  of  cubic  space  should  be  allotted  for  each  bed  ?

The  cubic  space  for  each  patient  in  this  climate  has  been  fixed  by
European  sanitary  science  at  not  less  than  1500  feet.

A  good  proportion  for  a  ward  of  20  patients  would  be  80  feet  long,
25  feet  wide,  and  16  feet  high.  This  would  give  1600  cubic  feet  to
each  bed.  It  would  give  13  feet  between  foot  and  foot,  which  is  not
too  much  where  there  is  a  clinical  school.  It  would  give  an  average
of  16  feet  to  each  2  beds  in  width.

Half  the  sick  are  supposed  to  be  on  each  side  the  ward.

What  is  the  best  2>Toportion  of  windoios  to  beds,  and  lohat  ought  to
be  the  relative  2>osition  of  windows  and  beds,  with  you,r  reasons  for  pre-
ferring one  arrangement  to  another  ?

One  window  should  be  allotted  for  every  two  beds  j  the  window  to
be  not  less  than  4  feet  8  inches  wide,  within  2  or  3  feet  of  the  floor,
so  that  the  patient  can  see  out,  and  up  to  the  ceiling.

The  pair  of  beds  between  the  windows  to  be  not  less  than  3  feet
apart.  With  a  very  bad  fever  case,  I  would  leave  the  other  bed  empty,
for  the  sake  of  isolating  the  patient.  Miasma  may  be  said,  roughly
speaking,  to  diminish  as  the  square  of  the  distance.  With  good  ven-
tilation, it  is  not  found  to  extend  much  beyond  3  feet  from  the  patient ;
although  miasma  from  the  excretions  may  extend  a  considerably
greater  distance.

Windows  are  to  be  placed  opposite  each  other,  and  to  be  either
double  or  filled  with  plate  glass  ;  the  former  is  preferable,  as  it  afibrds
the  opportunity  of  indirect  ventilation  in  all  weather.  Wire-gauze
across  the  open  part  of  the  window  would  afford  an  extent  of  surface


before  the  Royal  Commission.  59

for  veutilatiou  not  otherwise  to  be  obtained,  and  preclude  all  possibility
of  draught  upon  the  patient.

Windows  opening  as  at  Middlesex  and  Guy's  Hospital,  in  three  or
more  parts,  with  an  iron  casting  outside,  to  prevent  a  delirious  patient
from  throwing  himself  out,  are  the  best  form  of  plate-glass  window.

No  part  of  the  ward  ought  to  be  dark.  This  is  of  the  utmost  im-
portance, in  many  cases.  The  light  can  always  be  modified  for  indi-
vidual patients.  But  even  for  such  patients  to  have  light  in  the  ward
is  not  the  less  important.

There  are  three  reasons  for  this  m\iltiplicity  of  windows  : —

1.  Light.

2.  Ventilation.

3.  To  enable  patients  to  read  in  bed.

The  necessity  of  light  is  established  by  all  scientific  inquiry  and  ex-
perience. The  proportion  of  windows  to  cubic  space  is  of  the  first
importance  to  health.  It  has  been  lost  sight  of  in  English  architec-
ture, owing  to  the  unfortunate  window-tax,  which  has  left  its  legacy
in  giving  us  a  far  smaller  proportion  of  light  than  in  French  houses.
In  huts  the  proportion  of  window  space  to  cvibic  space  is  far  greater
than  in  buildings.  One  main  cause  of  the  unhealthiness  of  large
numbers  of  men  congregated  in  one  large  building,  even  with  suffi-
cient cubic  space,  is  the  disproportionately  small  window  space.  In
the  huts  in  the  Crimea,  during  the  last  22  Aveeks  of  our  occupation,
the  mortality  of  the  whole  army  was  only  two-thirds  of  what  it  is  in
England.

For  the  same  purpose  of  ensuring  a  sufficiency  of  light,  the  walls
should  always  be  white,  excepting  perhaps  for  some  few  cases  of  oph-
thalmia.

What  is  the  best  material  for  the  internal  vjalls  and  ceilings  of
wards  I

Impervious  walls  are  of  the  first  importance  for  hospitals.  These
walls  should  be  of  Parian  or  other  similar  cement,  or  glazed  tiles.
Brick,  used  at  Portsmouth  hospital,  is  highly  objectionable  from  its
porous  character.  Plaster  is  objectionable  from  the  same  circumstance,
it  absorbs  organic  matter.  Both  require  very  frequent  lime-washing
to  keep  them  healthy.

What  is  the  best  material  for  the  flooring  of  loards,  and  your  reasons
fur  preferring  one  material  to  anotlier  l

The  materials  used  for  floors  may  be  oak  wood,  pine  wood,  compo-
sition, and  tiles.

Oak  wood,  well  seasoned,  is  the  best.  No  sawdust  or  other  organic
matter  capable  of  rotting  should  be  placed  underneath  the  floor.
Concrete,  or  some  similar  indestructible  substance,  would  be  the  best
for  the  pui'pose.

The  reason  for  using  oak  wood  is,  that  it  is  capable  of  absorbing
but  a  very  small  quantity  of  water. And  it  is  very  desirable  to


60  Evidence  given

diminish  even  that  capability,  by  saturating  it  with  beeswax  and  tur-
pentine. Beeswax  is  an  inalterable  substance.*

The  joints  of  the  flooring  must  be  fitted  well  together,  and  cemented
with  marine  glue,  or  any  other  impervious  substance.  The  object  is,
of  course,  to  prevent  any  water  from  entering  the  floor.

Impervious,  non-absorbent  cement  or  composition  would  make  a
capital  floor,  used  as  it  is  in  Italian  houses.  But,  on  account  of  its
great  conducting  power,  it  would  be  necessary  to  furnish  each  patient
with  a  pair  of  list  shoes,  and  a  small  bedside  carpet.

The  stairs  and  landings  should  be  of  stone.  The  corridors  should
be  floored  with  diamond-shaped  flags  or  tiles,  which  stand  better  than
those  laid  in  the  usual  maunei*.  The  terrace  might  be  either  covered
with  asphalte  or  glazed  tile.

What  accommodation  for  nurses,  extra  diets,  clotldng,  and  clean  linen
should  be  attached  to  the  wards  ?

There  should  be  a  nurse's  room,  and  a  small  scullery  attached  to
each  ward,  also  a  press  in  the  ward.t

It  is  perhaps  hardly  necessary  to  add  that  there  should  be  a  few
small  wards  for  '  casualty'  cases,  for  noisy  or  ofiensive  cases.  But
they  should  be  completely  separated  from  the  other  wards,  and  under
a  completely  appointed  stafi"  of  their  own,  not  attached  one  to  each
larger  ward,  which  renders  proper  attendance  exti-emely  difficult.

What  kind  of  baths  should  be  attaclied  to  the  Iwspital  ?

The  baths  should  be  separated  from  the  pavilions,  but  connected  by
the  corridor.

The  walls  and  ceilings  should  be  of  pure  white  cement,  or  some
similar  matei-ial,  the  floors  of  tile.  They  should  be  suitably  venti-
lated and  warmed.  They  should  contain  hot  and  cold  water  baths,
sulphureous  water,  hot  air,  medicated  and  vapour  baths,  shower  baths,
and  douche. There  should  be  a  portable  bath  to  each  ward.

What  is  the  best  form  of  hospital  kitchen?

The  kitchen  should  be  placed  away  from  the  wards.  Its  walls  and
ceiling  should  be  of  pure  white  cement,  for  plaster  has  a  tendency  to
fall  off",  from  the  vapour  and  effluvia  of  the  kitchen.


*  This  floor  should  be  cleaned  like  the  French  ^jarguef,  hy  frottage.

A  hospital  floor  should  never  be  scoured.  A  ver}'  good  hospital  floor  is  that
used  at  Berlin,  which  is  oiled,  lackered  and  polished  so  as  to  resemble  French  polish.
It  is  wet-rubbed  and  diy- rubbed  every  morning,  which  removes  the  dust.  Its  only
objection  is  want  of  durability.

f  A  scullery,  with  complete,  efficient,  simple  apparatus  for  its  various  purposes,
places  for  washing  up  and  cleaning,  and  for  ward  cookery,  so  that  the  nurse  can
warm  the  drinks,  prepare  fomentations,  &c.,  without  jostling  the  orderlies  who  are
washing  up,  is  a  great  promoter  of  order,  efficiency,  and  work.

It  is  a  doubtful  arrangement  to  have  a  clothes'  room  for  each  ward.  A  military
hospital  should  have  but  one  clothes'  room,  under  cliarge  of  some  man.  Room  for
storing  and  issuing  dried  clean  linen,  as  well  as  laundry-room,  should  be  provided.
Foul  linen  should  be  delivered  twice  daily  into  the  laundry.  A  large  box  in  the
scullery  is  the  least  bad  place  for  it  in  the  meantime.


before  the  Royal  Commission.  Gl

The  cooking  apparatus,  boilers,  &c.,  if  placed  in  tlie  centime  of  the
kitchen,  instead  of  against  the  walls,  will  afford  twice  the  amount  of
fire  space.

In  the  Paris  kitchens  there  is  a  brick  erection  in  the  middle  of  the
floor,  with  iron  doors  and  bmss  mountings,  coppers  with  covers,  places
for  baking  and  for  roasting,  kc.

The  dressers  are  against  the  walls.

The  floors  are  flagged  with  square  flags.

This  appears  to  be  the  most  convenient  mode  of  erection.*

What  is  the  best /or m  of  laundry  for  a  hospital  ?

The  excellent  new  washing,  drying,  and  wringing  machines  lately
invented  are  so  numerous  that  it  would  take  too  long  to  enumerate  them.
On  the  whole,  the  laundry  at  the  Wellington  Barracks,  which  also  washes
for  all  the  Guards'  hospitals  and  barracks,  and  the  new  laundry  at
Haslar  naval  hospital,  are  the  best  I  have  seen.  But  every  day  brings
in  fresh  inventions,  and  a  reformer  is  always  adopting  the  good  ones.t

It  is  a  further  question  in  army  matters,  whether  you  should  timin
a  body  of  men  to  do  as  much  as  possible  by  hand,  so  as  to  be  service-
able in  the  field,  where  machines  cannot  be  had,  or  whether  you
should  make  use  of  all  the  inventions  for  saving  labour  which  are  now
so  good,  and  daily  improving. Probably  both  must  be  done.  J


*  For  camp  hospital  kitchens  Soyer's  boilers  and  Little's,  or  Smith's  of  Glasgow
'  enchantress'  stoves,  are  those  I  prefer  from  experience.  They  cook  well,  and
secure  both  great  economy  in  fuel  and  great  capability  of  varying  the  diets.

+  I  do  not  think  that  any  reliable  comparison  has  yet  been  made  between  the
French  system  adopted  at  the  Salp^trifere  and  Lariboisifere  hospitals  and  the  Eng-
lish system.  The  French  consists  in  filtering  hot  ley  through  the  clothes,  which
are  placed  for  that  purpose  in  large  tubs,  with  a  compartment  at  the  bottojii,  from
which  the  ley  is  pumped  up  by  machinery,  and  allowed  to  flow  over  the  top  of  the
linen,  through  which  it  filters  into  the  compartment,  to  be  again  raised  by  the
machine.

This  plan  is  stated  to  be  the  most  economical  which  has  been  tried  in  Paris.

There  are  several  good  plans  in  use  in  the  British  hospitals.  The  essential
characteristic  of  the  Haslar  one  is  boiling  by  steam,  the  linen  being  afterwards
placed  in  a  rotating  washing  machine.

Another  method  in  use  at  the  Wellington  Barracks,  where  the  washing  of  the
Guards'  barracks  and  hospitals  is  done,  consists  in  passing  the  linen  thi-ough
slowly  rotating  washing  tubs,  in  which  it  undergoes  a  process  of  vaulhing  by
wooden  rods. This  latter  plan  is  both  economical  and  effectual.

To  ascertain  which  is  the  most  really  economical  of  the  French  and  English  plans,
it  would  be  necessary  to  inquire  not  only  into  the  relative  cost  of  washing,  but  into
the  relative  wear  and  tear.  The  hardness  or  softness  of  the  water  must  also  be
taken  into  account.  The  softer  water  is  the  cheaper,  both  in  the  consumption  of
soap  and  the  wear  and  tear.  Now  the  Paris  water  is  in  hardness  to  that  of  London
as  20  to  16,  and  as  20  to  2  to  that  of  Glasgow.  Probably  the  Paris  method  is  the
only  economical  one  with  the  Paris  water.  But  it  takes  about  five  times  the  super-
ficial area  of  the  Guards'  method.

+  One  thing,  however,  cannot  be  too  strongly  said.  There  is  scarcely  a  laundry
I  know  in  any  military  hospital  at  home  where  there  is  any  suflBcient  provision
either  for  washing  or  for  preserving  the  health  of  the  washers.  This  latter  must  be
attended  to  primarily.  In  almost  all  military  hospitals  in  England,  it  is  true,  the
heavy  washing  is  done,  nobody  knows  how,  by  contract. But  the  lighter  washing


62  Evidence  given

How  should  nurses  and  orderlies  be  accommodated  ?

If  oi'derlies  are  to  sleep  among  their  patients,  the  per-centage  of
mortality  will  be  of  course  raised  among  them.  This  was  the  case  at
Scutari,  where  it  was  very  high,  though  it  will  never  be  known  how
high.  Statistics  are,  however,  not  necessaiy  to  establish  such  an
obvious  fact.  The  orderlies  should  sleep  at  a  distance  from  the  wards,
01',  if  sanctioned  by  military  authority,  in  little  rooms  adjoining  their
wards,  and  they  should  not  take  their  meals  with  the  patients.*

With  regard  to  the  female  nurses,  there  is  the  further  question  as
to  what  class  of  nurses  should  be  employed  in  military  hospitals.  My
own  opinion  is  entirely  against  employing  any  but  women  of  the  effi-
ciency, responsibility,  and  character  of  head  nurses  in  civil  hospitals.
For  such  a  nurse  a  small  airy  room  off  her  ward,  and  looking  into  it,
so  that  she  can  always  have  it  under  command,  is  the  best  for  her
efficiency,  and  need  not  be  injurious  to  her  health.

Unless,  however,  there  are  facile  means  of  access  to  another  nurse's
room,  in  case  of  illness,  there  must  be  only  a  day  room  for  each  head
nurse  adjacent  to  her  ward.  She  must  sleep  at  a  distance  from  her
ward,  and  contiguous  to  the  other  nurses.  Assistant  female  nurses
are  better  not  employed.

What  kind  of  bedstead  and  bedding  is  the  best  ?

No  bedding  but  the  hair  mattress  has  yet  been  discovered  that  is
fit  for  hospitals.  Hair  is  indestructible.  It  does  not  readily  retain
miasma.  And,  if  it  does,  heat  easily  disinfects  it.  It  may  be  washed.
It  is  not  hard  to  the  patient.  It  saves  the  objectionable  use  of  a
blanket  under  the  patient.

Straw  paillasses  are  absolutely  objectionable.  They  are  cold  ;  and,
in  some  cases,  the  abstraction  of  heat  from  the  spine  lowers  the
patient's  vital  energy  to  a  degree  which  does  not  leave  him  a  chance.
I  am  of  opinion  that  the  loss  of  life  must  have  been  great  during
the  war  from  laying  our  patients  on  paillasses,  which  were  either
placed  on  wooden  divans,  or  on  the  flagged  corridors,  with  only  a  mat
between.

The  bedstead  should  be  iron  ;  and  there  are  great  differences  in  the
way  the  sacking  is  put  in.  There  should  always  be  a  shelf  at  the
head. The  French  have  one  at  the  feet  too.

The  naval  and  civil  hospitals  have  all  kinds  of  dropsy  and  surgical
bedsteads  for  raising  a  jDatient  when  he  cannot  be  moved,  for  inclin-
ing him  at  a  certain  angle,  &c.,  also  water  and  air  beds. There  is  no

is  done  in  some  miserable  lean-to,  without  any  arrangement  for  'getting- up,'  dry-
ing, or  airing  the  linen,  which  is  done,  if  at  all,  at  the  ward-fire.  This  is  simply
destruction  to  anything  which  can  be  called  nursing.

*  A  scullery — small,  but  not  too  small — attached  to  each  ward  is,  as  has  been
said,  essential  to  order,  cleanliness,  and  discipline.  It  should  be  well  provided
with  cold,  and,  if  possible,  with  hot  water.  Each  orderly  should  have  his  locker,
each  his  safe  in  it,  with  a  key  of  his  own,  and  he  should  have  his  meals  there,  if  the
military  authorities  are  not  against  it.  No  patient  should  enter  the  scullery  unless
sent  there  to  wash  up,  &c.  ;  and  as  a  rule  none  should  be  sent  there.


before  the  Royal  Commission.  63

reason  but  a  general  objection  to  comfort  to  prevent  its  using  these
biidsteads  in  military  hospitals.

What  ward  furniture  shoidd  yoxi  recommend  ?

Oak  furniture  decidedly.  White  window  curtains  are  vised  in  some
French  hospitals,  not  to  exclude  the  light,  but  to  look  cheerful.
They  are  desii'able,  but  not  necessary.

The  less  wai'd  furniture,  speaking  generally,  the  bettei*.  But
hitherto,  as  is  well  known,  a  military  patient  has  been  expected
almost  to  furnish  his  own  ward.*

Do  you  loish  to  say  anything  about  loater  stq^ply  or  drainage  ?

The  water  must  either  be  drawn  from  a  tank  at  a  distance  from
the  hospital,  or  from  a  main  under  pressure  ;  but  never  from  a  cistern
within  the  hosijital.

The  fault  of  the  water]  supply  in  Parisian  hospitals  is,  that  the
water  is  either  carried  up  by  '  porteurs  d'eau,'  or  pumped  up  and  re-
mains standing.

There  is  no  question  that  this  is  wrong.

There  should  be  convenient  means  in  or  close  to  the  wards  for  obtain-
ing pure  drinking  water  for  the  sick.

No  drain  should  ever  pass  under  a  hospital ;  all  sinks,  water-
closets,  lavatories,  and  baths,  should  be  so  placed  that  the  drainage
should  be  conveyed  directly  away,  without  passing  under  any  part  of
the  hospital.

All  drains  or  pipes  for  the  purpose  of  conveying  away  water  from
any  part  of  the  hospital  should  be  carefully  trapped  between  the
outer  wall  of  the  building  and  the  sewer  ;  and  all  drains  should  be
ventilated.

What  is  the  best  position  for  the  water-closets  and  lavatories  mith  re-
gard to  the  ioards  ?

The  water-closets  should  be  placed  at  the  end  of  the  ward,  opposite
the  entrance,  and  separated  by  a  lighted  and  ventilated  lobby.  They
should  be  of  the  best  construction,  self-acting.  Adjoining  should  be
a  small  bath  room  for  bad  cases,  and  lavatory,  t


*  The  material  of  the  diflferent  utensils  required  for  ward  service  should  be
settled.  The  use  of  glass  or  earthenware  for  all  eating,  drinking,  and  washing
vessels  is  recommended  from  its  great  superiority  in  cleanliness,  and  in  saving
time  and  labour  in  cleaning.  Tin  vessels  of  certain  kinds  cannot,  by  any  amount
of  cleaning,  be  freed  from  smell.

f  The  lavatory  should  have  a  row  of  white  earthenware  basins  fixed  in  a  stand,
with  outlet  tubes  and  plugs,  each  basin  should  have  a  hot  and  cold  water  pipe,  and
there  should  be  not  less  than  one  to  each  six  or  eight  beds.  There  should  also  be  in
the  lavatory  a  hot  and  cold  water  pipe,  from  which  the  portable  bath  can  be  filled.

The  sink,  which  should  have  a  partition  of  its  own,  adjoining  the  water-closet,
should  be  a  high,  large,  deep,  round,  pierced  basin  of  earthenware,  above  a  large
hole,  with  a  cock  extending  far  enough  over  the  sink  for  the  stream  of  water  to  fall
directly  into  the  vessel  to  be  cleansed.  This  is  far  preferable  to  the  usual  oblong
sink.  The  scullery  sink  is,  of  course,  to  be  entirely  separate,  and  for  entirely
different  purposes  from  this.


64  Evidence  given

What  do  you  consider  the  lest  system  of  ventilation  for  a  hospital,
and  why  ?

The  doors,  windows,  and  fire-places  should  be  the  means  of  ventila-
tion for  such  wards  as  these  ;  nothing  else  is  wanted.  If  a  hospital
must  be  ventilated  artificially  it  betrays  a  defect  of  original  construc-
tion which  no  artificial  ventilation  can  compensate  ;  it  is  an  expen-
sive and  inefiicient  means  of  doing  that  which  can  be  done  cheaply
and  efficiently  by  constructing  your  building  so  as  to  admit  the  open
air  around.

But  there  are  buildings  of  original  defective  construction  which  it
is  undoubtedly  necessary  to  ventilate  artificially.  And  in  countries
where  fuel  is  dear  and  cold  severe,  the  problem  complicates  itself,
because  it  is  a  less  consumption  of  fuel  to  warm  the  fresh  air  as  you
admit  it.

In  the  case  supposed,  warming  is  a  necessary  part  of  ventilation,
and  heating  the  air  required  heats  the  wards,  without  extra  cost  of
fire-places,  which  always  burn  many  times  the  quantity  of  fuel  ex-
pended for  warming.

In  England,  where  fuel  is  cheap,  there  can  be  no  such  excuse.
If  attendants  cannot  be  trained  to  keep  the  rooms  ventilated  with-
out draughts,  there  is  a  defect  of  intelligence,  and  attendance  on  the
sick  is  not  their  calling.

Occasionally,  ventilating  shafts  carried  up  from  the  ceiling  of  the
ward  to  the  roof  will  be  found  an  advantageous  means  of  renewing
the  air.

There  should  be  one  or  more  open  fire-places  in  the  ward,  but  lofty,
so  that  the  throat  of  the  chimney  shall  be  above  the  patient's  head
and  bed.

We  look  upon  the  chimney  as  the  best  ventilating  shaft ;  and  one
disadvantage  of  artificial  ventilation  is,  that  you  must  then  supply
the  fire  with  its  own  consumption  of  air  by  a  shaft  to  itself.  Or
it  will  take  the  air  from  the  artificial  ventilation  and  cause  it  to
cease  to  act.  Whereas  with  natural  ventilation  the  fire  sets  it
acting,  takes  the  air  from  the  room,  and  is  the  most  valuable  means
of  ventilation.

Our  grandfathers'  lofty  fire-places  are  the  greatest  loss  in  modern
house  architecture.  The  little  low  fire-places  of  this  date  bring  the  best
current  of  air  below  the  stratum  in  which  we  are  breathing.  With
our  system,  to  breathe  the  best  air,  we  must  not  be  more  than  six
vears  old,  or  we  must  lie  down.

What  do  you  consider  the  best  system  of  warming  for  a  hospital,
and  why  ?

Radiation  ;  open  fire-places.  Heated  air  from  metal  surfaces  should
never  be  ixsed  for  warming.  It  has  a  tendency  to  produce  disease
of  the  lungs.  The  hot-house  system  of  warming  with  a  brick  floor
and  brick  fines  is  perfectly  safe ;  but  an  earthenwai'e  floor  in  hos-
pitals, unless  glazed,  is  inadmissible,  because  of  the  great  absorption  of
water.


before  the  Royal  Commission.  65

In  a  -ward  of  the  size  mentioned,  80  ft.  by  25,  two  fire-places  would
probably  be  necessary.

III.  Organization  of  General  Hospitals.

Do  you  advise  the  establishment  of  additional  general  hospitals  ?
Yes  ;  at  Malta,  Corfu,  Gibraltar,  London,  Portsmouth,  Aldershot,
and  perhaps  at  Shorncliffe  and  Fermoy,  there  are  sufficient  bodies
of  troops  for  general  hospitals  to  be  formed  ;  and  it  would  be  most
desirable  for  the  interests  of  science,  economy,  and  administration  to
establish  on  stations  where  larger  numbers  of  troops  than  one  regi-
ment are  collected,  at  home  and  abroad,  permanent  divisional  or  bri-
gade hospitals,  together  with  a  permanent  administrative  staff  of
officers  and  subordinates,  for  the  treatment  of  the  sick  of  the  station
and  of  detachments  within  reasonable  distance.

The  efficient  hospital  staff,  trained  under  such  an  organization,
would  supply  regiments  going  on  foreign  service.

The  medical  staff  would  consist  permanently  of  an  inspector  and
deputy -inspector,  the  rest  of  the  staff  would  not  be  permanent,  because
regiments  change  on  the  station.  The  complement  of  a  regiment  is
one  surgeon  and  two  or  even  three  assistant  surgeons.  One  of  these
would  be  appointed  to  serve  on  the  staff  of  the  general  hospital,  one
■would  remain  with  the  regiment  as  sanitary  officer,  and  the  third
might  be  set  free  on  leave  to  go  to  some  military  general  hospital
for  the  purpose  of  study,  for,  say  that  there  were  five  regiments,  five
surgeons  would  easily  do  the  duty  for  the  sick  in  a  general  hospital,
where  now,  in  regimental  hospitals,  it  is  the  business  of  fifteen.

Do  you  prefer  general  hospitals  to  agglomerated  regimental  hospitals,
and  xohy  ?

The  system  of  agglomex-ated  regimental  hospitals  is  no  system  at
all,  if  it  means  merely  assigning  one  or  more  wards  in  the  same  build-
ing to  each  regimental  hospital,  with  the  same  kitchen  to  all,  so  that
if  there  are  ten  hospitals,  there  may  be  ten  surgeries,  there  are  ten
hospital  Serjeants,  ten  staffs  of  medical  officers,  ten  of  everything,
while  in  one  hospital  there  may  be  two  severe  cases,  in  another  twenty.

The  only  theory  of  a  general  hospital  which  we  heard  during  the
late  war  was  that  of  making  it  as  much  like  a  congeries  of  regimental
hospitals  as  possible ;  and,  though  this  theory  neither  was  nor  could
be  systematically  carried  out  into  practice,  it  remained  and  does  still
remain  the  theory,  and  prevents,  as  it  then  prevented,  any  attempt  to
devise  a  better  and  more  practicable  scheme. For,

1.  The  surgeon  cannot  be  relieved  of  his  multifarious  non-pro-
fessional duties.

2.  No  compai'ison  of  different  treatments,  with  a  view  to  the
furtherance  of  science  or  the  advancement  of  individual  knowledge,
can  be  made,  while  in  the  military  medical  service  the  organization
remains  exclusively  regimental.

Without  actual  experience,  indeed,  it  is  evident  that  to  divide  a

F


66  Evidence  given

small  number  of  sick  into  half  a  dozen  hospitals,  which  have  all  to
be  kept  up  as  complete  and  separate  establishments,  instead  of  uniting
them  into  one,  necessarily  involves  considerable  waste  of  labour  and
expense.

It  is  contrary  to  every  analogy  in  England.  What  should  we  say
if  every  parish  in  Middlesex  insisted  upon  sending  its  own  lunatics
under  their  own  surgeon  to  be  separately  lodged  in  Han  well  Asylum?
We  should  say  no  improvement  in  science,  classification,  or  adminis-
tration is  here  possible.

In  what  particulars  is  improvement  impossible  under  the  present
exclusive  system  0/ regimental  hospitals?

1.  The  management  and  internal  economy  of  hospitals,  cooking,
washing,  stipply  and  issue  of  extras,  &c.

2.  The  financial  part  of  the  service.

3.  The  professional  and  economical  superintendence.

4.  The  or-ganization  and  superintendence  of  the  attendance  depart-
ment.

5.  The  supply  and  dispensing  of  medicines  and  medical  appliances.

6.  The  introduction  of  proper  baths,  lavatories,  &c.

7.  The  classification  and  treatment  of  particular  diseases.

8.  The  imperatively  needed  organization  of  hospitals  for  soldiers'
wives  and  children  when  sick,  the  want  of  which  is  most  demoralizing.

9.  The  arrangements  for  the  treatment  of  sick  prisoners  and  others
not  belonging  to  regiments  on  the  station.

In  large  permanent  establishments  only  can  these  things  be  properly
regulated.

How  does  this  system  affect  the  army  medical  officers  ?

The  standard  of  professional  service  can  never  be  raised  among
army  medical  officers  under  the  regimental  system.

For  to  do  this,  three  things  are  necessary  : —

1.  Sufficient  professional  occupation.

2.  Command  over  large  numbers  of  cases  of  the  same  afiections,

3.  Opportunity  for  comparing  results  of  different  modes  of  treat-
ment.

In  what  other  ways  does  the  existing  system  obstruct  the  progress  and
diffusion  of  medical  science  ?
Under  the  present  system,

1.  No  practice  can  ever  be  established  as  the  best ;  the  sick  being
treated  in  so  many  hundred  hospitals  by  as  many  hundred  surgeons.

2.  No  system  of  mutual  information  and  clinical  instruction  can  be
established.  Individual  experience  remains  individual  property,  or  is
buried  in  official  reports.

3.  No  professional  specialties  can  be  acquired.  For  there  is  no
opportunity  of  collecting  the  necessary  material  for  study,  practice,
and  experiment  in  special  diseases.  Nor  is  the  experience  of  one  man
shared  by  others.

4.  No  publicity  can  be  introduced,  bringing  individuals  and  esta-


before  the  Royal  Commission,  67

blishments  into  competition  with  their  rivals  in  civil  life  and  other
armies.

5.  No  prizes,  distinctions,  or  promotion  for  scientific  and  professional
labours  can  be  systematically  introduced.

What  are  the  2^>'inci2X(,l  objections  to  tlie  regimental  hospital  or  agglo-
meration  0/ regimental  liospitals?

1.  The  impossibility  of  professional  progress.

2.  The  impossibility  of  any  organization  of  government.

3.  The  impossibility  of  any  organization  of  attendance.

The  agglomeration  of  the  regimental  hospitals  does  not  modify
these  evils  any  further  than  what  was  actually  done  in  the  Crimea,
where  the  hospital  huts  of  each  regiment  were  placed  as  near  as
possible.

As  to  2.  and  3.,  the  management  and  government  of  the  regimental
hospitals  are  now  entirely  vested  in  the  medical  officer  and  hospital
Serjeant,  under  the  military  authorities.

Can  advantage  he  taken  of  the  division  of  labour  ?
It  is  easy  to  see  that  no  division  of  labour  is  possible.
The  duties  of  the  hospital  serjeant,  by  regulation,  ai'e  so  multi-
farious that  it  amounts  to  a  physical  impossibility  for  one  man,  however
active  and  intelligent,  to  perfoi'm  them  all.

He  is  Ward  Master ;
Serjeant  j
Steward ;
Head  Nurse ;
sometimes  Dispenser ;
sometimes  Purveyor's  Clerk.
The  consequence  is  that  there  is  no  nursing,  and  no  hospital  dis-
cipline, in  the  sense  in  which  these  things  are  understood  in  a  civil
hospital.

Again,  the  regimental  system  was  shown  to  be  in  the  Crimea
utterly  incapable  of  meeting  the  requirements  of  an  army  in  the  field
under  the  circumstances,  and  yet  we  might  never  again  be  in  cir-
cumstances in  the  field  so  favourable  to  the  formation  of  regimental
hospitals.

When  the  general  hospitals  came  to  be  formed,  there  were  but  two
or  three  medical  officers  who  had  any  idea  of  organizing  a  system  for
Tooo  to  2500  sick.

What  reasons  are  usually  alleged  in  favour  of  the  regimental
hospitals  ?

1.  That  the  regimental  surgeon  knows  all  his  men  j  and

2.  That  the  sick  soldier  does  not  like  to  be  separated  from  his
regiment.

Are  these  reasons  valid  ?

No ;  only  partially,  i .  The  fact  of  the  frequent  changes  of  the
regimental  surgeon,  especially  in  time  of  war,  is  overlooked.  Even
promotion  takes  him  away  from  his  regiment. The  hospital  sei-jeant

F  2


68  Evidence  given

is  frequently  the  only  permanent  officer. He  sometimes  knows  all  his
men  ;  but  often  the  surgeon  does  not,

2,  As  far  as  I  have  seen,  nothing  but  evil  comes  of  comrades  lying
together  sick.  They  are  depressed  by  eacli  others'  sufferings  or  death.
They  are  led  to  combine  against  hospital  discipline,  I  incline  to  think
that  the  task  of  governing  a  number  of  men  in  a  civil  hospital,  who
have  never  been  under  any  discipline  at  all,  and  are  there  merely  as
casual  inmates,  is  considerably  facilitated  by  their  being  strangers  to
one  another.

Is  the  regimental  hospital  system  a  preparation  for  organizing  a
general  hospital  in  time  of  xoar  1  And  is  it  safe  to  depend  upon  an
exclusively/  regimental  system,  when,  in  all  emergencies,  the  general
hospitals  are  what  we  must  depend  upon  ?

The  primary  necessity  of  management  in  institutions  containing,
say,  looo  persons,  is  the  reduction  of  departments  to  their  smallest
possible  number,  and  the  definition  of  their  functions.

This  has  not  even  been  attempted.  The  nine  departments  of  our
■war  general  hospitals  have  been  described.  Before  a  patient  could
eat  his  dinner  in  the  Scutari  general  hospitals,  it  had  to  be  manu-
factured through  the  medium  of  the  commandant  who  assigned  the
orderlies  and  cook;  of  the  engineers'  department  who  repaired  the
kitchen ;  of  the  purveyor  who  supplied  a  portion  of  the  food ;  of  the
commissary  who,  through  the  contractor,  supplied  bread,  meat,  and
fuel ;  and  of  the  soldier  himself,  who  supplied,  out  of  his  own  kit,
some  of  the  utensils  for  eating  and  drinking.

A  question  of  hospital  repairs  has  been  known  to  pass  from  the
medical  officer  to  the  pui'veyor,  thence  to  the  principal  medical  officer,
back  to  the  purveyor,  thence  to  the  quartermaster-general's  depart-
ment, commandant,  engineers'  department,  and  was  ultimately  decided
upon  without  appeal  to  the  informing  judgment,  viz.,  the  surgeon  in
charge,  who  saw  his  patient  suffering  from  (say)  a  leaky  roof  or  broken
pane  of  glass,  without  the  means  of  redress.

It  is  hardly  necessary  to  state  that  it  is  not  safe  to  depend  on  any
system  which  leads  to  such  results.

What  has  been  your  experience  of  the  working  of  the  present  system
of  written  requisitions,  checks,  and  counter-checks  1

This  system  of  checks  and  counter-checks  seems  to  have  been  in-
vented for  the  purpose  of  saving  money  instead  of  for  that  of  saving
the  lives  of  the  sick.  Now  it  fails  in  its  object  both  ways,  because
the  lives  of  men  are  of  more  money  value  to  the  country  than  any
saving  can  ever  by  any  possibility  be  in  such  matters ;  and  also
because  it  actually  wastes  money;  for  the  clerk  system  and  check
system  require  such  a  staff  as  to  cost  far  more  than  the  additional
supplies  would  do.

No  system  can  be  more  expensive  than  ours,  for  these  reasons.
It  is  also  inconsistent  with  prompt  and  efficient  action,  and  con-
sequently hazardous  to  the  sick.


before  the  Royal  Commission.  69

Can  you  suggest  any  simpler  and  more  efficient  arrangement  ?

A  goveruor,  wlio  slioulcl  be  responsible  for  everything ;  a  principal
medical  ojSicer ;  a  stewai-d,  who  should  supply  everything,  like  the
agent  in  the  naval  hospitals ;  a  caiitain  of  hospital  attendants,  who
should  overlook  the  whole  attendance  department;  a  ti-easurer;  and
a  sanitary  officer  attached  to  the  governor.  What  more  do  we  want  1
We  must  have  regimental  hospitals  also.  It  is  not  meant  to  do
away  with  a  necessaxy,  at  all  events,  and,  in  some  respects,  an  admirable
system.  But  a  medical  officer  must  be  conversant  with  both,  other-
wise, as  surely  as  we  again  have  war,  shall  we  again  break  down  in
our  general  hospitals.

Has  exjierience  established  the  necessity  of  general  Iwspitals  ?

Yes.

It  does  not  appear  necessary  to  discuss  whether  there  ought  or
ought  not  to  be  general  hospitals,  because  there  must  be  general
hospitals.  If  they  are  an  evil,  let  the  evil  be  made  as  light  as  possible
by  good  organization  ;  if  they  are  good,  let  them  be  made  as  good  as
possible.

But,  in  what  war  have  our  general  hospitals  not  been  a  signal
failure  1  In  the  early  part  of  George  II.'s  reign,  at  Coimbra,  and,
most  fatal  example  of  all,  in  the  late  war.

If  this  has  been  the  case,  and  if  this  always  will  be  the  case,  reasoning
from  the  past,  is  it  not  advisable  at  least  to  go  into  tJie  question  of  con-
stituting a  scheme  of  government  for  general  hospitals  ?

Certainly.

General  hospitals,  at  the  base  of  operations,  when  this  is  at  a
distance  from  the  army,  must  necessarily  fall  through,  between  the
two  authorities,  the  commander  of  the  forces  engaged  in  active  opera-
tions, and  the  departments  at  home,  unless  there  is  a  governing  head
with  commensurate  responsibility  on  the  spot.

If  it  is  said  that  the  general  officer  commanding  in  the  district  is
the  governing  power,  it  is  obvious  that  the  commander  of  the  forces
will  give  the  man  least  wanted  and  least  efficient  in  the  front  for  this
jjurpose;  whereas,  if  a  governor  for  the  hospital  itself  were  appointed
from  home  for  his  known  powers  in  administration,  the  man  most
efficient  might  be  sent.

Ought  not  the  principal  medical  officer  to  be  the  governor  ?

Not  if  it  can  be  avoided.  It  is  obvious  that  the  real  object  and
glory  of  the  medical  professioii  are  medical  skill  and  practice :  and,  if
a  good  medical  officer  be  put  to  do  something  else,  his  services  are
lost  in  that  which  he  has  spent  his  life  to  acquire.

But  exjjerience  is  the  true  test,  and  if  the  experience  of  the  failure
of  the  Scutari  hospitals  will  not  teach  us  at  least  to  discuss  the  question,
no  ai*gument  stronger  can  be  used.

Hoio  should  the  general  hospital  be  governed  and  organized  1

An  executive  head,  who  is  there  on  the  spot  to  answer  for  failure,
whose  business  it  is  without  any  question  to  govern  this  institution


70  Evidence  given

and  nothing  else,  with  power  corresponding  to  the  responsibility,
which  is  his  and  no  one's  else,  this  is  what  we  seek  in  all  similar
known  institutions. He  ought  to  have  full  power  to  obtain

Labour,
Transport,
Supplies.
Labour  he  must  have  poAver  to  hire,  when  not  obt;  "nable  from  the
military  train,  also  transport,  as  far  as  land  is  concerned,  when  not
obtainable  from  the  land  transport  corps  ;  the  sea  transport  he  must
have  from  the  admiral  on  the  station. Supplies  he  must  have  power
to obtain without reference to the commissariat, who are not
responsible.

Whether  his  steward  is  to  be  a  commissariat  officer,  detached  for
the  purpose,  or  an  officer  from  a  different  service,  it  is  not  my  pro-
vince to  discuss.

But  it  cannot  be  dispiited  that  the  articles  of  supply  for  a  hospital
are  different  from  those  for  an  army.  The  French  take  a  different
bread  for  their  hospitals.  We  are  allowed  to  give  Id.  per  pound  more
for  our  hospital  meat.

It  cannot  be  disputed  that  it  is  better  to  let  the  responsibility  for
all  supplies  rest  upon  one  person  than  upon  two.

What  is  the  difference  between  a  civil  hospital  and  an  agglomeration
of  regimental  hospitals  ?

The  former  has  one  treasurer,  who  administers  the  finance  of  all
the  wards.  It  has  one  committee,  who  manages  the  supply  of  all  the
wards.  It  has  one  secretary,  who  manages  the  correspondence  for
all  the  wards.  It  has  one  house  governor  or  superintendent  for  all
the  wards  ;  one  kitchen  which  cooks  for  all  the  wards  ;  one  laundry
which  washes  for  all  the  wards  ',  one  surgery ;  one  apothecary ;  one
pharmacy  and  laboratory  for  all  the  wards ;  one  set  of  attendants,
under  one  head  ;  one  set  of  accounts  ;  one  system  of  supply.  It  has
one  set  of  officers  ;  one  operating  theatre ;  one  dissecting  room.

There  is  not  a  bad  case  in  the  hospital  which  may  not  have  the
advantage  of  the  advice  of  all  the  best  officers  in  the  institution ;
there  is  not  a  surgeon  or  physician  who  may  not  be  called  into
consultation  by  all  the  rest.  I  have  never  known  an  instance  where
the  interests  of  a  patient  were  sacrificed  to  the  interests  of  an  indi-
vidual officer.  So  strong  is  the  professional  spirit  in  civil  medical
life  that  the  experience  of  each  man  becomes  the  common  property
of  all  the  rest.

I  have  recently  heard  it  stated,  for  the  first  time,  that  each  civil
surgeon  is  situated  as  regards  his  ward  precisely  as  a  regimental
surgeon  is  in  his  hospital.  I  am  bound  to  record,  as  strongly  as  I
can,  that  the  reverse  has  been  my  experience  in  a  great  variety  of
instances.

What  peculiar  advantages  would  the  patient  enjoy  in  general  hospitals
well  organized?


before  the  Royal  Commission.  71

In  general  hospitals,  there  can  or  ought  to  be  no  difficulty  in  obtain-
ing all  that  is  necessary  for  the  patient.  In  all  regimental  hospitals,
it  is  impossible  for  the  regimental  surgeon  to  obtain  all  that  he  wants
for  his  patients ;  unless  there  is  such  a  staff  for  each  regimental
hospital  of  50  patients,  as  there  is,  or  ought  to  be,  for  a  general
hospital  of  500  ;  which  is  manifestly  impossible.

What  is  the  real  objection  to  general  /wspitals  in  the  minds  of  a/)'my
niedical  officers  ?

A  most  legitimate  and  tmanswerable  one  under  the  present
system.

A  regimental  surgeon  is  master,  as  he  ought  to  be,  of  his  own
practice  in  his  regimental  hospital.  The  practising  surgeon  in  the
general  hospital  practically  is  not.  Both  are  subject  to  inspection,
but  practically  the  difference  is  great.

With  the  slightest  knowledge  of  human  nature,  with  the  com-
monest sense,  it  is  obvious  that  the  inspections,  as  now  conducted  in
general  hospitals,  the  system  of  superintendence  and  subordination  of
scientific  acquirement  to  rank,  must  destroy  in  a  man  his  sense  of
responsibility,  and  (the  most  important  quality,  the  latest  acquired,
in  a  man  of  action,  which  a  medical  man  must  be)  his  self-reliance.

Therefore  do  surgeons  tuider  the  present  regime  most  reasonably
and  justly  prefer  being  regimental  surgeons.

What  are  the  legitimate  objects  of  inspections  ?

Inspections  ought  to  be  merely  for  the  purpose  of  collecting  facts,
with  the  view  of  enabling  the  authorities  to  act  upon  them.

Your  whole  purpose  in  educating  and  examining  the  medical
officer  is  to  fit  him  for  medical  practice.  If  he  is  not  fit  to  practise,
he  is  not  fit  to  be  a  medical  officer  ;  and  yet  you  would  subject  him
to  weekly  interference  in  his  practice  and  in  petty  details  much
better  left  to  himself.

The  only  rationale  of  superintendence  is,  when  it  comes  from  a
superintendent  better  qualified  than  the  superintended,  which  the
treating  surgeon,  in  the  army  medical  department,  does  not  feel  to  be
the  case  in  most  instances.  For  the  superintendent  has,  in  most
instances,  ceased  to  practise.

Are  any  peculiar  views  of  their  2)t'oper  sphere  of  action  entertained  by
any  section  of  army  medical  officers  ?

There  is  a  portion  of  the  army  medical  department  who  like  to
keep  the  housekeeping  and  book-keeping  in  their  own  hands.  This
is  a  very  small  portion.  But  they  do  not  consider  how  impossible  it
is  to  raise  the  true  dignity  of  the  department,  to  attract  the  best  men
into  it,  as  long  as  this  is  the  case.

To  make  high-priced  labour  do  what  low-priced  labour  can  do,  to
make  men  at  7s.  6d.  a  day  do  what  men  at  is.  6d.  a  day  could  just  as
well  perform,  is  the  true  way  to  degrade  a  scientific  department.

And  I  do  not  see  how  it  is  possible,  without  the  organization  of
large  permanent  establishments,  in  which  alone  a  proper  admin  is-


72  Evidence  given

trative  staff  could  be  ti'ained,  to  make  the  army  surgeon  other  .than  a
sort  of  maid  of  all- work.

Are  the  confidential  reports  attended  with  any  evil  consequences  ?

The  evil  inflicted  by  them  is  not  so  much  the  injury  to  individuals,
severely  as  this  is  sometimes  felt,  as  the  lowering  of  the  whole  moral
tone  of  the  department,  the  danger  of  depriving  a  man  of  his  con-
scientiousness, his  sense  of  responsibility,  his  true  dignity.  For  army
medical  men  are  like  all  other  medical  men.  And  such  interference
with  their  practice  and  their  reputation  would  be  fatal  to  all.  No
increase  of  pay  will  raise  the  department  while  these  things  are
suflfered  to  exist.

What  is  the  best  class  of  men  to  he  recruited  for  the  medical  staff
corps  ?

Discharged  soldiers  or  civilians  of  good  character.  They  should
always  be  men  who  can  read  and  write.

In  what  manner  woidd  you  propose  to  have  them  instructed  in  their
duties  ?

If  they  are  to  nurse,  unquestionably  they  should  be  instructed  in
the  duties  of  nursing,  as  also  in  those  of  cleaning,  &c.,  by  head  female
nurses,  who  understand  these  things.  To  the  superior  ranks,  a  few
simple  anatomical  lectures  might  be  given  by  the  medical  oflicers.  Dis-
pensers must,  of  course,  be  suitably  educated,  if  they  are  to  dispense.

What  are  the  duties  of  orderlies  attending  on  the  sick  ?

And  what  would  you  propose  to  he  the  respective  duties  and  relative
position  of  the  nurses  and  orderlies  employed  in  the  same  wards  ?

The  administration  of  diets  and  of  medicine,  the  making  of
poultices,  and  application  of  leeches,  blisters,  and  the  minor  dress-
ings, the  management  of  the  ventilation  and  warming  of  the  ward,
should  always  be  in  charge  of  the  head-nurse.  Under  her,  the
cleanliness  of  the  ward,  bed,  bedding,  and  utensils  of  the  patients,
as  well  as  his  personal  cleanliness  ;  the  fetching  of  diets,  the  warming
and  ventilation  of  the  wards,  are  to  be  attended  to  by  the  orderlies,
but  always  under  the  nurse's  surveillance.  And  she  is  to  have  the
power  of  reporting  disobedience  on  their  part.

What  should  he  the  p)roportion  of  orderlies  to  sick  1

Not  less  than  one  to  each  seven  sick,  where  there  is  no  female  head-
nurse. I  am  not  speaking  of  convalescents.*


*  Where  there  is  a  female  head-nurse,  but  no  lifts  or  supply  of  hot  and  cold
water  all  over  the  building,  still  one  orderly  to  every  seven  patients  will  not  be  too
much.  Upon  an  average,  these  two  appliances  make  the  difference  of  one  orderly's
duty  to  a  ward  of  thirty  sick.  And  a  ward  of  thirty  sick,  with  these  appliances,
will  be  better  served  by  three  orderlies  and  half  a  nurse  (for  one  head-nurse  could
see  after  two  such  wards)  than  a  ward  without  the  appliances  would  be  by  four
orderlies.  The  proportion  of  severe  cases  in  military  hospitals  being  generally
much  smaller  than  in  civil  ones,  one  nurse  could  overlook  two  wards  of  thirty  beds,
provided  they  were  on  the  same  floor.  But,  in  all  other  respects,  the  wards  should
be  quite  separate.


before  the  Royal  Commission.  73

How  long  loould  you  keep  a  man  on  duty  in  the  ward  ?

Not  more  than  twelve  hoxu's  altogether.  Watches  of  four  hours  are
good,  as  in  the  naval  service.  But  this  is  a  question  which  the  proper
military  authorities  alone  can  decide.*

How  looidd  you  provide  for  the  discipline  and  regidatio7i  of  the
orderlies  ?

What  duties  should  you  assign  to  the  toard-master  ?

What  proportion  of  xoard-masters  to  the  number  of  orderlies  em-
ployed  ?

There  should  be  a  Avard-master  for  every  five  or  six  wai'ds,  whose
whole  business  should  be  to  see  to  the  regulation  and  discipline  of
the  orderlies,  and  to  the  enforcing  obedience  to  the  orders  of  the  nurse.
But  it  is  obvious  that  if  the  nurse  is  not  in  authority  in  regard  to  all
that  concerns  the  jmtieut,  her  duties  will  become  impossible.  If  she
is  in  authority  the  orderlies  will  willingly  obey.

It  should,  therefore,  be  com})ulsory  that  she  should  report  a  refrac-
tory orderly  to  the  ward-master  or  to  the  captain  of  orderlies,  if  such
an  officer  be  created.

The  wai'd-master  should  be  in  charge  of  all  returns,  accounts,  states,


*  Twelve  hours  for  the  orderly  to  be  off  duty  are  not  at  all  too  much.  Upon  an
average,  all  men  and  women,  after  a  laborious  day,  require  a  good  night,  in  the  long
run.  When  they  do  not  have  it,  either  health,  efficiency,  or  sobriety,  or  all  three  go.
A  strong  soldier  is  no  exception  to  the  general  rule.  In  the  long  run,  if  made  to
do  night  duty  after  a  laborious  day,  he  will  either  go  to  sleep,  or  drink  to  keep
awake,  or  he  will  get  knocked  up  before  his  time.  It  is  sound  economy  to  give
watchers  sufficient  sleep.  You  will  get  more,  and  get  it  longer,  out  of  the  man
by  giving  him  twelve  hours  on  duty  and  twelve  hours  off.  It  is  better  for  him  to
have  eight  than  seven  hours'  sleep ;  and  one  or  two  hours  for  exercise  and  fresh  air
each  afternoon,  or  each  alternate  afternoon,  make  a  man  last  longer  than  going  to
and  from  his  bed  and  his  ward — care,  of  course,  being  taken  that  he  does  not
exercise  himself  in  some  tap.  Supposing  regular  night  duty  required  in  a  ward  of
thirty  men,  supplied  as  above,  and  served  by  half  a  nurse  and  three  orderlies,  it
might  be  worked  thus  : — The  principal  medical  officer  will  decide  whether  the
same  orderly  should  do  the  night  duty  for  a  week,  or  the  three  on  successive  nights;
probably  the  latter.  The  orderly  might  come  on  night  duty  at  9  P.M.  and  remain
on  duty  until  9  A.M.,  thus  taking  his  share  in  the  heavy  morning  work  of  cleaning
the  ward,  &c.  A  large  ward,  got  into  thorough  order  by  9  a.m.  is  in  very  good
time.  A  night  ration  for  night  watchers  is,  I  believe,  indispensable.  A  nurse,
whether  male  or  female,  watching  and  fasting  in  a  ward  from  nine  to  nine,  or  even
from  nine  till  six,  would  either  soon  be  unfit  for  duty,  or  put  drams  in  his  or  her
pocket,  or  doze  through  the  ni^ht.  It  should  be  arranged  that  the  nurses  who  sleep
before  and  after  the  watch  can  do  so  quietly.  This  is  by  no  means  always  attended
to,  either  in  civil  or  nulitary  hospitals.  The  following  extraordinary  system  of
night  nursing  is  that  which  prevails  in  the  Army  at  present : — '  Nursing  is  managed
by  comrade-patients  told  off  in  three  watches  of  two  hours  each  for  the  night.'  ■
'  Orderlies  are  likewise  warned,  and  often  sit  up  for  the  purpose.'  Or  they  'arrange
tamong  themselves,'  without  any  exemption  meanwhile  from  day  duty.  Or  soldiers
are  sent  in  from  the  ranks  to  attend  specially  upon  each  bad  case.  Or  it  has  been
proposed  that  the  patients  shall  'nurse  each  other  J'  All  this  refers  to  things  at
home,  not  to  war-time,  nor  to  any  emergency.  Upon  each  and  all  of  these  systems,
or  no  systems,  it  is  hardly  necessary  to  make  any  comment.


74  Evidence  given

diet-rolls,  &c.,  so  as  to  set  the  mirse  completely  at  liberty  to  attend  to
her  ward.

WTiat  objection  is  there  to  the  Jwspital  with  a  long  corridor  and  small
wards  ?

The  least  administrable  form  of  hospital  is  the  long  corridor  with
wai'ds  of  from  eight  to  ten  patients,  opening  off  one  side.  Attendance,
meaning,  of  course,  due  attention  to  the  patients,  suitably  superin-
tended, becomes  almost  impossible,  especially  at  night.

How  do  you  propose  to  obviate  tJie  evident  danger  of  collecting  a  great
number  of  sick  raen,  labouring  under  diseases  of  every  kind,  into  one
large  building  where  they  breatJie  a  common  cdrtwsphere  ?

The  French  break  up  their  general  hospitals  into  separate  blocks,
while  we  sometimes  agglomerate  our  regimental  hospitals  into  one
building,  thus  reversing  the  sanitary  law.

The  Lariboisiere  hospital  at  Paris  has  600  patients  under  six  roofs;
and  we  had  in  the  Crimea  accommodation  for  500  or  600  patients  at
the  Castle  hospital  in  from  20  to  30  large  and  small  huts.

One  administration,  in  both  cases,  for  all.

This  is  the  true  principle.  All  that  has  to  be  manufactured,  as  the
cooking,  washing,  &c.,  should  be,  as  much  as  possible,  concentrated
into  one  ;  while  human  beings,  sick  or  well,  should  be  distributed  as
much  as  possible.

In  London,  one  wash-house  will  do  for  a  number  of  families,  and  is
as  good  as  giving  an  additional  room  to  each  ;  but  this  does  not  break
up  our  house  system  and  convert  London  into  a  gigantic  public
institution.


NOTE  A.

No.  47. — Lord  Raglan  to  Loed  Panmure.

{Received  March  20.)

(Extract.)  Before  Sebastopol,  March  3,  1855.

I  beg  now  to  lay  before  your  lordship  Dr.  Hall's  report  of  the  state
of  the  sick,  and  I  will  direct  him  to  make  one  weekly,  which  I  will
transmit  for  your  lordship's  information.


(Enclosure.)
Dk,  Hall  to  Lord  Raglan.

Before  Sebastopol,  March  19,  1855.

My  Lord, — In  transmitting  the  weekly  state  of  sick  of  the  army
to  the  17  th  instant,  I  have  the  honour  to  state,  that  though  the  sick^


before  the  Royal  Commission.  75

ness  still  amounts  to  i4'3t  per  cent.,  the  mortality  does  not  exceed
o'5i  per  cent.,  whicli  is  a  proof  that  the  diseases  are  milder  in  cha-
I'acter  ;  and  I  think  I  may  safely  say  the  general  health  and  appear-
ance of  the  men  is  greatly  improved  ;  and  had  not  the  duty,  by  the
unavoidable  operations  of  the  siege  going  on,  been  increased  of  late,  I
think  the  sick  list  would  have  been  still  more  diminished,  as  the  men's
condition  is  in  every  other  way  so  much  improved,  both  in  diet,  dress,
and  accommodation.


(Enclosure.)
Dr.  Hall  to  Lord  Kaglan.

Before  Sebastopol,  April  3,  1855.

My  Lord, — In  transmitting  the  weekly  state  of  sick  to  the  31st
March,  I  have  the  honour  to  state,  that  I  am  sure  it  will  be  pleasing
to  your  lordship  to  learn,  that  the  general  health  of  the  army  con-
tinues steadily  to  improve  ;  and  although  fevers  and  bowel  complaints
continue  to  prevail,  they  are  both  assuming  a  milder  character,  and
the  latter  are  of  much  less  frequent  occurrence.

During  the  present  week  the  admissions  to  strength  have  been  in
the  ratio  of  3-93  per  cent.,  and  the  deaths  to  strength  0*38  per  cent.

Last  week,  the  admissions  to  sti-ength  were  4-35  per  cent.,  and  the
deaths  0*52  per  cent.;  which  makes  a  decrease  of  139  in  the  admis-
sions, and  43  in  the  deaths  during  the  week.


(Enclosure.)
Dr.  Hall  to  Lord  Kaglan.

Before  Sebastopol,  May  1%,  1855.

My  Lord, — The  enclosed  weekly  state  of  sick  to  the  26th
instant,  I  am  glad  to  say,  shows  an  improvement  in  the  sanitary  con-
dition of  the  army.  The  cases  of  cholera  which  have  been  admitted
during  the  week  have  been  of  a  milder  character,  and  the  mortality
from  that  disease  has  been  much  less ;  but  it  has  extended  to  the
Sardinian  contingent,  to  the  men  of  the  land  transport  corps,  and  to
the  shipping  in  the  harbour  of  Balaklava,  and,  from  these  sources,  the
admissions  and  deaths  in  the  general  hospital  thei-e  have  been  con-
siderably increased;  no  fewer  than  eighteen  out  of  the  twenty-five
casualties  which  occurred  there,  having  taken  place  amongst  these  extra
patients.  In  future,  I  will  have  the  extra  patients  excluded  from  the
weekly  state  and  shown  sepai'ately  ;  but  as  I  cannot  get  fresh  returns
made  out  in  time  for  the  post  on  the  present  occasion,  I  have
deducted  the  numbers  from  the  general  return.

The  admissions  to  strength  during  the  present  week,  have  been  in
the  ratio  of  4*20  per  cent, ;  and  the  deaths  to  strength,  0*27  per  cent.
Last  week  they  were  4*53,  and  0*47,  respectively.


76


Evidence  given


Fevers  have  been  less  numerous  during  the  week,  but  diarrhoea
has  been  slightly  on  the  increase ;  and  it  has  been  noticed  that  many
convalescent  from  fever  have  been  seized,  in  some  of  whom  the
disease  has  run  on  to  cholera  and  terminated  fatally.

I  have,  &c.
J.  Hall,
Inspector-General  of  Hospitals.


Dr.  Hall  to  General  Codrington.

Head  Quarters,  Camp,  Crimea,  Dec.  31,  1855.
The  following  abstract  shows  the  admissions  and  deaths  during
the  week,  and  those  during  the  previous  week.


This  week.

Last  week.

Admitted.

Died.

Admitted.

Died.

Fever

182

15

J  73

16

Head  affections

9

2

2

2

Chest  ditto

279

0

221

I

Diarrhoea

117

3

204

4

Cholera

3

3

12

7

Dysentery

8

I

40

0

Rheumatism

44

2

58

I

Frost  Bites

98

0

269

I

Wounds  and  Injuries . , .

72

4

48

6

Ophthalmia

37

0

22

0

Other  diseases

Total . , .

425

6

374

2

^,274

36

1,423

40

I  have,  &c.,

J.  Hall,
Inspector-General  of  Hospitals.


before  the  Royal  Commission.


77


NOTE  B.
I have  carefully  compared all the  statistics from  six different
official  sources. I  will  here  put  in  four  sets  of  returns.

I.


Name  of  Ship.*

Deaths  according  to

Cumming-

Maxwell's

Beturn.

House  of

Commons

Return.

Adjutant  a
Return.

Kangaroo

Dunbar

Cambria

Vulcan

Andes

Colombo

Arthur  the  Great ....

Orient

Caduceus

Courier

Cornwall

Negotiator

Lady  McNaughten  ....

Australia

Cambria

Echunga

Palmerston

&c.  &c.

22

l8

15
30
34

j30

133}

114

16

6

6

3

8

None.

7

22
10
21
10

4
30

SO

26
104

'I

6
3
3

6

7

30

25

57
30

45

16
8

3

12

I

5

The  above  comparison  is  made,  taking  the  first  seventeen  ships  in  order,  as
their  names  stand  in  the  returns.


II.

From  Returns  of  Adjutant's  Office  at  Scutari.


Months.

No.  of  Burials  in
each  month.

No.  of  Deaths
reported  in
each  month.

Excess  of  Burials

over  Deaths  in

each  month.

1854,  September
,, October .
,, November
,, December

1855,  January  .
„ February
,, March

„ April .
,, May . .

i6s
266
368
667
1,473
1,151
418

165

76

78
219
291

536

1,360

1,076

416

152

76

87

47

77

131

113

75

2

13

4,749

4,204

545

Remarks. — S 1 7  of  the  545  have  been  struck  off  the  strength  of  the  general  depfit,
the  other  28  men  were  brought  ashore  either  dead  or  insensible,  with  no  marks  to
ascertain  their  names  or  regiments.


78


Evidence  given


III.

Appendix  to  Report  from  the  Sebastopol  Committee,  2nd  Report,

p.  705.

Return  showing  the  Total  number  of  Sick  and  Wounded  treated  in
Hospital  at  Scutari.
Months.  Total  Treated.

During  Novemher  1854 16,846

„ December 1854 I9j479

„ January 1855 23,076

A.  Smith,  M.D.,  Director-General.
13,  St.  James's-place,
29th  March,  1855.


Appendix  to  Report  from  the  Sebastopol  Committee,  p.  470.

No.  I. — Return  showing  the  Total  Number  of  Men  of  Lord  Raglan's
Army  Sick  during  each  Month,  from  the  Landing  in  Turkey.


Months.


1854,  -A-pril

„  May . .

„  June

„  July  . .

„  August  .

„  September

,,  October

, ,  November

„  December

1855,  Jarmary


To  i*j  February
>, 17 „


Crimea  .
Scutari  .
Abydos .
Gallipoli
Smjn-na .


Total  Siok  or

Wounded  of  all

arms  daring  each

month.


503

1,83s

3,498

6,937

11,236

",693
11,988
16,846

19,479
23,076


Total  to  latest  dales  in  February


9,284
6,725

38s
70

500


16,964


Army  and  Ordnance
Medical  Department,
14th  March,  1855.


A.  Smith,

Director-General.


before  the  Royal  Commission.


79


IV.

Deaths  at  Scutari  and  Koulali  Hospitals,  October i,  1854,  to
April  30,  1855.


I.

2.

3-

4-

'■

6.

Com-

Inspector-General,

Medical

Head  RoU

Reported

Depot

as  quoted  by

at  Scutari.

Retvirns.*

Burials.

Deaths.

Returns.

Sir  A.  TuUoch.
(Infantry).

October . .

250

266

219

213

144

November

—

267

368

291

244

228

December

—

393

667

536

493

423

January . .

1,480

1,235

1,473

1,360

1,079

1,193

February  . .

1,254

1,329

1,151

1,076

1,254

1,261

March . . .

424

555

418

416

324

587

April . . .

200

165

152

213

216

4-052

t  Rem. 470

—

4,229

4,508

4,050

3,820

4,522

At  Scutari  and

At  Scutar

i.

Koulali.

t  Being  Cavalry,  Artilleiy,  and  Royal  Engineers.

The  above  are  the  returns  from  different  official  sources.  The  dis-
crepancies in  them  will  no  doubt  be  explained  to  us  at  some  future
time.  Smyrna  is  not  included.  The  Smyrna  hospital  was  opened  to
sick  February  15,  and  from  that  day  till  March  31,  127  deaths
occurred,  by  the  inspector-general's  return .  Returns  i  and  2  purport
expressly  to  be  for  Scutari  and  KoulaH.  Returns  3,  4,  5  to  be  for
Scutari  alone.  Return  6  may  include  Smyrna.  Otherwise,  being  for
the  '  infantry'  alone,  it  would  prove,  in  defiance  of  Euclid,  that  a  part
is  greater  than  the  whole.  For  the  deaths  in  the  month  of  March  of
infantry  alone  are  greater  than  those  recorded  by  the  other  returns  in
March  for  all  arms  of  the  service.  However,  the  Smyrna  supposition
by  no  means  accounts  for  the  difference — as  return  6  is  something
less  than  return  2  (the  medical  return)  for  February,  although  some-
thing more  for  March.


For  the  first  four  months  in  Return  2,  read —

October  i  to  November  4 250

November  5  to  December  2 767

December  3  to  December  30 393

December  31  to  January  31 1,235


80  Evidence  given


NOTE  C.
Extra-Diet  Kitchen.

The  kitchen  apparatus  of  the  Barrack  and  General  hospitals,  as  left
by  the  Turks,  consisted  of  thirteen  large  copper  boilei"s  in  the  former
building,  and  eleven  in  the  latter,  set  in  brickwork,  eight  and  five  of
which  only,  respectively,  were  available  with  safety.

In  the  General  hospital  the  brickwork  was  loose,  and  the  fuel  was
supplied  from  within  the  building,  so  that  the  kitchen  was  filled  with
smoke  and  the  cooking  impeded.  This  state  of  things  continued  till
after  the  ari'ival  of  M.  Soyei',  in  April,  1855,  when  the  engineer
officer  set  the  boilers  properly,  and  placed  the  fiues  so  that  they  could
be  lighted  from  without — at  the  same  time  open  charcoal  stoves  were
placed,  according  to  M.  Soyer's  directions,  for  the  cooking  of  extra
diets,  heating  cofiee,  &c.

In  the  Barrack  hospital  the  kitchen  was  at  one  end  of  the  yard,
with  no  other  arrangement  in  use  than  the  above-mentioned  boilers,
which  were,  however,  perfectly  well  set,  and  supplied  with  wood
placed  in  fire-places,  the  opening  of  which  was  on  the  outside.  The
kitchen  was  twenty  yards  from  one  end  of  the  barrack  yard,  and  200
yards  from  the  other;  the  barrack  yard  being  220  by  194  yards ;  the
corridor,  therefore,  which  was  in  the  internal  side  of  the  building,
was  about  half  a  mile  in  extent.  External  to  it  were  the  wards,  with
their  windows  in  the  outside  of  the  building.  The  mass  of  the  patients
was  ranged  on  one  flat  and  part  of  two  other  flats.  In  the  winter  of
1854—5,  ^^^J  varied  from  1900  to  2500.  The  corridors  had  two  rows  of
beds,  placed  transversely,  leaving  a  vacant  space  along  the  centre  of  about
three  feet.  The  beds,  measured  across,  with  the  intervals  between
them,  extended  over  a  space  of  from  three  to  four  miles,  including,
of  course,  both  wards  and  coi-ridors.  As  the  eight  coppers  above
mentioned,  placed  in  one  kitchen,  had  to  supply  three  meals  a  day  for
this  vast  number,  the  issue  was  necessarily  but  slowly  conducted — it
occupied  from  an  hour  to  an  hour  and  a  half.  The  meat  was  issued
from  the  purveyors'  store,  at  one  ofiice  only,  nominally  between  9
o'clock  and  half-past  12,  but  the  last  of  the  meat  was  rarely  bi'ought
into  the  kitchen  before  half-past  i,  jD.m.  As  soon  as  it  was  received  by
the  orderlies,  each  carried  the  portion  intended  for  his  own  mess  or  ward
to  the  kitchen,  and  placed  it  in  the  copper,  with  some  distinguishing
mark  (occasionally  of  very  peculiar  description),  which  was  called  a
'tally.'  The  nominal  hour  for  dinner  was  one  o'clock,  when  the  por-
tions were  supposed  to  be  cooked,  and  were  re-delivered  to  the  order-
lies ;  and  as  no  order  of  precedence  was  observed  among  them,  it
might  thus  easily  happen  that  some  of  the  portions  remained  three
hours,  and  some  not  above  half  an  hour  in  the  coppers.  The  meat,
after  it  had  traversed  the  coi'ridors,  was  divided  into  the  required
number  of  diets  by  the  orderly,  upon  his  own  bed,  and  then  dis-


before  the  Royal  Commission.


81


tributed  to  the  patients.  The  real  hour  of  dinner  was  2,  3,  or
even  half-past  3,  p.m.

No  attempt  at  extra-diets  had  been  made  except  that  of  cooking
arrowroot  in  one  copper  and  fowls  and  chicken  broth  in  another,  or
in  tin  pots  on  Turkish  braziers.  The  orderlies  cooked  some  small
articles  for  the  patients  in  their  own  mess-tins.

Under  these  circumstances  Miss  Nightingale  established  an  extra-
diet  kitchen,  in  November,  1854,  which  continued  in  action  up  to
July,  1855.  Four  cooks  were  employed  in  it,  besides  which,  arrow-
root, puddings,  lemonade,  &c.,  were  prepared  during  the  whole  time  in
the  nurses'  kitchen,  for  the  patients.

The  regulations  for  military  hospitals  contain  five  diets,  being  '  full,'
'  half,'  '  low,'  '  milk,'  and  'spoon.'  When  this  last  diet  is  ordered,  con-
sisting of  I  pint  of  tea  and  4  oz.  of  bread  for  breakfast,  and  tlie  same  for
tea,  any  articles  may  be  ordered  at  the  discretion  of  the  medical  officer,
for  the  patient's  other  meals — these  articles  are  then  called  '  extras.'

Under  this  regulation  the  medical  officers  drew  for  patients  upon  spoon
diet  (daily),  'extras'  on  diet-rolls  for  700  to  800  men  upon  this  kitchen.

The  extra-diet  rolls  were  necessarily  carried  away  with  the  diets,
to  ensure  a  proper  delivery  by  the  orderly,  and  were  returned  to  the
ward  for  the  medical  officer  to  form  his  diet-roll  next  day.

In  making  the  issues,  therefore,  the  superintendent  had  only  to
comply  with  the  diet-rolls  presented,  which  did  not  return  to  her
hands.  The  following  extract  from  a  parliamentary  document  wilt
exhibit  the  ordinary  demand.

Average  Daily  Issue  of  Extra-diets  supplied  from  F.  Niglitingale's
Kitchens  to  the  Extra-diet  Rolls  of  the  Medical  Officers,  Barrack
Hospital,  Scutari,  from  the  13th  January  to  13th  February,  1855.
Vide  p.  41  of  'Report  upon  the  Scutari  and  Crimean  Hospitals,'
by  the  Cumming-Maxwell  Commission.


No.  supplied.

-

From  Public  Stores.

From  Private  Sources.

25  gallons . . .

Beef  tea.

80  lbs.  beef.

_

15 ., ...

Chicken  Broth.

28  chickens.

12  chickens.

40 „ ...

Arrowroot.

—

Arrowi'oot.

IS „ • . .

Sago.

—

Sago.

240  quarts  . . .

Barley  water.

Barley.

—

10 „ ...

Rice  water.

Rice.

—

8 „ ...

Lemonade.

—

Lemons.

30 ,, . . .

Milk.

—

Milk.

275  portions .

Rice  puddings.

Rice.

—

15  bottles  . . .

Port  wine.

—

Port  wine.

3 „ ...

Marsala.

—

Marsala.

3 „ ...

Brandy.

—

Brandy.

15  lbs. . . .

Jelly.

—

Isinglass.

4  dozen . . .

Bggs.

—

Eggs.

40 ....

Chickens.

28  chickens.

12  chickens.

83  Evidence  given

The  average  '  daily  issue  table,'  though  a  fair  average  for  the
three  month.s  of  December,  1854,  January,  1855,  and  February,  1855,
by  no  means  reaches  the  amount  of  the  issues  of  the  end  of  December
and  beginning  of  January.  For  instance,  in  the  return  of  issues  for
articles  consumed  in  extra-diets,  from  December  19,  1854,  to  Decem-
ber 31,  1854,  in  one  division  (viz.  D)  alone  of  the  Barrack  hospital,
containing  519  sick,  appears  an  issue  of  108  bottles  of  port  wine
mixed  in  the  daily  airowroot  from  Miss  Nightingale's  kitchen.

A  second  extra-diet  kitchen  had  been  constructed  by  her  in  aid  of
the  first  about  Christmas,  1854,  and  three  supplementary  boilers  for
supplying  hot  water  for  arrowroot,  &c.,  were  also  set  upon  one  of  the
staircases  at  her  request.

A  third  of  these  kitchens  was  afterwards  added  by  a  first-class
stafi'-surgeon,  in  charge  of  one  of  the  four  divisions  of  the  hospital.

At  the  General  hospital,  in  consequence  of  the  difficulties  said  to
exist,  a  modified  system  was  adopted,  until  the  extra-diets  began
to  be  cooked  in  the  general  kitchen  arranged  with  M.  Soyer  in  April,

1855- ^

M.  Soyer  was  also  permitted  to  arrange  extra-diet  kitchens  at
Haidar  Pacha  and  at  Koulali.

At  the  five  general  hospitals  attended  by  female  nurses  in  the
Crimea,  extra-diet  kitchens,  in  which  they  were  for  the  most  part
the  cooks,  were  introdxiced  under  the  female  superintendent.

Butter  being  a  new  and  exceptional  article,  was  of  course  supplied
from  private  sources  when  ordered  by  requisition  of  the  medical  officer.
A  quantity  was  despatched  by  her  Majesty,  and  was  placed  by  the
pui"veyor  in  the  charge  of  the  superintendent,  to  be  disposed  of  in
conformity  with  the  above  regulation.

In  consequence  of  the  absence  of  any  provision  for  sick  and
wounded  officers  in  hospital,  by  the  War  Office  regulations,  the  cook-
ing for  their  service,  in  the  Castle  and  General  hospitals  in  the  Crimea,
was  entirely  done  by  the  female  stafi" ;  part  also  of  the  materials  for
their  use  being  supplied  from  private  sources.  And,  by  the  express
desire  of  the  medical  officer  in  charge,  the  superintendent  drew  for
the  sick  officers  wine,  bread,  and  meat,  under  the  head  of  nui'ses'
supplies,  although  not  consumed  by  the  nurses.


NOTE  D.

Number  of  Shirts  found  in  Patients'  Knapsacks  that  are  deposited
in  the  Pack  Store  of  the  Barrack  Hospital  at  Scutari.

Twenty-two.

Selkirk  Stuart,
4th  December,  1854.  Purveyor  to  the  Forces.


before  the  Royal  Commission.


83


Returu  of  the  Number  of  Shirts  issued  from  the  Purveyor's  Stores  in
the  General  Hospital  and  Barrack  Hospital  at  Scutari,  from  ist
October,  1854,  to  i6th  February,  1855.


Issued.

To
General
Hospital.

To
Barrack
Hospital.

To  Kulali.

To  Haidar
Pasha.

To  Miss

Nightin- Total.
gale.

From  store  at  Gene-
ral Hospital

From  store  at  Bar-
rack Hospital  ,

Totals  issued .

4,203

3,019

558

512
442

1,000
1,500

5,715
5,519

4,203

3,019

558

954

2,500 11,234

Barrack  Hospital,  Scutari,
22nd  February,  1855.


Selkirk  Stuart,
Purveyor  of  the  Forces.


Account  of  Clothing  received  into  Quartermaster's  Stores  at  Scutari.


Date.

Shirts.

Drawers.

Socks.

Mits.

Trow-
sers.

Boots.

-

1854.
Dec.  5

589

1,173

4,628

Received

„ 16

3,588

1,817

4,597

from  Con-
stantinople,
purchased
by  Captain
Wetherall.

1855.
Jan.  14

3,092

—

—

—

—

1,600

From Quar-
termaster-
General.

„ 16

600

Purchased
by  order  of
Lord  Wil-
liam Paulet,

Feb. 2

2,081

4,086

From  Con-
stantinople,
purchased
by  Captain
Wetherall.

„ 3

1,000

Purchased
by  order  of
Lord  Wil-
liam Paulet.

„ 5

2,000

4,000

360

From Quar-
termaster-
General.

Total

9,269

7.990

11,306

4,086

600

1,960

G 2


84


Evidence  given


Of  .the  above  clothing  there  has  been  served  out  to  the  men  of  the
General  Depot,  and  to  invalids  proceeding  to  England,  since  the  5th
December,  as  follows : —


Date.

Shirts.

Drawera.

Socks.

Mits. 1  Trowsers.

Boots.

-

4,387

3,088

6,703

i
1,500 300

1,930

and  1,530
blankets.

Jasper  Hall,
Captain  ^th  K,  0.  Regiment,  Qr.  Mr,
Scutari,  i^th  February,  1855.

The  store  was  established  when  the  first  articles  of  clothing  were
received,  viz.,  on  the  5th  December,  1854,  as  above.

Jasper  Hall,
Captain  4th  Regiment,  Qr.  Mr.


\  Major  Sillery.

'  I  was  commandant  from  the  time  the  army  left  till  within  ten  or
twelve  days.  When  convalescents  or  invalids  leave  the  hospital,  they
come  under  my  command.  Many  of  the  sick  and  wounded  men  arrived
with  little  or  no  clothing.  From  the  want  of  any  establishment  for
the  purpose  at  thisdepdt,  tJiere  is  the  greatest  difficulty  in  sujyplying  such
men  with  necessaries.  There  is  a  non-commissioned  officer  of  each
regiment  here  in  charge  of  the  men  of  his  own  regiment.  It  is  the
duty  of  that  non-commissioned  officer  to  meet  the  wants  of  the  men  if
possible,  getting  the  money  for  the  purpose  from  the  paymaster,  who
stops  the  amount  from  the  soldiers'  pay.  The  corporal  must  get  the
shirts  when  he  can.  In  the  case  of  boots,  which  are  a  heavy  ai'ticle,  .
there  is  more  difficulty.  We  cannot  get  the  regimental  boots  here.
For  men  going  up  to  the  Crimea,  we  look  very  closely  as  to  boots.  Till
the  last  draft  we  sent  up  about  a  fortnight  ago,  we  generally  got
boots  from  the  commissariat  for  men  going  up  ;  but  I  do  not  know  if
we  got  any  for  invalids.  Every  man  is  examined  before  he  goes  to
the  Crimea  or  home,  but  not  when  he  comes  out  of  hospital.  We
endeavour  to  complete  the  outfits  as  much  as  we  can.  This  is  done
partly  out  of  commissariat  stores  and  dead  men's  efiects.  In  the  same
way  we  give  the  red  coatees  of  dead  men.

*We  want  a  quartermaster's  establishment, — a  large  store  with
necessaries  of  all  kinds.  The  complication  of  accounts  with  so
many  soldiers  of  different  regiments  requires  a  large  staff".  In  a
regiment,  a  soldier  who  wants  anything  is  supplied  by  his  captain,
who  inspects  him  and  draws  the  articles  wanting  from  the  quarter-
master's stores.  Here  we  have  no  officer  who  discharges  the  duty  of
a  captain.'


before  the  Royal  Commission.  85

Note  E.

Orderlies'  Attendance. — "With  regard  to  the  present  '  regulation
number  of  ordei'lies,  viz.,  i  to  every  lo  patients,  it  is  to  be
observed, —

(i.)  Forty-bed  Ward  Minimum  iSize  for  Regidation  Number  of  i
Atterldant  to  lo  Patients. — A  ward  of  40  patients  might  be  efficiently-
served  (but  it  would  be  hard  work)  with

I Head  Nurse — Female.
3  Orderlies.

Provided  always  there  were  lifts  and  hot  and  cold  water  laid  on.

With  no  number  under  40  of  patients  to  a  ward,  can  the  Regula-
tion propoi'tion  of  1  attendant  to  10  patients  be  adhered  to.

(2.)  Twenty-bed  Hard  requires  3^  Attendants.  —  A  ward  of  20
patients  cannot  be  efficiently  served  (if  the  orderlies  be  men)  with
less  than

^  Head  Nurse — Female.
3 Oi'derlies.

And  the  other  ward  of  this  head-nurse  ought  to  be  on  the  same  floor.

N.B. — The  same  number  would  quite  as  efficiently  serve  a  ward  of
30  patients,  provided  there  be  lifts  and  a  supply  of  hot  and  cold  water
all  over  the  building.

(3.)  Ten-bed  Ward  cannot  be  served  by  i  Orderly. — The  Army
system  of  i  orderly  to  10  patients,  with  a  number  not  exceeding  10
patients  to  a  ward,  is  upset  as  immediately  by  one  bad  case  among  the
10,  as  by  9  to  the  10.

For,  is  the  same  orderly  to  be  on  duty  for  the  24  hours  ?

The  difficulty  is  practically  got  over  by  the  Army,  with  a  per-
mission that  any  '  bad  case'  may  select  any  one  he  likes  of  his  com-
rades (out  of  the  depot)  to  be  '  told  off,'  to  attend  upon  him.

This  cxtraoi'dinary  regulation  is  equivalent  to  (and  affiDi-ds  little
other  practical  result,  than)  granting  opportunity  for  any  quantity  of
spirits,  and  illicit  food,  to  be  smuggled  into  hospital,  and  it  is  clear
that  it  wovild  be  totally  inadmissible  in  a  general  hospital,  where
tlie  whole  system  of  nursing  would  be  under  the  most  stringent  dis-
cipline and  supervision.

(4.)  Naval  Hospitals  Regulation  number  of  Attendants  i  to  'j
Patients. — In  all  naval  hospitals,  the  regulation  number  of  attendants
is  I  to  every  7  patients,  or  2  attendants  for  each  ward  containing
more  than  7  patients  and  up  to  14.

In  civil  hos[)itals  the  proportion  is  as  great,  generally,  of  attend-
ants to  patients,  and  is  mainly  determined  by  the  size  of  the  ward  :

E.  g.,  in  one  hospital,  where  there  are  quadruple  wards  of  44  or  48
patients,  11  or  12  in  each  compartment,  the  number  of  attendants  is  7.

In  exceptional  cases  extra  night-nurses,  sometimes  extra  day-nurses
serve  particular  patients. The  labour,  both  of  cleaning  and  of  night-


86  Evidence  given

nursing, is  mucli increased by  the compartments  being  four,  and
separated  by  a  large  lobby.

In  another  of  the  large  London  hospitals,*  where  there  are  to  each
ward,


there  are  <


ATTENDANTS.

I  Sister.

24  /  i-ucic  cvic  ^ ^  Nurses.

( I  Sister.

30  „  < 2  Nurses.

( I  Scrubber.

f I  Sister.

^^  "  (3  Nurses.

I  Sister.

4.0  „  •{ 3  Nurses.


I  Helper.

In  the  Lariboisiere  Hospital  at  Paris,  where  the  wards  hold  32
beds,  I  sister,  i  nurse,  and  2  orderlies  on  the  men's  side,  i  sister,  2
nurses,  and  i  orderly  on  the  female  side,  serve  the  ward  efficiently.
In  this  hospital  there  are  no  lifts.

(5.)  Same  oiumher  of  Men  will  not  do  same  amount  of  Work  as  om
equal  number  of  Women  would. — One  woman  does  the  work  of  more
than  a  man  in  a  hospital,  speaking  of  the  duties  discharged  by  under-
nurses  in  civil  hospitals  ;  for  men  are  not  accustomed  to  these  duties
in  England,  as  women  are  from  their  childhood.

From  this  it  is  by  no  means  to  be  inferred  that  women  of  the  class
of  under-nurses  in  civil  hospitals  should  be  employed  in  military
hospitals,  which  unquestionably  they  should  not.  But  it  is  to  be
inferred  that  the  woi'k  will  not  be  done  efficiently,  with  a  smaller
number  of  men  than  would  be  employed  of  women.

(6.)  Practically,  it  is  impossible  to  serve  4  wards  oi  9  beds  each,
with

I Head  Nurse,
4  Orderlies.
For,  as  has  been  said,  one  bad  case  in  each  ward  makes  this  economy
as  unmanageable  as  nine.

I  Female  Head  Nurse  ) , f  50  Patients,  in  (say)
6  Orderlies . . . .  j  (6  Wards,

would  be  wholly  insufficient,  though  this  attendance  would  be  more
than  sufficient  for  50  cases  in  one  ward;  but  such  a  ward  is  considered

*  It  is  singular  how  little,  even  in  civil  hospitals,  attention  has  been  directed  to
the  comparative  cost  of  nursing  in  larger  and  smaller  wards.  In  two  civil  hospitals,
the  distribution  of  sick  in  which  is  nearly  as  in  the  two  instances  above,  the
annual  cost  of  nursing  each  bed  is  about  one-third  more  in  the  former  than  in  the
latter  case.  It  is  true  that  the  average  number  of  constantly  occupied  beds  is
about  one-third  less  in  the  former  than  in  the  latter  hospital.  But  the  diffei'ence
of  cost  seems  mainly  attributable  to  the  difference  of  the  number  of  beds  in  each
ward.  And  the  efficiency  of  the  nursing  is  certainly  not  less  in  the  latter  than  in
the  former  hospital.


before  the  Royal  Commission.  87

in  a  sanitary  sense  too  large.  Two  wai'ds  of  30  beds  each  on  the  same
floor  would  be  efficiently  served  by  such  a  staff,  liowcver ;  and  there
would  be  no  sanitary  objection.

(7.)  One  Orderly  shotdd  he  the  Frotteur. — One  orderly  shoidd  be
trained  to  be  tlxefrotteiir  to  each  ward.  He  should  also  be  the  porter
to  fetch  and  carry  evei'ything  to  and  from  the  ward.

(8.)  Comparison  of  Cost  of  JVursing  loith  larger  and  smaller  Wards. —
The  plan  of  K^etley,  with  its  wards  for  9  sick,  is  by  far  the  costliest
for  administration,  as  the  following  facts  will  prove  :

I.  It  is  proposed  to  provide  the  hospital  with  orderlies  and  nui'ses

to  conduct  the  nursing  in  wards  of  9  sick,  as  mentioned.

II.  On  sanitary  grounds  wards  may  safely  be  lai-ge  enough  to  ac-

commodate 25  to  30  sick.
We  may  therefore  choose  the  lai'ger  wards,  being  guided  only  by  the
cost  of  the  nursing.

III.  A  ward  of  9  sick  would  require i day  and i night  orderly,

and  a-third  of  a  nurse  (that  is,  a  nurse  could  superintend  three
such  wards).

A  ward  of  30  sick  would  require  2  day;  and  i  night  orderlies
and  I  nurse  =  4  persons  in  all.
Or  if  two  sitch  wards  were  on  one  floor,  i  nurse  could  serve  both.

IV.  We  cannot  count  the  cost  of  orderlies  and  nurses,  including

lodging,  rations,  wages,  at  less  than  50^.  a  year,  which  when
capitalized  at  3  per  cent.  (33  years'  purchase),  would  amount
to  1650/.  for  each.
v.  A  ward  of  9  sick  would  cost  in  nursing  1650^. x  2I  =  3850?.,  or
427Z.  15s.  6d.  per  bed.

VI.  A ward  of 30 sick  would cost for  nursing,  in perpetuity,

1650?.  X  4  =  6600^.  =  220^.  per  bed.

[One  nurse  to  each  ward  is  here  allowed.]

VII.  The  cost  of  the  two  plans  relatively  for  a  hospital  of  1000  sick
would  stand  thus  : —

Wards  with  9  beds = £427,775
Wards  with  30  beds  = 220,000


Capitalized  difference  of  cost  in  favour  \ n^

of  large  wards J "' '''75

Suppose  the  sanitaiy  requirement  of  25  sick  to  a  ward  be  combined
with  the  greatest  economy  of  administration,  the  cost  would
stand  thus  : —
For  each  ward  of  25  sick,  3  orderlies,  at  1,650^. —  £4,950
If  two  such  are  built  in  line  close  to  each  othei*,
with  the  nurse's  room  between  them,  one
nui'se  could  superintend  both  wards,  or  half
a  nurse  to  a  Avard. The  cost  would  be  for
the  ward 825

^5.775


88  Evidence  given  before  the  Royal  Commission.

5775
Or  cost  for  each  bed = £231

.  ^5
The  comparative  cost  of  wards  with  9  beds  and  25  beds,  would

stand  thus  for  1000  sick  : —

Wards  with  9  beds ,£427,775

Wards  with  25  beds 231,000

Saving £196,775

The  cost  of  the  administration  per  1000  beds  at  Netley  and  at  the
proposed  hospital  at  Aldershot  would  stand  as  follows  : —

Netley . £427,775

Aldershot,  pavilions,  with  3  superimposed  wards  and
25  sick  in  each,  would  I'equire  3  ordei'lies  and  1  nurse*  to
each  ward,  and  would  cost  264I.  per  bed  in  perpetuity,  or
per  1000  sick 264,000

Difference  of  cost  in  favour  of  Aldershot . . £163,775

Some  abatement  would  have  to be  made,  as  regards  the  cost  of
Netley,  as  there  are  a  few  wards  with  16  or  18  sick.


* One  Durse  might  possibly  be  able  to  serve  the  whole  pavilion. The  highest
estimate  is  here  taken.


%tes  th


ALHi

LAKLI  SMYENA.

554— JtFeb.,  1855— Nov.,  1855.

ions. Admissions. Deatlis.


3  from  c
I  from  c


737
256

94

38

56

26

17

417

22


1887


30

97

9
6

5
I

T


^54


RENKIOI.

Oct.,  1855 — June,  1856.
Admissions. Deaths.


232

6

234

I

263

5

345

12

226

16

II

9

4

I

8

—

7

—

1330

50

APPENDIX


SITES  AND  CONSTRUCTION  OF  HOSPITALS.

{Three  Articles  reprinted  from  the  'Builder^  of  August  28th,  and
Sejitember  nth  and  i^th,  1858).

WE  propose  to  devote  two  or  three  additional  papers  to  a  discussion  of
general  principles  on  which  hospital  sites  should  be  selected  and  hospitals
constructed.

The  sanitary  history  of  hospitals  may  be  summed  up  in  very  few  words.
There  are  hospitals  on  very  bad  sites :  there  are  hospitals  on  comparatively
good  sites ;  but  there  is  hardly  an  instance,  in  this  country  at  least,  of  both
hospital  and  site  fully  embodying  those  sanitary  principles  which  are  essentially
necessary  for  a  rapid  recovery  of  the  sick  and  maimed.

The  one  paramount  sanitary  condition  which  ought  to  be  observed  in  all
hospitals  is  that  of  having /;?/;-i?  and  dty  air  both  within  and  without  the  walls
of  the  buildings.  The  medical  profession  generally,  and  the  public,  have  been
so  much  in  the  habit  of  considering  that  medicine  is  some  kind  of  occult  force,
by  which  disease  is  to  be  expelled  from  the  human  body,  that  it  seems  to  have
been  thought  sufficient  for  all  purposes  of  curing  and  healing,  that  the  sick  man
and  the  doctor  should  merely  be  brought  together,  in  any  locality,  or  under
any  conditions  whatever.  It  used  to  be  thought  that  human  beings  could  live
in  any  sort  of  place,  and  under  any  circumstances.  And  it  is  too  much  the
fashion,  even  now,  to  consider  that  the  sick  ought  to  recover  anywhere.
Hospital  trustees  and  committees  conclude  that  they  have  done  all  that  is
requisite,  when  they  have  provided  '  the  very  best  professional  advice  and
assistance  that  can  be  obtained,'  and  so  the  enormous  mortality  in  hospitals  has
come  to  be  considered  as  unavoidable,  merely  indicating  the  'per-ceutage  of
mortality  inevitably  resulting  from  disease.'

It  appears  to  us  that  sanitary  reformers  have  too  much  overlooked  the  in-
fluence of  hospital  statistics  upon  the  mortality  of  particular  towns.  It  is  true
tliat  the  startling  increase  produced  in  the  mortality  of  a  registration  sub-
district  by  the  accidental  position  of  the  union  workhouse  in  it  is  well  known.
But  it  does  not  seem  to  us  that  the  question  has  always  been  considered,
whether  much  of  the  high  mortality  of  particular  towns  is  not  due  to  the  bad
sanitary  state  of  local  charitable  institutions.  Towns,  as  everybody  now  knows,
are  more  unhealthy  than  the  country.  But  is  it  recognised  that  hospitals  in
towns  foUow  the  same  law  ?  That,  other  things  being  equal,  a  hospital  in  a
town  ought  to  yield  a  higher  mortality,  fewer  permanent  recoveries,  a  longer
dui'ation  of  sick  cases,  and  therefore  a  greater  current  expense  to  the  adminis-
tration, than  a  hospital  in  the  country  would  do  for  the  same  number  of  cases  ?
Again,  '  Hospitals,'  says  a  great  living  statistical  authority,  '  are  adapted  to  an
intermediate  state  of  civilization.'  But  the  question  of  how  much  hospitals,  in
their  present  condition,  increase  the  mortality  among  the  poor  of  this  'inter-
mediate state  of  civilization'  has  scarcely  been  touched.  We  can  only  state  the
question,  and  pass  on. The  importance  of  an  inquiry  as  to  what  is  the  relative


90  Appendix

mortality  in  hospital  practice  and  private  practice  among  the  poor  (considering,
too,  that  cases  supposed  incurable  are  never  received  into  hospital)  cannot  -well
be  overrated.

To  return  to  our  main  question,  we  state  broadly  that '  town  districts'  should
be  avoided  for  hospital  sites.  Air  of  sufficient  purity  is  not  to  be  obtained  in
towns.  Every  existing  town  hospital  ought  therefore  to  be  removed  into  the
country,  if  it  be  possible  to  do  so.  At  a  moderate  distance  from  towns  land  is
mucli  cheaper  than  in  close-built  places ;  and  there  are  many  large  hospital
establishments  covering  considerable  areas  of  ground  in  crowded  and  valuable
parts  of  towns  and  cities,  which  might  be  removed  to  the  country,  not  only  with
incalculable  advantage  to  the  sick,  but  with  great  pecuniary  gain  to  the  hospital
establishment.  Even  in  so  vast  a  place  as  the  metropolis,  a  few  casualty  wards,
where  accidents  might  temporarily  be  seen,  rooms  for  the  examination  and  the
reception  of  cases,  and  suitable  vehicles  for  transferring  them  to  the  country,
would  be  all  that  would  be  necessary  to  effect  the  reform.

The  single  consideration  that  the  welfare  and  speedy  recovery  of  the  sick
must  be  considered  as  the  main  object  of  all  hospitals,  ought  to  determine  the
removal  and  reconstruction  of  any  unhealthy  hospital,  provided  there  be  the
pecuniary  means  of  doing  so ;  and  if  these  are  deficieiit,  every  exertion  should
be  made  to  obtain  them.

The  foundations  of  every  hospital  should  be  laid  in  dry  ground,  which  should
be  covered  by  concrete ;  or  the  building  should  have  an  arched  basement,  pre-
venting the  soil  from  having  any  coumiunication  with  the  floors  above.  Base-
ments, enclosed  and  connected  with  the  wards  by  staircases,  are  inadmissible,
as  aff'ording  ingress  for  damp  air  from  the  subsoil  to  the  air  breathed  by  the
sick.  _  A  gravelly,  or  sandy  subsoil,  well  drained,  is  the  best.  Clay  subsoils  arc
unsuitable  in  proportion  to  their  power  of  retaining  moisture.  !Made-ground,
or  ground  covered  with  decaying  organic  matters,  such  as  sweepings  of  streets,
old  burial-grounds,  &c.,  should  be  sedulously  avoided.  One  of  the  most  ill-
advised  proposals  for  building  a  hospital  wliich  perhaps  has  ever  been  enter-
tained is  that  of  extending  one  of  our  great  metropolitan  hospitals  over  St.
Clement  Danes  burial-ground,  wliich  has  for  years  been  a  public  nuisance  to
the  metropolis.

The  vicinity  of  marshes,  wet  ground,  damp  valleys,  river  estuaries,  and
mud-banks  should  be  avoided.  The  choice  of  the  position  of  the  new  Royal
Victoria  Hospital,  at  Netley,  with  its  ten  square  miles  of  mud,  is  singularly
unfortunate.

The  natural  configuration  of  the  ground  should  admit  of  the  buildings  being
protected  from  prevailing  cold  winds.  The  local  climate  should  be  dry.  There
should  be  a  good  supply  of  pure  soft  water.

Wherever  '  Accident-wards'  are  required  in  towns,  care  ought  to  be  taken  to
select  a  liealthy  district,  not  closely  populated,  with  no  nuisances  nor  otlier  local
causes  of  disease  in  the  vicinity.

The  great  principle  to  be  kept  in  view  in  the  selection  of  sites  and  climates
is  that  recovery  from  sickness  in  the  vast  majority  of  cases  depends  perhaps
more  upon  pure  air  and  pure  water,  with  suitable  diet,  than  upon  any  medical
treatment,  however  skilful.  The  same  remarks  apply  to  surgical  cases,  in
many  of  which  there  is  a  greater  susceptibility  to  the  influence  of  external
causes  than  is  to  be  found  even  in  medical  cases.  The  idea  which  ought
to  be  uppermost  in  the  minds  of  hospital  committees,  of  architects,  and  of
medical  men,  is  that  of  pure  air.  Better  leave  the  sick  and  maimed  at  home,
unless  this  be  realized.  The  aggregation  of  a  number  of  helpless  sick  and
maimed  under  one  roof,  in  a  given  space,  without  attention  to  this  requisite.


on  Hospital  Sites  and  Construction.  91

may  be  at  any  time,  as  it  has  often  been,  and  now  is,  nothing  but  manslaughter
under  the  garb  of  benevolence.

The  proof  of  this  on  a  colossal  scale,  was  the  mortality  at  Scutari,  which
actually  reached  in  the  mouth  of  February,  1S55,  iust  before  the  Sanitary
Commissioners  commenced  their  labours,  the  incredible  rate  of  41.5  per  cent,
per  annum.  And  this,  when  the  character  of  the  cases  sent  there  from  the
Crimea  had  improved  so  much,  that  the  general  mortality  of  the  army  had
diminished,  notwithstanding  up  to  this  time  the  fearful  and  increasing  death-
rate  of  the  Scutari  hospitals.

In  the  Peninsula,  as  we  learn  from  Sir  J.  McGrigor,  the  general  hospitals
had  actually  to  be  broken  up,  in  consequence  of  the  terrible  rate  of  mortality
within  them.

Suppose  a  site  already  occupied  by  a  hospital  in  which  the  condition  above
named,  as  first  in  importance,  viz.  that  of  ptire  air  cannot  be  obtained.  What
is  to  be  done  ?  Ought  we  to  go  on  receiving  sick,  in  such  a  building,  with  the
certainty  that  a  number  will  oe  hurried  prematurely  to  their  graves  year  after
year,  who  would  have  recovered,  if  the  building  had  been  in  a  more  healthy
place  ?  Rather  than  admit  so  fearful  an  alternative,  would  it  not  be  better  to
consider  the  question  of  removing  the  hospital  altogether  ?  Hospital  sites  in
the  midst  of  increasing  populations,  are  far  more  valuable  for  almost  any  other
purpose  than  for  hospitals.  Why  not  sell  them,  and  remove  the  establish-
ments into  healthy  districts,  leaving  only  a  few  accident-wards,  and  offices  for
out-patients,  and  provide  the  means  of  transporting  hospital  patients  to  the
new  hospitals  ?  Even  medical  schools  ought  to  yield  to  true  sanitary  require-
ments. The  sick  ought  not  to  be  permitted  to  suffer,  in  order  that  any  medical
school,  however  good,  may  prosper.  Medical  schools  woidd,  however,  prosper
far  more  in  the  vicinity  of  good  than  of  bad  hospitals.  The  processes  of
nature  by  which  the  sick  recover,  would  be  seen  in  operation,  instead  of  the
processes  of  foul  air  by  which  the  sick  die,  which  latter,  it  is  to  be  feared,
forms  a  considerable  proportion  of  the  experience  of  some  hospital  students
at  the  present  time.

Having  obtained  a  good  site,  how  is  that  site  to  be  used  ? — in  other  words,
on  what  plan  is  the  hospital  to  be  built  ?

The  fundamental  idea  of  all  hospital  plans  ought  to  be  this  :  to  have  pm-e,
fresh  air  in  every  part  of  the  building.  Fresh  air  is  the  sine  qnanoii.  _  Unless
a  building  can  be  so  planned  that  the  sick  shall  breathe  air  as  fresh  within  its
walls  as  they  could  do  externally,  they  will  suffer  in  a  ratio  corresponding  to
the  degree  of  impurity.

All  surgical  operations,  all  medical  treatment,  and  all  nursing,  are  subsidiary
to  this  great  central  point  in  hospital  construction  and  management.  We  again
assert  tliat  it  should  never  be  forgotten  for  a  moment,  by  hospital  committees,
by  architects,  and  by  medical  officers,  that  on  the  purity  of  the  air  of  a  ward
depend,  in  a  great  measure,  the  recovery  or  death  of  the  sick  and  maimed,  the
usefulness  or  injury  arising  from  the  hospital,  the  duration  of  cases ;  and,  con-
sequently, the  hospital  economy :  whether,  in  short,  a  hospital  planned,  erected,
and  supported  by  '  voluntary  contributions,'  is  to  be  a  blessing  or  a  curse  to
civilization.  And  when  w'c  consider  that  (in  the  words  of  the_  statistical
authority  already  quoted),  '  a  man  cannot  forego  his  supply  of  air  so  many
minutes  as  he  can  forego  food  for  days,'  is  it  a  subject  for  wonder  that  pure
air  should  be  the  main  condition,  as  of  health,  so  of  recovery  ?

In  the  infancy  of  knowledge,  when  Christian  benevolence  provided  for  the
sick  and  destitute,  and  where  it  also  was  the  sole  foundation  _  of  the  work,
hospitals  were  built  in  situations  and  on  plans  which  were  far  from  realizing


93  Appendix

the  intentions  of  their  founders.  Mere  shelter,  food,  and  attendance  were  to
be  afforded  to  as  large  a  number  of  sufferers  as  possible.  In  times  of  pesti-
lence, the  buildings  would  be  crowded  to  excess,  as  we  have  seen  in  the  case
of  the  Irish  workliouses  during  the  famine  of  1847.  And  who  can  tell  how
much  of  the  dire  loss  of  human  life  in  the  Middle  Ages  and  during  the  great
Irish  calamity  alluded  to  was  due  to  benevolence  misdirected.

One  of  the  most  striking  illustrations  of  the  results  of  absence  of  know-
ledge on  these  subjects  is  afforded  by  the  experience  of  the  Hotel  Dieu,  at
Paris.  By  the  statutes  of  its  foundation,  'all  applicants'  were  to  be  'admitted.'
It  had  1 200  beds,  and  towards  the  end  of  the  last  century  these  beds  used  to
receive  at  the  same  time  from  2000  to  5000  sick.  During  epidemics  as  many
as  7000  sick  have  been  in  the  building  at  one  time.  From  20,000  to  30,000
sick  passed  through  the  hospital  every  year,  about  25  per  cent,  of  whom  were
carried  to  the  cemeteries.  In  the  other  hospitals  of  Paris  the  mortaKty  was
about  12^  per  cent,  of  the  sick.

The  excuse  for  the  enormous  mortality  of  the  Hotel  Dieu  was  the  same  as
that  which  is  put  forward  by  ill,  and  even  by  many  well-informed  persons  at
the  present  day  for  the  high  rate  of  mortality  in  civil  hospitals,  and,  during
war,  in  military  hospitals,  viz.,  that  only  the  worst  cases  were  sent  there,  and
that  they  were  sent  there  only  to  die.

The  frightful  over-crowdiug  and  bad  ventilation,  with  the  absence  of  every
sanitary  precaution,  were,  however,  the  real  causes  of  the  catastrophe  in  the
Hotel  Dieu,  just  as  the  frightful  over-crowding,  the  want  of  ventilation,
defective  di-ainiug,  and  want  of  cleanliness,  were  the  real  causes  of  the  catas-
trophe at  Scutari.

Both  catastrophes  led  to  great  discussion  and  inquii-y  on  tlie  part  of  bene-
volent and  intelligent  men.  In  the  Crimea  the  Sanitary  Commission  was  the
result ;  in  the  ease  of  the  Hotel  Dieu,  it  resulted  eventually  in  the  introduc-
tion into  Prance  of  the  greatest  improvements  in  hospital  construction  and
management  which  have  taken  place  up  to  the  present  time.  In  these  cases
great  good  came  out  of  great  evil.  Prom  the  Scutari  case  it  is  also  hoped,
that  great  permanent  improvements  wiU  arise  in  military  hospitals ;  and  it  will
be  well,  if  the  experience  of  our  own  civil  hospitals  should  lead  to  similar
results.

Let  any  one  conversant  with  the  phenomena  of  disease  go  into  a  badly-
constructed,  and,  consequently,  ill-ventilated  ward,  and  look  at  the  sick.
Unless  his  senses  are  dulled  by  perverse  education,  he  will  detect  that  peculiar
musty  smell  which  always  indicates  more  danger  to  the  sick,  than  there  is
safety  contained  in  the  long  list  of  benevolent  and  eminent  physicians  and
expert  surgeons  who  attend  in  the  wards.

Let  him  look  at  the  languid  powerless  character  of  the  patients,  and  ask
lujnself  the  question.  What  would  be  the  effect  of  fresh  air  upon  these  pool-
sufferers  ?

Let  him  ask  if  nurses,  or  doctors,  or  medical  students  are  ever  seized  with
fever;  and  he  may  elicit  some  facts  which  will  astonish  him.

Let  him  go  into  the  surgical  wards  and  ask  whether  wounds  heal  kindly,
whether  operations  succeed,  whether  hospital  gangrene  ever  appears,  whether
erysipelas  is  common,  whether  purulent  ulcerations  and  discharges  are  apt  to
take  place  ?

In  the  new  surgical  part  of  the  Edinburgh  Infirmary  he  will  be  answered  that
'  hospital  gangrene  is  never  out  of  the  wards  if  full.'  In  the  double  wards  of
Guy's  Hospital,  in  London,  he  will  be  told  that  they  are  only  fit  for  medical
cases. In  the  Scutari  hospitals,  he  would  have  learned  that  out  of  44  secondary


on  Hospital  Sites  and  Construction.  G3

amputations,  36,  or  upwards  of  80  per  cent,  died ;  that  in  one  month  tliere
have  been  recorded  80  cases  of  hospital  gangrene  !

To  questions  concerning  the  appearance  of  hospital  fever  among  patients
and  attendants,  the  inquirer  will  also  be  answered  too  truly  in  the  affirmative ;
and  very  likely  lie  will  be  told  at  the  same  time,  'that  it  is  nothing  more  than
is  to  be  expected,  considering  the  kind  of  cases  received  into  hospital.'
This  was  the  reply  at  Scutari,  this  is  the  general  reply  as  to  all  casualties  of
the  kind  occurring  in  bad  hospitals,  civil  and  military.  In  fact,  nature  alone
is  to  blame,  according  to  these  authorities,  or  else  'contagion'  is  the  cause.

Nature  is  never  to  blame.  If  the  cases  be  bad  as  possible,  all  the  more
necessity  is  there  for  care  in  placing  them  where  they  may  have  a  moderate
chance  to  recover.

To  place  patients  in  musty  wards  is  simply  to  kill  them,  with  the  addition  of
torture.

The  great  army  surgeon,  Sir  John  Pringle,  knew  this  quite  well  when  he
asserted  that  hospitals  were  amongst  the  chief  causes  of  the  mortality  of
armies.  We  may  safely  extend  this  remark,  and  say  that  badly  constructed
civil  hospitals  and  other  charitable  institutions  increase  the  mortality  of
districts.

We  may  take  this  for  granted, — that  no  hospital  ought  to  yield  a  mortality
on  its  sick  treated  of  seven  to  ten  or  eleven  per  cent.,  as  is  the  case  with  our
existing  metropolitan  hospitals.  A  certain  per  centage  of  deaths  is  inevitable,
but  not  a  per  centage  such  as  this.

Again,  the  whole  doctrine  of  contagion,  in  the  case  of  fevers,  maybe  said
to  rest  on  no  stronger  foundation  than  the  observation  of  facts  in  badly-
constructed  and  ill-ventilated  hospitals,  where  emanations  from  the  sick  play
a  corresponding  part  to  the  emanations  from  cesspools  and  other  nuisances,  in
producing  fevers  out  of  hospitals.  Both  classes  of  emanations  may  become
fatal  or  remain  innocuous,  but  all  depends  on  the  extent  to  which  they  are
diluted  in  pui-e  atmospheric  air.  A  few  fever  cases  in  a  crowded,  ill-ventilated
ward  may  spread  fever ;  but  in  a  well-ventilated  hospital,  with  plenty  of  cubic
space,  they  certainly  will  not.  The  mortality  in  some  of  our  best-constructed
fever  hospitals  is  enormous,  and  indicates  of  itself  how  much  they  stand  in
need  of  improvement.

When  fever,  erysipelas,  or  gangrene  spreads  in  any  hospital,  such  an  event
is  no  proof  of  '  contagion'  or  inevitable  '  infection.'  On  the  contrary,  it  is
Nature's  method  of  teaching  men  that  her  laws  are  being  neglected.  If  a
medical  officer,  or  nurse,  has  fallen  victim  to  the  disease,  we  may  be  quite  sure
tiiat  the  disease  is  not  to  blame,  but  those  who  failed  to  observe  and  to  obey
tlie  laws  by  which  the  disease  is  infallibly  prevented  from  extending  itself.

Hospital,  sites  and  plans  should  be  selected  in  strict  conformity  with
Nature's  laws  ;  and  not  till  this  is  done  will  the  outcry  against  hospital  con-
tagions cease.

CONSTRUCTION  OF  HOSPITALS.— THE  GROUND

PLAN.

'  TTOSPITALS,'  wrote  an  eminent  French  physician  of  the  last  century,
XX  '  ai-e  a  curse  to  civilization.'
'  Hospitals,'  said  Sir  John  Pringle, '  are  among  the  chief  causes  of  mortality
in  armies.'

It  is  not  sickness,  nor  defective  medical  treatment,  nor  bungling  surgical


94  Appendix

operations,  which  the  great  surgeon  blames  for  the  mortality.  The  medical
treatment  may  be  of  the  most  perfect  order,  and  yet  be  of  little  avail,  if  the
buildings  are  bad  or  are  overcrowded.  Given  a  crowded,  ill-ventilated
hospital,  and  we  are  sure  to  have  a  hi"-h  mortality ;  given  the  Hotel  Dieu,
with  its  thousands  of  sick  lying  five  and  six  in  a  bed,  as  was  sometimes  the
case  seventy  or  eighty  years  ago,  and  it  is  quite  certain  that  a  fourth  part  of
aU  sick  and  wounded  who  enter  such  an  hospital  will  be  carried  out  of  it
to  the  cemeteries.  Given  an  hospital  for  fever  cases,  in  which  there  are  four
ranges  of  beds  between  the  opposite  windows,  and  no  sufficient  means  to  pre-
vent tlie  stagnation  of  air  by  changing  it  frequently,  and  we  need  not  be  sur-
prised that,  even  in  this  temperate  climate,  we  have  a  mortality  of  ten  and
eleven  per  cent,  on  the  cases  treated.*

Can  we  avoid  by  any  structural  arrangements  such  excess  of  mortality  ?
This  is  the  great  question  to  be  decided  by  hospital  architects.  Experience
replies  that  there  are  many  illustrations  of  masses  of  sick,  who,  having  been
treated  in  the  open  air,  have  escaped  with  few  deaths ;  of  large  numbers
treated  in  properly-constructed  tents,  and  in  small  wooden  huts,  who  have
also  recovered.  Even  the  famine-stricken  fever  population  of  Ireland  ex-
hibited a  marked  contrast,  in  the  small  mortality  of  cases  treated  under
hedges,  in  the  open  air,  as  compared  with  the  same  class  of  cases  treated  in
workhouses  and  in  hospitals.  In  like  manner,  iu  the  large,  but  at  first  over-
crowded, badly  drained,  and  badly-ventilated  hospitals  at  Scutari,  the  mor-
tality rose  as  high  as  42*7  per  cent,  on  cases  treated.  In  the  wooden  huts  of
the  Castle  Hospital  above  Balaklava,  which  only  held  from  fifteen  to  thirty

?atients  each,  the  mortality  was  under  three  per  cent,  of  the  cases  treated,
n  the  large  overcrowded  and  badly-ventilated  hospitals  of  the  Peninsular
army,  the  mortality  was  so  great  that  they  had  to  be  closed,  and  the  sick  to
be  subdivided  amongst  a  number  of  separate  buildings.  The  old  idea  that  fresh
air  was  dangerous,  and  that  warmth  must  be  obtained  and  preserved  even  for
small-pox  and  fever  patients,  has  been  done  away  with.  A  small-pox  patient
will  have  more  chance  of  recovery  if  placed  on  clean  straw  under  an  open  shed
and  covered  with  blankets,  than  in  many  private  rooms,  or  in  most  hospital
wards. Small-pox  eases  have  been  so  treated,  and  without  loss.

After  the  pestilential  hospitals  at  Scutari  had  been  cleansed,  ventilated,  and
regulated  according  to  the  plans  and  under  the  directions  of  the  sanitary  com-
mission, the  deaths  among  the  sick  there  did  not  much  exceed  the  deaths
among  healthy  guardsmen  at  home.

The  lesson  taught  by  all  experience  is,  therefore,  that  large  hospitals,  as


*  In  our  last  section  we  gave  the  mortality  of  hospitals  as  7  to  10  or  ri  per  cent.
So  stated,  the  mortality  appears  much  less  than  it  really  is.  The  deaths  on  cases
treated,  may  be  fairly  stated  at  7,  10,  and  1 1  per  cent.  When  the  element  ^jfj*  annum,
is  introduced,  it  must  refer  of  necessity  to  the  number  of  beds  constantly  occupied
by  sick.  And,  if  we  apply  this  test  to  the  hospitals  whose  deaths  to  cases  treated
we  have  given  above,  we  find  the  annual  mortality  mount  up  to  85,  134,  no  per
cent.  This  estimate,  however,  depends  to  a  great  extent  on  the  rapidity  with
which  the  cases  pass  through  hospital,  as  well  as  upon  the  mortality  on  the  cases
treated.  Tlie  mortality  on  the  cases  treated  in  the  metropolitan  hospitals  varies
between  four  and  a  half  per  cent,  and  nearly  sixteen  per  cent.  Even  this  enormous
mortality  is  a  trifle  when  compared  with  the  mortality  in  the  metropolitan  lunatic
asylums.  It  varies  from  9  to  10,  20,  25,  up  to  nearly  42  per  cent,  of  the  cases
which  enter  their  destructive  precincts.  Surely  there  is  *  something  rotten  in  the
state  of  Denmark. '


on  Hospital  Sites  and  Construction.  95

generally  built  and  managed,  are  destructive  of  human  life,  unless  extraordi-
nary precautions  be  taken,  and  that  it  would  be  safer,  as  a  general  rule,  in  the
absence  of  such  precautions,  to  treat  large  numbers  of  sick  in  the  open  air.
But  wc  miis^  have  hospitals,  and  it  is  only  by  subdivision  of  the  sick  among  a
number  of  separate  buildings,  by  relatively  large  cubic  space,  and  by  ample
ventilation,  that  we  can  make  hospitals  furnish  a  minimum  rate  of  mortality
and  a  minimum  duration  of  cases.

Large,  rambling,  low-roomed  buildings,  like  old  mansion-houses,  are  utterly
unfit  to  receive  sick.  Their  wards,  or  rather  their  badly-constructed,  ill-
arranged-rooms,  are  hardly  adapted  for  the  smallest  families  of  healthy  people
to  live  iu,  much  less  for  numbers  of  helpless  sick  people  to  recover  in.

Given  a  building  like  Netley  Hospital,  with  500  sick  coufiued  to  bed  under
one  roof,  in  a  series  of  cells  communicating  with  each  other  by  corridors  and
staircases,  and  wc  have  uot  our  own  intelligence  to  thauk  if  the  sick  are  not  car-
ried off  by  hospital  epidemics.  There  is  a  certain  ratio  between  the  number  of
sick  placed  in  a  building,  and  the  amount  of  niortality.  We  know  that,  of  the
sick  who  were  treated  in  the  Crimea,  almost  exposed  to  the  elements,  during
the  frightful  winter  of  1854-55,  not  above  one-half  so  many  in  proportion  died,
as  perished  in  the  great  hospitals  at  Scutari  during  the  same  time.  In  the
Crimea,  the  sick  were  aggregated,  twenty  or  thirty  together.  Iu  the  hos-
pitals at  Scutari,  there  were,  at  one  time,  crowded  under  one  roof,  upwards
of  4000  sick,  wounded,  and  healthy  men.  The  subdivision  of  the  sick
and  wounded  should  therefore  be  made  a  primary  object  iu  all  hospital
construction.

To  what  extent  should  this  subdivision  be  carried  ?  We  apprehend  that
the  point  must  be  determined  by  the  twofold  consideration  of  uniting  the
greatest  advantages  as  to  health,  with  the  greatest  facilities  as  to  adminis-
tration and  economy.

And,  first,  we  woidd  lay  down  the  principle  that  no  hospital  should  be
more  than  two  flats  in  height.  By  such  a  construction,  the  sick  are  spread
over  a  wider  area,  the  walls  are  not  so  high  as  to  interfere  with  sunlight  and
ventilation  of  neighbouring  pavilions,  the  accumulation  of  hospital  miasms  in
upper  flats  is  avoided,  access  to  the  wards  is  easier  for  patients  and  attendants,
and  the  whole  administration  is  much  facilitated.  '  It  will  cost  a  great  sum  for
land  to  build  an  hospital  with  ouly  two  flats,'  will  say  the  hospital  economist.
No  doubt  it  will  cost  more  money  to  accommodate  a  given  number  of  sick  in  an
hospital  of  two  than  in  one  of  foiu  flats.  But  the  question  has  been  discussed
and  decided  notwithstanding,  that  the  hospital  of  two  flats  is  better  than  one
of  additional  stories,  and  many  hospitals  of  two  flats  have  been  built.  Those
of  St.  Jean  and  St.  Pierre,  at  Brussels,  have  eacn  two  flats,  and  land  is  dear
enough  in  Brussels.  In  this  country  also,  land,  in  towns,  has  been  used  for
building  hospitals  of  two  flats  high.  But  even  admitting  the  argument  of  the
expensiveness  of  land  as  being  entirely  valid,  the  conclusion  is  certainly,  not
that  hospitals  three  and  four  flats  high  should  be  built  in  towns ;  but  that  hos-
pitals should  be  built  in  the  country  where  land  is  less  expensive.  It  is  little
else  than  a  breach  of  trust  to  build  great  lofty  architectural  structures  merely
to  flatter  the  bad  taste  of  committees  or  governors ;  or  to  place  the  hospital
in  a  close  unhealthy  neighbourhood,  to  suit  the  convenience  of  medical
attendants,  when  the  object  of  the  whole  ought  to  be,  recovery  of  the  sick.

The  number  of  sick  which  may  be  safely  placed  under  one  roof  will,  to  a
certain  extent,  be  determined  by  the  local  position  of  the  hospital,  by  the
amount  of  cubic  space  allotted  to  the  patients,  and  by  the  state  of  ventilation.
In  the  most  recent  hospitals  the  number  varies  considerably. Thus,  in  the


96  Appendix

Royal  Marine  Hospital,  which  is  at  present  being  erected  at  Woolwich,  84
sick  are  to  be  accommodated  under  one  roof.  In  the  proposed  hospital  at
Aldershott  there  will  be  arrangements  for  abont  100.  In  each  of  the  hospital
blocks  at  Beaujon,  in  Paris,  there  are  arrangements  for  60  sick.  In  the
magnificent  Hospital  Lariboisiere,  at  Paris,  the  number  is  102  per  block.  At
the  Hospital  St.  Jean,  at  Brussels,  it  is  about  88.

Too  great  a  subdivision  of  sick  must  necessarily  incur  an  increase  of  cost
in  administration  and  nursing.  On  examining  the  experience  of  all  these
hospitals,  we  are  of  opinion  that  from  100  to  120  sick  may  be  safely  and
economically  treated  under  one  roof,  provided  the  ventilation  and  cubic  space
be  sufficient,  and  the  structure  and  communications  of  the  building  be  so
arranged  as  to  facilitate  the  administration  and  nursing.

The  next  important  question  is,  how  to  arrange  buUdings  so  as  to  have
pure  air  outside  and  inside  the  structure.

The  air  must  be  *  moving  air '  in  mass.  The  motion  of  the  air  in  any  room
should  never  exceed  a  velocity  of  two  feet  and  a  half  per  minute,  and  should
not  be  at  any  time  much  below  this  rate.  There  must  be  no  '  stagnation.'  It
is  a  great  error  to  imagine  that  because  buildings  are  erected  around  a  large
court,  therefore  they  are  airy  enough.  A  court,  with  high  walls  round  it,
does  one  thing  with  certainty, — it  stagnates  the  air.  All  closed  courts,  narrow
culs-de-sae,  high  adjacent  walls,  closed  angles,  overshadowing  trees,  and  other
obstructions  to  outer  ventilation  should  be  sedulously  avoided,  at  whatever
cost.  Plan  the  building  so  that  the  sunlight  can  strike  as  large  a  surface
of  it  as  possible,  and  so  that  the  air  may  move  freely  over  the  whole  external
surface.

Pigures  i,  2,  and  3  represent  arrangements  of  buildings  at  present  occu-
pied for  hospital  purposes,  which  ought  to  be  carefully  avoided.

It  may  be  considered  certain  that,  wherever  such  arrangements  exist,  injury
to  the  sick  is  so  constant  that,  were  it  practicable,  all  the  angles  should  be
opened  to  admit  of  the  circulation  of  air.

The  simplest  form  of  structure  for  ensuring  light  and  ventilation  is  to  build
hospital  wards  in  a  straight  line.  Fig.  4,  with  windows  on  both  sides,  i.e.,  back
and  front ;  the  lengthway  of  the  ward  being  the  lengthway  of  the  building,
and  the  administration  in  the  centre.  By  such  an  arrangement  as  this,  how-
ever, no  more  than  four  wards  could  be  obtained,  if  the  building  were  two
stories  high.  Por  small  hospitals  not  exceeding  120  sick  this  plan  would  be
economical  and  efficient.  The  direction  of  the  axis  of  such  a  building  should
be  from  north  to  south,  a  little  inclining  to  the  east,  which  would  ensure  the
sun  shining  on  both  sides  every  day  of  the  year,  and  would  also  protect  the
wards  from  north-east  winds.

One  staircase  would  suffice  for  an  hospital  such  as  this.  If  it  were
carried  from  the  bottom  to  the  top  of  the  building,  and  ventilated  above
the  roof,  it  would  cut  off  entirely  one  set  of  wards  from  the  other,  which
is  all  that  is  necessary  to  prevent  the  possibility  of  any  intermingling  of
foul  air.

By  adding  j)rojecting  wings  at  the  ends  of  such  a  line  of  building,  as  in  Figs.
5  and  6,  additional  ward  space  might  be  obtained.

But  additional  staircases  also  there  must  then  be  at  the  ends,  and  such  a
building  would  have  the  disadvantage  of  a  closed  angle,  although  this  would
be  of  less  consequence,  if  the  wings  were  very  short  in  proportion  to  the
length  of  the  front.

A  much  better  arrangement  is  represented  in  Fig.  7,  in  which  the  wings
are  entirely  detached  from  the  centre,  and  connected  with  it  only  by  an  open


on  Hospital  Sites  and  Construction.


97


tOO.D.


^^%lm


no.  I.


■> -i-  ■ ■


FIO.&.


98


Appendix


corridor  on  the  lower  floor.  This  is  the  plan  adopted  in  the  great  military
hospital  at  Yincennes,  and  is  a  very  good  one  for  hospitals  of  a  certain  size,
for  the  open  angles  permit  air  to  circulate  freely  round  the  building.  All  of
these  plans,  however,  have  the  disadvantage  of  not  admitting  extension  beyond
a  certain  limit.  The  only  plan  which  allows  as  much  extension  as  can  be
necessary  in  any  single  hospital  up  to  (say)  looo  sick  (beyond  which  hospital
management  becomes  very  difficult),  is  the  plan  adopted  in  the  hospital  at
Bordeaux;  or  still  better,  that  of  the  Lariboisidre  at  Paris.  In  that  fine
hospital,  each  block,  containing  102  sick,  constitutes  a  separate  hospital.
There  are  six  of  these  blocks,  which  are  arranged  parallel  to  each  other
on  two  opposite  sides  of  a  square.  And  there  are  four  blocks  containing
the  administrative  and  other  offices.  The  kind  of  arrangement  is  repi'csented
in  Fig.  8.


All  the  blocks  are  joined  together  by  a  glazed  corridor  along  the  lower
flat,  and  by  an  open  terrace  above  for  convalescents  taking  exercise.  In  such
a  building,  for  the  sake  of  sunlight,  the  axis  of  the  wards  should  run  nearly
from  north  to  south,  and  the  distance  of  the  blocks  from  each  other  should
be  about  twice  the  height  of  the  side  walls.

We  have  given  these  illustrations  of  the  arrangement,  of  hospital  buildings
to  show  the  more  recent  improvements  in  this  important  matter.  Whether
any  of  these  or  any  better  arrangement  be  adopted  in  building  an  hospital,
it  should  be  kept  in  mind  that  the  great  objects  aimed  at  are,  subdivision
of  the  sick,  free  ventilation  outside  and  inside  the  buildings,  abundance  of
light,  and  windows  on  opposite  sides  of  the  wards,  the  heads  of  the  beds  being
between  the  \Adndows.

An  hospital  for  1000  sick  ought  to  have  none  of  its  offices  in  duplicate.  It
should  have  one  kitchen,  so  situated  that  the  diets  can  be  easily  carried  to
any  ward,  and  in  the  shortest  space  of  time  to  all.  The  kitchen  should  be
separately  ventilated,  and  should  not  be  under  any  part  of  the  building  used  for
sick.  The  laundry  should  be  at  a  distance  from  the  hospital,  and  in  no  way
connected  with  it.  The  offices  of  the  administration  should  be  conveniently
situated,  not  only  for  facility  of  access,  but  for  efficiency  of  superiutendence.
This  point  was  quite  lost  sight  of  in  the  Netley  plans,  in  which,  if  the
unfortunate  governor  happened  to  be  wanted  at  the  two  extremities  of  the
building  successively,  he  would  have  to  walk  half  a  mile ;  while,  with  such  a

Elan  as  that  of  Lariboisiere,  he  could  in  the  same  time  walk  all  round  the
uildings.
No  sewer  or  drain  should  pass  under  any  part  of  the  hospital  where  there


on  Hospital  Sites  and  Construction.  99

are  sick.  Sewers  and  drains  should  be  outside,  and  free  even  of  the  external
walls ;  there  should  be  means  of  ventilation  in  abundance ;  there  should  be
means  of  inspection  and  for  flashing.  The  water-supply  should  be  of  the
purest  and  softest  description.  It  should  be  laid  over  tlie  whole  building  hot
and  cold.  This  arrangement,  together  with  that  of  lifts,  saves  the  service  of
at  least  one  attendant  to  every  thirty  sick.  For  water-supply,  there  should
be  a  water  tower  and  tank  placed  centrally,  afi'ordiugAvater  under  liigh  pressure.
The  mains  should  be  of  cast  iron,  varnished;  the  service-pipes  sliould  be  of
wrought  iron ;  there  should  not  be  any  cisterns,  but  the  supply  shoidd  be
constant.  Eire-cocks,  or  'hydrauts,'  should  be  placed  at  short  intervals.  Each
supply-tap  should  have  a  waste-sink  underneath  it,  and  these  should  be  placed
so  as  to  save  labour.  Water-closets  must  be  external,  but  near  the  wards,  and
under  such  arrangement  of  plan  as  to  prevent  any  possibility  of  atmospheric
contamination.  There  should  be  not  less  than  one  closet  to  each  ten  patients.
All  staircases  and  passages  should  be  wide,  light,  and  airy.  Tliis  is  a  most
important  consideration  in  hospitals.  The  steps  should  consist  of  stone,  but
they  may  be  covered  with  wood,  as  in  some  of  the  French  hospitals.  Stone
is  essential  to  prevent  accidents  from  fire.  All  hospitals  should  have  con-
valescent wards,  supplied  with  dining  and  day  rooms.  In  the  pavilion  structure
these  can  be  placed  under  a  separate  roof.  Casualty  wards  and  small  wards
for  special  cases  should  be  placed  in  a  separate  part  of  the  hospital.

The  square  within  the  hospital,  and  the  spaces  between  the  pavilions,  should
be  laid  out  as  garden  ground,  with  weU-drained  aud  rolled  walks,  and  shaded
seats  for  convalescents.

It  is  of  great  importance  to  provide  places  of  exercise  under  shelter,  for
patients,  to  be  appropriated  to  that  purpose  alone.  Such  recreation  and
winter-airing  grounds  may  be  comparatively  large,  aud  yet  of  cheap  con-
struction, if  roofed  on  the  Crystal  Palace  plan.  The  country  can  alone  offer
all  the  necessary  facilities  for  the  establishment  of  such  valuable  aids  to
hospitals.


HOSPITAL  CONSTRUCTION.— WARDS.

In  the  two  first  sections  on  this  subject,  we  Lave  considered  the  question
of  Sites  and  general  arrangement  of  hospital  buildings.  We  now  proceed
to  discuss  the  question  of  Ward  Arrangements,  with  reference  to  Ught,  venti-
lation, and  administration.

Without  entering  into  any  scientific  discussion  as  to  the  effects  of  light  on
organizatLou,  it  may  be  taken  as  proved,  that  light  exercises  a  peculiar  influ-
ence on  the  two  elements  of  form  and  colour.  And,  as  both  of  these  proper-
ties in  living  bodies  are  intimately  connected  with  the  reparative  processes,
we  may  safely  consider  it  as  certain  that  light  is  essential  to  the  recovery  of
the  maimed  and  sick.  Experience  in  the  more  southern  climates  of  Europe
has  determined  the  erection  of  houses  for  invalids  in  localities  exposed  to  the
fuU  glare  even  of  a  southern  sun,  with  which  the  rooms  are  flooded  through  a
greater  proportion  of  windows  than  would  be  considered  safe  by  some  of  our
medical  men  in  colder  climates.  Very  many  of  our  civil  hospitals  would  enable
experiments  to  be  instituted  as  to  the  injurious  effects  of  absence  of  light  on
peculiar  classes  of  disease.  But  the  only  experimental  evidence  we  have
hitherto  obtained  is  that  given  by  Sir  James  Wylie  in  regard  to  certain  hos-

H  2


100  Appendix

pitals  and  barracks  at  St.  Petersburg.  In  some  of  these  hospitals  there  were
rooms  without  direct  light ;  and  the  sick  and  wounded  treated  in  these  dark
chambers  yielded  only  a  fourth  part  of  the  recoveries  when  compared  with
patients  treated  in  the  light  rooms.  Nearly  twice  the  number  of  invalids,  it  was
also  found,  were  received  from  the  dark  side  of  the  barracks  as  from  the  light
side.  Dr.  Edwards,  who  has  paid  particular  attention  to  the  effect  of  light
upon  health,  has  given  equally  strong  testimony  to  its  preventive  and  curative
efficacy.

Altogether  apart  from  scientific  elements,  common  sense  would  lead  us  to
anticipate  such  results.

Now  let  us  see  how  light  is  treated  by  some  popular  physicians  and  ignorant
nurses.  In  nine  cases  out  of  ten,  a  physician  will  draw  down  the  window-
blinds,  and  half  shut  the  shutters,  while  an  ignorant  nurse  will  probably  shut
the  remainder  of  the  shutters — especially  if  it  be  a  bright  day — and  draw  the
bed-curtains.  We  have  the  positive  testimony  of  a  well-known  London  phy-
sician, given  in  his  report  to  the  Netley  committee,  that  whenever  he  enters
a  sick-room,  he  takes  care  that  the  bed  shall  be  so  placed  that  the  patient
shall  be  turned  away  from  the  light.  (See  note,  p.  io8).  After  this,  we  cannot
blame  army  medical  officers  for  not  knowing  much  about  the  matter.  An  ac-
quaintance of  ours  one  day  passing  a  barrack,  saw  the  windows  on  the  sunny
side  boarded  up  in  a  fashion  peculiar  to  prisons  and  penitentiaries.  He  said
to  a  friend  who  accompanied  him,  '  I  was  not  aware  that  you  had  a  penitentiary
in  this  neighbourhood.'  '  Oh  !'  said  he,  '  it  is  not  a  penitentiary — it  is  a  mili-
tary hospital.  There  is  a  great  horror  of  light  on  the  part  of  certain  army
medical  men.  I  suppose,'  he  added,  '  the  medical  officers  are  afraid  the  light
wiU  alter  the  shape  of  the  men,'  Not  a  few  civil  surgeons,  also,  treat  light  as
if  it  were  an  enemy.

In  the  teeth  of  all  these  popular  fallacies,  we  assert  that  every  sick  ward
should  be  capable  of  being  flooded  by  sunlight ;  and,  consequently,  that  the
windows  should  bear  a  large  proportion  to  the  wall-space  in  all  hospitals.
Experience  appears  to  prove  that  window-space  should  not  be  in  a  much  less
proportion  to  wall-space  of  an  hospital  than  one  to  two.

The  next  important  question  is,  the  quantity  of  air  required  in  an  hospital,
and  how  best  to  renew  it.

The  great  and  constant  movements  going  on  in  the  atmosphere  prove  that
the  amount  of  change  which  nature  has  provided  for  healthy  existence  is
unlimited.  The  test  of  the  ventilation  of  a  sick  ward  is  the  comparative
freshness  or  impurity  of  the  air.  The  interesting  experience  of  Lariboisiere
appears  to  prove  that  about  4000  cubic  feet  per  bed  per  hour  are  required  to
ensure  this.

There  are  two  ways  of  maintaining  the  freshness  of  the  au"  of  a  ward : —

Eirst,  by  so  constructing  a  building  that  nature  will  renew  the  air,  if  left  to
herself,  which  is  by  far  the  best  plan.

Secondly,  by  artificial  ventilation — never  to  be  used  except  as  a  pis  alter.

If  the  hospital  is  badly  planned,  or  if  fuel  be  dear,  artificial  ventilation  comes
into  beneficial  operation ;  for  it  admits  of  economical  warming,  but  it  never
freshens  a  ward  like  pure  natural  air  from  without.  Every  intelligent  physician
and  nurse  knows  the  value  of  freshness  in  the  aii-  of  a  ward.  It  is  better
oxygenated,  and,  perhaps,  contains  more  ozone.  But  whether  or  not  this  be
so,  it  is  quite  certain  that  a  condition  of  ward-air  is  secured  by  open  windows,
and  by  open  fire-places  for  warming,  which  is  never  obtained  by  the  best  ven-
tilating^ machinery,  especially  if  warm  air  be  thrown  in  by  it.

Architects  must  therefore  well  consider  how  in  every  comer  of  wards,  pas-


on  Hospital  Sites  and  Construction.  lOl

sageSj  aud  staircases,  air  is  to  be  kept  coni&i&wil-^  Jloioiiiff, — not  air  passing  in
a  stray  or  in  a  sti-oug  current,  but  air  gently  moving.

Tliis  can  only  be  clone  by  having  wards  of  a  certain  height  and  breadth,  and
by  having  a  window  for  every  two  beds,  the  windows  opposite.

We  shall  afterwards  discuss  the  questions  as  to  the  size  of  wards,  and  the
proportion  of  window-space ;  but,  in  the  meantime,  we  lay  down  a  principle
of  construction  applicable  to  all  wards,  of  whatever  size.

Few  greater  mistakes  can  be  committed  in  hospital  construction,  as  far  as
liglit  and  ventilation  are  concerned,  than  placing  the  windows  at  one  end  of  a
ward,  or  even  at  both  ends,  with  beds  ranged  down  the  sides,  their  heads  to
the  dead  wall.  No  greater  mistake,  we  had  nearly  said,  could  be  committed.
But  there  has  been  a  greater  in  the  case  of  Netley  Hospital,  where,  not  only
has  this  most  objectionable  principle  of  construction  been  adopted,  but  also
that  of  covering  the  windows  in  on  one  side  by  a  glazed  corridor.

In  an  hospital  similarly  built,  we  asked  the  medical  officer  how  his  sick,
who  were  men  in  the  prime  of  life,  recovered  ?  His  reply  was,  '  I  do  not
know  how  it  is  :  but  all  my  cases  linger.'  The  reason  why  the  cases  lingered
was  obvious  enough.  For,  in  the  first  place,  the  air  of  all  the  wards  commu-
nicated by  the  corridor ;  and,  in  the  second  place,  wards  and  corridor  were  so
arranged  that  thorough  ventilation  was  impossible.

In  another  such  hospital  we  expressed  to  the  medical  attendant  our  surprise
that  every  ward  was  so  uniformly  full  of  sick.  He  replied  that  it  did  not  arise
so  much  from  fresh  admissions,  as  from  the  fact  that  when  he  got  sick  into  the
hospital,  he  could  hardly  "ct  them  well  again.

Our  military  buildings  have  been  and  are  most  unfortunate  in  their  arrange-
ments. The  unhappy  Netley  Hospital  has  been  copied  in  its  wards  and  cor-
ridor arrangements  from  such  places  as  Chatham  Garrison  Hospital,  Woolwich
Hospital,  &c.  In  fact,  there  are  few  military  hospitals  in  which  the  error
does  not  exist  in  one  form  or  another.  It  was  hardly  to  have  been  expected
that,  given  the  same  directors,  Netley  should  have  escaped  the  same  fate.
A  great  mistake  and  a  lamentable  misfortune  is  Netley  Hospital.  But  let  us
hope  we  have  seen  the  last  of  such  fatal  blunders  in  hospital  building.  _

Having  alluded  to  military  hospitals,  we  may  say  a  word  about  regimental
hospitals.  We  have  visited  several  of  these  establishments,  and  certainly  we
can  but  consider  their  style  of  construction  as  extraordinary.  They  generally
resemble  a  small  ill-planned  village  residence,  belonging,  perhaps,  to  the
attorney  or  the  doctor.  There  are  usually  a  narrow  passage,  a  narrow  stair-
case, and  small  rooms,  in  which  the  sick  are  stewed  up  :  these  rooins  have  a
window  or  two  here  aud  there,  as  if  each  building  had  been  an  especial  victim
of  the  window-tax.  Buildings  of  this  class  have  not  such  a  thing  as  a  proper
ward.  They  have  merely  little  bedrooms,  and  everything  else  upon  a  little
scale.  As  for  light  and  ventilation  arrangements,  these  have  not  attracted
much,  if  any,  attention  on  the  part  of  the  adapter.  We  hope  that  there  may
be  some  regimental  hospitals  on  a  better  plan.  We  speak  from  a  knowledge
of  such  as  we  have  seen;  and,  judging  from  these,  we  should  say  that  a  mini-
mum of  accommodation  has  been  provided  at  a  maximum  of  expense.

Besides  arranging  for  light  and  ventilation,  all  hospital-plans  should  provide
for  the  greatest  economy  in  administration,  consistent  with  healing  of  wounds
and  recovery  of  the  sick.  There  should  be  facility  of  superintendence  and
nursing.  The  wards  should  be  of  such  a  size,  and,  if  possible,  so  arranged,
that  the  head  nurse  may  have  all  her  sick  under  her  eye  at  once,  This  is
especially  necessary  for  night-watching.  A  single  attendant  can  easily  per-
form the  duty  of  night-watching  for  many  bad  cases,  if  the  beds  are  so  placed


103  Appendix

as  to  be  seen  from  a  single  point.  The  bead  nurse's  room  sbould  bave  a
window  looking  into  her  ward.  It  is  bighly  important  tbat  patients,  wbo  must
necessarily  be  in  -various  stages  of  sickness  or  convalescence,  sboidd  feel  that
they  are  continually  under  the  eye  of  the  head  nurse.  It  is,  of  course,  most
economical  to  bave  one  ward  to  each  head  nurse.  The  ward,  therefore,  should
be  large  enough  to  occupy  her  whole  attention ;  but  not  too  large  to  render  its
ventilation  difficult.  Small  wards  cannot  be  overlooked  with  sufficient  strict-
ness, unless,  indeed,  a  head  nurse  is  to  be  set  apart  for  each — an  arrangement
which  would  enormously  increase  the  expenses  of  nursing,  without  benefiting
the  patients.

A  bead  nurse  may  adequately  superintend  a  ward  of  from  thirty  to  forty
patients.  But,  if  we  are  to  be  guided  by  the  results  of  recent  experience  in
hospital  building,  we  should  say  that  a  ward  with  thirty  sick,  or  thereabouts,
is,  upon  the  whole,  the  best  for  sanitary  reasons,  and  this  number  of  thirty
we  propose  to  fix  as  the  ward  unit  for  an  hospital.

Much  has  been  said  about  the  benefits  of  small  wards  for  from  six  to  ten
sick,  about  the  greater  comfort  and  privacy  of  such  wards,  and  the  greater
facility  for  ventilation  which  they  afford.  It  is  simply  an  error  to  assume
that  small  wards  afford  any  such  advantages.  Privacy,  in  an  hospital,  does
not  extend  beyond  any  two  adjacent  beds.  As  regards  complete  ventilation,
the  effects  of  angles  in  retarding  an  even  flow  of  air  has  not  been  sufficiently
considered.  Direct  experiment,  made  in  the  wards  of  the  Lariboisiere  Hospital,
has  proved  that  the  amount  of  air  circulating  along  the  centre  of  a  ward  is
two  or  three  times  as  great  as  it  is  near  angles.  Such  a  result  might  have
been  inferred.  But  the  important  practical  point  never  seems  to  have  been
comprehended,  that  the  difficulty  of  ventilating  a  given  cubic  space  occupied
by  sick  bears  a  direct  ratio  to  the  length  of  the  corridors  and  to  the  number
of  cells  or  'wards'  into  which  that  space  is  divided.  Unnecessary  rooms,
angles,  or  cupboards  should  be  omitted  in  any  structure.  There  should  be  no
dark  corners  in  any  part  of  an  hospital  ward.  Every  recess  or  angle  not
easily  overlooked  is  as  injurious  to  hospital  discipline  as  it  is  to  hospital  ven-
tilation. Each  pavilion  should  have  a  staircase,  wide,  roomy,  well  lighted,
and  ventilated  from  above.  The  gradients  of  the  steps  should  not  exceed  a
rise  of  5  inches  to  12  inches  tread,  to  enable  patients  to  ascend  and  descend
with  facility.  There  should  be  as  little  passage  space  as  possible,  and  none  of
it  sbould  be  dark.  The  head  nurse's  room  should  be  situated,  as  already
described,  with  one  window  opening  down  the  ward,  and  a  window  looking
into  the  open  space.  There  must  be  a  separate  scullery  for  every  ward,
adjoining  the  nurse's  room,  but  having  a  separate  entrance  and  a  sepai-ate
window  to  the  open  air.  A  lift  will  be  found  an  essential  means  of  convenience
as  weU  as  of  economy.  Each  ward  should  have  bath-room,  lavatory,  and  closets.
On  the  male  side  there  may  be  other  necessary  conveniences  attached.  The
best  situations  for  these  will  be  at  the  ends  of  the  wards,  opposite  the  entrance.
They  should  be  separated  from  the  wards  by  a  partition  wall  with  a  half  glass
door.  There  should  be  a  small  lobby,  lighted  by  a  large  window  at  the  end,
and  from  this  lobby  there  should  be  doors  opening  right  and  left — one  to  the
bath-room  and  lavatory,  the  other  to  the  closets,  &c.  The  ventilation  and
lighting  of  these  places  should  be  ample  and  independent  of  that  of  the  wards.
No  ward  requires  more  offices  than  are  here  enumerated.  (See  note,  p.  108.)
There  should  neither  be  small  wards  nor  dining-rooms  attached  to  the  large  wards.

A  ward  for  sick  should  not,  as  a  rule,  contain  convalescents.  This  class  of
patients,  under  a  proper  system  of  hospital  construction,  should  always  have
separate  accommodation.  Small  wards  for  casualty  cases,  as  already  stated,
should  be  built  separately  and  be  separately  administered.


on  Hospital  Sites  and  Construction.


103


lu  applying  these  principles  it  is  necessary,  first,  to  ascertain  what  ought
nol  to  be  done.

Figures  i,  2,  3,  and  4  represent  common  errors  in  hospital  ward  construction,
which  ought  to  be  carefully  avoided.  Figui-e  i  represents  the  arrangement  in
King's  College  Hospital  and  in  the  new  wards  at  Guy's,  London.  Figure  2  is
the  ward  arrangement  usually  carried  out  in  buildings  which  have  been  adapted
for  civil  hospitals.  It  was  aesiguedly  adopted  in  the  military  hospital,  Ports-
mouth, as  also  in  many  other  military  hospitals.  Figure  3  is  the  arrangement
in  a  few  ill-constructed  foreign  hospitals,  as  e.ff.  in  one  at  Rotterdam.  It
exists  at  Chatham  Garrison  Hospital,  and  is  to  be  perpetuated  at  the  new
Victoria  Hospital,  at  Netley. Figure  4  shows  the  kind  of  arrangement  in  the


^ '

N  S'  "'■

n

CD

tm

□

WARD H

LJ

IZU

^

n

riff.  I.


Fig.  2.


Fig.  4.


104


Appendix


wards  and  corridors  in  the  old  Royal  Marine  Hospital  at  Woolwich.  These
diagrams  do  not  pretend  to  extreme  accuracy;  they  simply  indicate  the
arrangement.

These  plans  should  be  avoided  for  the  future  in  hospital  construction.  They
are  contrary  to  every  sound  principle  of  sanitary  construction,  and  can  only  be
kept  free  from  hospital  epidemics  by  the  greatest  possible  care, — hardly  even
with  that.

We  shall  next  state  what  ought  to  be  done  in  applying  the  principles  of
hospital  construction  we  have  laid  down.

The  best  principle  of  hospital  construction  is,  as  has  long  been  urged,  that
of  separate  pavilions  placed  side  by  side,  or  in  line.  The  former  is  preferable
for  large  hospitals,  for  the  reasons  stated  in  our  last  paper.  The  distance
between  the  blocks  should  be  double  their  height.  There  should  be  two  flats
in  a  pavilion,  and  one  ward  to  a  flat.

The  hospital  should  be  erected  to  form  a  square ;  the  basement  story  of  the
pavilions  being  connected  by  a  corridor,  and  the  whole  of  the  basements  erected
on  arches.

The  wards  should  hold  from  twenty  to  thirty  sick :  each  bed  should  have
from  1500  to  2000  cubic  feet  of  air  space  allotted  to  it.

The  following  table  exhibits  the  proportions  of  a  ward  for  thirty-two  patients.
The  first  column  gives  the  proportions  of  such  a  ward  in  the  Lariboisiere  Hos-
pital ;  the  second,  the  proportions  adapted  to  a  larger  cubical  space,  such  as
IS  given  in  our  best  hospitals  in  this  country : —


Feet. In.


Feet. In.


Length  of  ward

Breadth .

Height

Wall  spaces  between  end  walls  and  windows

Breadth  of  windows

Breath  of  wall  space  between  windows . .
Height  of  windows

Cubic  space  per  bed


Ill

30

17

5

4

9

X3


128

30

17

6

4
II

^3


1760


2100


It  is  imdesirable  to  increase  the  width  of  any  ward  beyond  30  feet,  because
the  distance  between  the  opposite  windows  becomes  then  too  great  for  efficient
ventilation.

The  proportions  of  a  ward  for  twenty  patients  might  be  80  feet  long,  by
25  feet  wide,  and  16  feet  high.  This  would  give  about  t6oo  cubic  feet  to
each  bed.

One  window  at  least  should  be  allotted  to  every  two  beds.  There  are  hos-
pitals with  a  window  to  each  bed.  The  windows  should  be  double,  or  be
glazed  with  plate-glass,  to  prevent  loss  of  heat.  Tripartite  windows,  like  those
of  Middlesex  Hospital,  are  useful  for  ventilation.  The  ward  walls  should  con-
sist of  pure  white  polished  Parian  cement,  or  some  other  equally  white  non-
absorbent  substance.  Grey-coloured  cements  should  be  avoided :  they  never
look  clean ;  they  give  the  ward  a  sombre  appearance,  and  they  hide  dirt.  The
best  ward  flooring  is  oak. No  sawdust  nor  other  organic  matter,  capable  of


on  Hospital  Sites  and  Construction.
DESIGN  EOR  A  PAVILION  HOSPITAL.


105


CORRIDOR,


sew  En
JO ao to lo so (0 70


Sett


Fig.  5-


A.  Ward  Closets.

B.  Bath  and  Lavatory.

C.  Lift  in  Scullery.


D.  Private  Closet.

E.  Ornamental  Ground.

Ward  Windows  to'be  4  ft.  8  in.  in  the  clear.


106  Appendix

rotting,  should  be  placed  underneath  hospital  floors.  The  joints  of  the  floor-
ing should  be  well  fitted  together,  so  as  to  be  impervious.  Floors  should  be
bees-waxed,  or  oiled  and  polished.  The  general  baths  of  the  hospital  should  be
separated  from  the  pavilions,  but  connected  with  the  corridor.  They  should
contain  hot  and  cold  Avater,  sulphureous,  medicated,  hot  air,  vapour,  shower,
and  douche  baths.  The  kitchen  should  have  walls  and  ceiling  of  Parian
cement.

There  should,  as  stated,  be  a  head-nurse's  room  and  scullery  attached  to
each  ward,  and  store  presses  in  each  ward.  _  <

"  The  bedsteads  should  be  of  iron.  The  ward  furniture  should  be  of  oak.
The  arrangements  for  water  supply  and  drainage  were  discussed  in  a  previous
article.  We  have  also  pointed  out  already  the  best  position  for  closets,  lava-
tories, ward-baths,  &c.

The  ward  construction,  now  described,  is  that  which,  up  to  the  present  time,
experience  has  shown  to  be  best  suited  for  fulfilling  all  the  requirements  of
ventilation,  light,  cheerfulness,  recovery  of  health,  and  economy,  in  this  country.
It  is  embodied  in  the  plan.  Kg.  5.

One  great  advantage  of  the  proposed  system  of  construction  is,  that  it  admits
of  any  arrangement  of  the  pavilions  on  plan,  which  is  consistent  with  light  and
ventilation.  Hospital  establishments,  so  constructed,  may  be  added  to  without
difficulty  and  without  altering,  or  indeed  without  interfering  with  any  of  the
existing  pavilion  buildings.

The  principles  of  hospital  construction  which  we  have  now  laid  before  our
readers  are  a  tacit  condemnation  of  the  majority  of  hospitals  in  the  three  king-
doms. It  may  be  thought  by  some  of  our  readers  that  we  have  expressed  our
opinions  somewhat  strongly.  We  have  considered  it  necessary  to  do  so,  be-
cause, as  we  have  shown,  large  hospitals  are]even  now  being  built  in  defiance  of
the  most  ordinary  sanitary  principles,  as  to  site  and  plan ;  and  men  have  been
found  to  defend  these  errors.  Another  opportunity  is  now  afforded  of  re-
tracing our  steps.  The  noble  bequest  of  Mr.  Morley  for  the  foundation  of  a
convalescent  establishment  in  the  country,  near  Loudon,  may  be  a  great  prac-
tical advance  in  the  right  direction ;  and  it  behoves  the  governors  of  St.
George's  Hospital  to  take  care  that  an  institution  of  such  importance  is  con-
structed so  as  to  realize  the  benevolent  intention  of  its  founder.

Most  of  the  great  hospital  and  charitable  institutions  in  this  country  were
suburban  at  their  foundation ;  the  rapid  growth  of  our  towns  in  modern  times
has  encroached  so  much  upon  space  once  country,  that  gardens  and  fields  have
been  absorbed,  and  are  now  covered  by  bricks  and  mortar ;  and  hospitals  are
surrounded  by  the  screaming  and  roaring  traffic  of  railways,  street  cabs,  omni-
buses, and  wagons.  It  is  due  to  the  benevolent  founders  of  our  great  chari-
table institutions,  that  their  humane  intentions  should  continue  to  be  realized
by  removing  the  sick  and  maimed  to  pure  air  and  quiet.  It  is  due  to  poor
suffering  humanity  that  any  plans  adopted  should  be  the  most  perfect  modern
intellect  can  devise ;  and  it  is  no  less  due  to  the  cause  of  charity  that  there
should  be  the  best  and  most  economical  form  of  hospital  nursing  and
management.

The  following  is  a  summary  of  the  principles  of  hospital  construction  con-
tained in  this  and  preceding  papers  : —

1 .  Never  erect  a  general  hospital  within  the  precincts  of  a  town,  or  in
suburbs  likely  to  be  built  upon.

2.  Remove  all  large  hospital  establishments  out  of  town,  or  from  populous
suburbs,  as  soon  as  possible.

3.  Build  all  hospitals  in  the  country,  on  areas  of  ground  sufficient  to  admit


on  Hospital  Sites  and  Construction.  107

of  extensions  of  the  buildings,  and  to  prevent  other  buildings  from  beino-
erected  within  such  a  distance  as  shall  interfere  with  a  free  circulation  of  air
and  with  quiet.

4.  Select  a  dry  and  mild  climate.

5.  Give  the  preference  to  a  porous  self-draining  sub-soil,  and  avoid  ground
saturated  with  organic  matter,  especially  old  graveyards.

6.  Build  all  hospitals  on  arches,  to  admit  of  a  free  circulation  of  air  under-
neath the  ward  floors.

7.  Let  the  plan  be  simple,  and  have  as  few  closed  angles  and  corners  as
possible.

8.  Do  not  provide  for  more  than  120  patients  or  beds,  under  one  double
pavilion  roof.  If  the  hospital  must  contain  a  larger  number  of  beds,  increase
the  number  of  pavilions,  but  on  no  account  increase  their  size.  Connect  the
pavilions  by  corridors  running  between  the  ends,  and  no  higher  than  the
ground-floor.

9.  Plau  any  hospital  with  no  more  than  two  flats,  containing,  in  a  sino-le
pavilion,  two  supenmposed  wards.  Provide  for  convalescents  and  '  casualty'
cases  in  pavilions  separate  from  the  ordinary  sick.

TO.  Provide  for  no  more  than  32  beds  in  a  ward— 16  on  each  side,  with  a
window  to  every  two  beds.

11.  Let  the  window  spaces  be,  as  near  as  may  be,  in  the  proportion  of  one
to  two  of  the  wall-space.  The  windows  should  reach  from  within  3  feet  of
the  floor  to  within  i  foot  of  the  ceiling.

12.  Wards  should  not  exceed  30  feet  in  width.

13.  Each  bed  should  have  from  1500  to  2000  cubic  feet  of  air  space.

In  very  exposed  and  airy  situations  the  smaller  cubic  space  will  suffice ;
but  where,  from  the  nature  of  the  ground,  there  is  not  likely  to  be  much
horizontal  external  movement  of  the  atmosphere,  the  larger  the  internal  cubic
space  is  the  better.

14.  Trust  for  pavilion  ventilation  to  open  windows  and  fireplaces.  Artificial
methods  are,  in  this  climate,  unnecessary,  with  proper  construction.

15.  Place  water-closets,  ward-baths,  and  lavatories,  at  the  far  end  of  a
ward,  opposite  the  entrance,  and,  in  addition  to  ventilating  them,  cut  them
entirely  off  from  the  ward  by  a  separately -ventilated  and  lighted  lobby.

16.  Restrict  the  ward  offices  to  a  nurse's  room  and  scullery,  with  a  lift.

17.  Let  staircases  be  wide,  roomy,  and  thoroughly  ventilated  up  to  the
roof.  Construct  the  stairs  and  entrance-lobbies  of  stone,  and  cover  them
with  wood.

t8.  Make  hospital  floors  of  oak,  and  walls  and  ceilings  of  pure  white  polished
cement.

19.  Supply  hospitals  with  water  at  high  pressure,  and  lay  it  on,  hot  and
cold,  over  the  whole  of  the  buildings.

20.  All  sewers  and  drains  must  be  outside,  and  detached  from  the  walls
of  the  buildings.  Provide  for  their  ventilation  at  a  distance  from  the  wards,
and  also  for  their  inspection  and  flushing.

2 1 .  Provide  garden  ground  for  exercise  with  properly  drained  and  gravelled
walks,  sheltered  seats  for  convalescents,  and,  where  practicable,  a  prome-
nade covered  with  glass  for  use  in  bad  weather.

Other  matters  of  detail,  regarding  kitchens,  washhouses,  rooms  for  hospital
administration,  &c.,  can  be  best  decided  on  according  to  local  circumstances ;
but  none  of  these  should  ever  be  under  the  same  roof  with  the  sick.

The  pubKc  hospitals  of  any  countrjr  may  fairly  be  taken  as  a  standard  of
the  knowledge  and  care  of  the  governing  "body,  or  of  civilization  amongst  a


108  Appendix  on  Hospital  Sites  and  Construction.

people.  Commercial  wealth,  political  freedom,  and  education  ought  to  enable
the  inhabitants  of  Great  Britain  to  set  an  example  in  this  respect.  Life  is  of
more  value  in  the  British  empire  than  in  any  other  part  of  the  globe,  and  the
means  to  secure  it  to  the  latest  periods  ought  to  be  sought  out  and  put  in
practice.  Let  us  reform  our  hospitals  now ;  and,  as  we  improve  our  cities
and  towns,  they  will  be  less  required.


Note  to  Page  ioo.

To  show  the  want  of  acquaintance  with  the  influence  of  light  on  recovery  evinced
by  otherwise  intelligent  members  of  the  medical  profession,  it  is  only  necessary  to
quote  the  following  passage  from  page  125  of  the  report  on  Netley  Hospital,  1858  :
'  In  the  side  chambers  of  private  patients  medical  men  generally  enjoin  that  the
bed  should  be  placed  in  any  other  position  rather  than  opposite  a  window.'  We
are  glad  to  know  that  there  are  medical  men  who  entertain  far  more  just  and  en-
lightened views  as  to  the  influence  of  light  on  disease.


Note  to  Page  102.

It  is  important,  for  the  purposes  of  discipline,  to  isolate  as  much  as  possible  the
nursing  staff  of  each  ward.  The  head  nurse  should  be  within  reach  and  view  of
her  ward  both  by  day  and  night.  Associating  the  assistant  nurses  in  large  dormi-
tories tends  to  con-upt  the  good  and  make  the  bad  worse.  Accommodation  for  the
assistant  nurses  of  each  ward  separate  should  therefore  be  found  in  each  paviUon.
This  may  easily  be  done  in  the  roof  over  the  front  part,  and  the  great  staircase  of
each  pavilion.  In  doing  this,  care  must  be  taken  that  the  night  nurse  shall  have
quiet  to  sleep  by  day. She  should  have  a  room  to  herself.


THE END;
