*mi


V


TORONTO  6,  CANADA


THE LOVES OF
LAILI AND MAJNUN


The  course  of  true  love  never  did  run  smooth.

Lovers  and  madmen  have  such  seething  brains,
Such  shaping  fantasies,  that  apprehend
More  than  cool  reason  comprehends.

Shakespeare.


THE LOVES OF

LAILI AND MAJNUN

A POEM FROM THE ORIGINAL
PERSIAN OF NIZAMI: BY

JAMES ATKINSON, ESQ.

OF THE HONOURABLE EAST INDIA

COMPANY'S MEDICAL SERVICE

EDITED BY

THE REV. J. A. ATKINSON

M.A.,  D.C.L.,  VICAR  OF  BOLTON
HONORARY CANON OF

-MANCHESTER


LONDON

Published  by  DAVID  NUTT

in the Strand

1894


Edinburgh  :  T.  and  A.  Constaele.  Printers  to  Her  Majesty


EDITOR'S PREFACE

My  father's  translation  of  Nizami's  poem,  Laili
and  Majnun,  was  published  by  the  Oriental
Translation  Fund  in  1836.

NizamI,  Nizam-ud-dln-Abu  Muhammad  Uyas
B.  Yusuf,  is  said  to  have  been  born  in  the  year  of
the  Hegira  535,  either  at  Tafnish,  in  the  province
of  Kum,  or  at  Ganjah,  a  town  of  Arran,  now
Elisabetpol.  The  greater  part  of  his  life  was
spent  at  Ganjah,  where  he  died  in  a.h.  599  =
A.D.  1202,  in  his  64th  year.

His  writings  are  called  the  '  Panj  Ganj,'  '  The
Five  Treasures  :  '

1.  Makhzan-ul-Asrdr=The  Storehouse  of  Mys-

teries. Moral  and  religious  maxims,  illus-
trated by  anecdotes,  written  about  a.h.
570.

2.  Khosru  and  Shlrhi,  A.H.  576.

3.  Laili  and  Majnun,  his  masterpiece,  written


vi THE  LOVES  OF  LAILI  AND  MAJNUN

at  the  request  of  the  Shirvim  Shfih,
Akhsatfm,  son  of  Minuchehr,  A.H.  584  =
a.d.  1188,  consisting  of  four  thousand
couplets,  which  were  completed  in  four
months.

4.  Haft  Paikar =The Seven Images. Seven

tales  told  by  the  seven  favourites  of  the
king,  Bahram  Gur. a.h.  593.

5.  Iskandar  Nameh=Tlie  Book  of  Alexander.

In  two  parts  :  the  career  of  Alexander  (1)
as  Conqueror, (2) as sage  and prophet.
a.h.  597.
Sir  "William  Jones  says  :  'The  beautiful  poem
on the  loves  of Laili  and  Majnun  by  the  im-
mortal Nizami  (to  say  nothing  of  other  poems  on
the  same  subject)  is  indisputably  built  on  true
history,  yet  avowedly  allegorical  and  mj-sterious ;
for  the  introduction  to  it  is  a  continued  rapture
on  Divine  Love  ;  and  the  name  of  Laili  seems  to
be  used  in the  Masnavi  and the  Odes  of  Hafiz
for  the  Omnipresent  Spirit  of  God.'

The  late  Sanscrit  Professor  at  Oxford  (Horace
Hayman  Wilson)  referred  to  my  father's  transla-
tion as  a  '  poetical  version  of  the  celebrated  poem
of  Nizami on  the  loves  of Laili  and Majnun,


EDITOR'S  PREFACE  vii

mystified  as  the  reciprocal  affection  of  body  and
soul.  This  is  perhaps  the  most  carefully  finished
of  Mr.  Atkinson's  translations,  and  conveys  a
pleasing  and  sufficiently  faithful  representation
of  the  original.'

The  fame  of  Nizami's  poem  in  the  East,  and
my  father's  version  being  a  '  sufficiently  faithful
representation  of  the  original,'  has  induced  me  to
prepare  a  new  edition,  with  a  view  of  introducing
it  to  the  general  reader,  the  publications  of  the
Oriental  Translation  Fund  having  had  only  a
limited  circulation.

The  MS.  of  Laill  and  Majnun  used  by  my
father  is  in  my  possession.  Dr.  Charles  Rieu,  of
the  British  Museum,  says :  '  The  text  is  evi-
dently due  to  the  pen  of  an  accomplished  Persian
caligrapher ;  it  cannot  be  later  than  A.H.  971  =
a.d.  1563,  for  that  date  appears  on  a  seal  facing
the  first  miniature.  The  miniatures  are  in  the
most  highly  finished  Indian  style.  The  subjects
are  : — 1.  The  father  of  Majnun  takes  him  to
the  Kaba.  2.  Laili  going  to  the  palm-grove.
3.  Noufal  attacking  Laili's  tribe ;  Majnun  throwing
stones  at  Noufal's  troops.  4.  Majnun  redeeming
the  deer  from  the  huntsman. 5.  Ibn  Salam  in


viii THE  LOVES  OF  LAILI  AND  MAJNUN

Laili's  bedchamber  ;  she  gives  him  such  a  slap
that  he  falls  senseless  to  the  ground.  6.  Majniin
making  friends  with  the  wild  beasts.  7.  The
King  of  Mero  throws  a  youth,  bound  hand  and
foot,  to  the  dogs,  who  do  not  hurt  him ;  the  dog-
keepers  look  on  amazed.  8.  Selim  talking  to
Majniin. 9.  Majniin  dying  on  the  tomb  of  Laili.'

Dr.  Charles  Kieu  further  says  :  '  Nizami  is
considered  in  the  East  as  a  most  holy  man,  and
I  think  any  spiritual  interpretation  is  fully  justi-
fied by  the  known  character  of  the  poet ; '  and
of  my  father's  version  he  adds  :  '  No  man  has  so
felicitously  rendered  in  English  the  spirit  of  the
Persian  poet.'

My  father,  James  Atkinson,  was  born  at  Dar-
lington, March  9th,  1780,  and  early  exhibited  a
remarkable  talent  for  portrait-painting.  He  was
enabled,  by  the  kindness  of  a  friend,  to  study
medicine  at  Edinburgh.  Whilst  a  student  there
he  published  Rodolpho,  a  romantic  poem,  dedi-
cated to  Lady  Charlotte  Campbell.  He  went  to
India  as  medical  officer  of  an  East  Indiaman,  and
was  appointed  assistant-surgeon  in  the  Bengal
Medical  Service  in  1805.  He  was  several  years
Assistant  Assay  Master  at  the  Mint, Calcutta,


EDITOR'S  PREFACE  ix

and  edited  the  Government  Gazette  and  the  Press.
For  a  short  time  he  filled  the  Deputy  Chair  of
Persian  in  Fort  William  College.  His  literary
and  artistic  abilities  gained  for  him  the  friend-
ship of  successive  Governors-General.  In  the
first  Affghan  War  he  was  Superintending  Surgeon
of  the  Army  of  the  Indus,  and  received  the
order  of  the  Dooranee  Empire.  He  retired  in
1847,  after  forty-two  years'  service,  and  died  in
London,  August  7th,  1852.

My  father's  publications  indicate  his  industry
and  varied  accomplishments  : — Rodolpho,  1801 ;
Sohrab,  1814;  Hatim  Tye,  1818;  The  Aubid,  an
Eastern  poem,  1819  ;  contributions  to  the  Cal-
cutta Annual  Register,  1821-2  ;  Ricchiarda,  a  trans-
lation from  Ugo  Foscolo,  1823;  Prospectus  of
the  Calcutta  Liberal,  1824;  The  City  of  Palaces,
and  other  Poems,  1824  ;  La  Secchia  Rapita  (The
Rape  of  the  Bucket),  a  translation  from  Alessandro
Tassoni,  1825  ;  Description  of  the  New  Process  of
Perforating  and  Destroying  the  Stone  in  the  Bladder,
1831  ;  The  Shah  Namch  of  Firdausi,  translated
and  abridged,  published  by  the  Oriental  Trans-
lation Fund,  and  awarded  the  gold  medal,  1832  ;
Custom*  and  Manners  of  the Women  of  Persia,


x THE  LOVES  OF  LAILI  AND  MAJNUN

1832,  and  Laili  and  Majnun,  1836,  both  pub-
lished by  the  Oriental  Translation  Fund ;  The
Expedition  into  Affghanistan,  1842;  and  Sketches
in  Affghanistan,  fol.  1842.

In  testimony  of  my  father's  artistic  skill,  it
may  be  stated,  that  an  oil-painting  by  him  of  the
first  Earl  of  Munster  hangs  in  the  room  of  the
Eoyal  Asiatic  Society.  Portraits  by  him,  taken
from  life,  of  the  Earl  of  Minto,  the  Marquis  of
Hastings,  Lord  William  Bentinck,  Sir  William
Macnaghten,  Bart.,  Sir  Willoughby  Cotton,
Captain  Arthur  Connolly,  Professor  H.  H.
Wilson,  Flaxman  the  sculptor,  and  one  of
himself,  painted  by  himself,  are  in  the  National
Portrait  Gallery  ;  and  a  sketch  of  Edward  Irving
and  one  of  the  Earl  of  Minto  are  in  the  Scottish
National  Portrait  Gallery.

J.  A.  ATKINSON.

The  Vicarage,  Bolton,
April  9th,  1894.


TRANSLATOR'S PREFACE

The  story  of  The  Loves  of  Laili  and  Majnti.11  is
one  of  the  most  popular  in  the  East.  There  are
several  poems  on  the  same  subject  by  different
authors,  but  that  by  Nizami  is  considered  the
best ;  and  I  believe  this  is  the  first  time  it  has
appeared  in  any  European  language.

Every  nation  has  its  favourite  tales  of  love  as
well  as  chivalry.  France  and  Italy  have  their
Abelard  and  Eloisa,  their  Petrarch  and  Laura;
and  Arabia  has  its  Laili  and  Majniin,  the
beautiful  record  of  whose  sorrows  is  constantly
referred  to,  throughout  the  East,  as  an  im-
mortal example  of  the  most  faithful  love.  The
reader  will,  I  think,  be  pleased  with  the  manner
in  which  the  Persian  poet  has  depicted  the
character  of  a  frantic  lover,  and  also  the  tender
affections  of  his  Laili.  The  sentiments  will
be  found  to  differ  very  little  from  those  of  the


xii THE  LOVES  OF  LAILI  AND  MAJNUN

Western  world.  Human  nature  is  everywhere
the  same.

Nizami  was  eminently  distinguished  through
life  for  his  rigid  sanctity,  which  formed  indeed
the  peculiarity  of  his  character,  cherishing,  as  he
did  at  the  same  time,  the  amatory  or  meta-
physical sentiments  which  pervade  his  romantic
poem  of  Laili  and  Majnun.  But  he  may  have
been  a  Sufi,  and  aimed  at  describing  the  passions
of  the  soul  in  its  progress  to  eternity.  The
Odes  of  Hafiz  have  been  supposed  to  have  a
similar  spiritual  object !

In  honour  of  Nizami,  it  is  related  that  Ata
Beg  was  desirous  of  forming  and  cultivating  an
acquaintance  with  him,  and  with  that  view
ordered  one  of  his  courtiers  to  request  his
attendance.  But  it  was  replied,  that  Nizami,
being  an  austere  recluse,  studiously  avoided  all
intercourse  with  princes.  Ata  Beg,  on  hearing
this,  and  suspecting  that  the  extreme  piety  and
abstinence  of  Nizami  were  affected,  waited  upon
him  in  great  pomp  for  the  purpose  of  tempting
and  seducing  him  from  his  obscure  retreat ;  but
the  result  Avas  highly  favourable  to  the  poet;
and  the  prince  ever  afterwards  looked  upon  him


TRANSLATORS  PREFACE  xiii

as  a  truly  holy  man,  frequently  visiting  him,  and
treating  him  with  the  most  profound  respect  and
veneration.  Nizami  also  received  many  sub-
stantial proofs  of  the  admiration  in  which  his
genius  and  learning  were  held.  On  one  occasion,
five  thousand  dinars  were  sent  to  him,  and  on
another  he  was  presented  with  an  estate  con-
sisting of  fourteen  villages.  The  brief  notice  in
Dowlat  Shah's  account  of  the  Poets  of  Persia
represents  him  as  the  finest  writer  of  the  age  in
which  he  lived. Hafiz  thus  speaks  of  him  :

'  Not  all  the  treasured  store  of  ancient  days
Can  boast  the  sweetness  of  Nizami's  lays.'


Bakkackpoke,
December  20/ A,  1835.


THE LOVES OF
LAILI AND MAJNUN


Y


THE  LOVES  OF  LAILI  AND  MAJNTO


Saki,1  thou  know'st  I  worship  wine  ;

Let  that  delicious  cup  be  mine.

Wine  !  pure  and  limpid  as  my  tears,

Dispeller  of  a  lover's  fears  ;

With  thee  inspired,  with  thee  made  bold,

'Midst  combat  tierce  my  post  I  hold  ;

With  thee  inspired,  I  touch  the  string,

And,  rapt,  of  love  and  pleasure  sing.

Thou  art  a  lion,  seeking  prey,

Along  the  glades  where  wild  deer  stray  :

And  like  a  lion  I  would  roam,

To  bring  the  joys  I  seek  for  home  ;

With  wine,  life's  dearest,  sweetest  treasure,

I  feel  the  thrill  of  every  pleasure  :

1  Saki — cup-bearer.  The  cup-beaver  and  Iris  ruby  wine
stand  in  about  the  same  relation  in  Persian  poetry,  as  the  muse
and  '  Castalia's  stream '  in  the  Greek.  The  cup-bearer  is  the
great  inspirer.  Indeed,  the  Muses  were  the  tutelar  goddesses
of  festivals  and  banquets.


THE  LOVES  OF

— Bring,  Saki,  bring  thy  ruby  now  ;
Its  lustre  sparkles  on  thy  brow,
And,  flashing  with  a  tremulous  light,
Has  made  thy  laughing  eyes  more  bright
Bring,  bring  the  liquid  gem,  and  see
Its  power,  its  wond'rous  power,  in  me.
— No  ancestors  have  I  to  boast ;
The  trace  of  my  descent  is  lost.
From  Adam  what  do  I  inherit  1
What  but  a  sad  and  troubled  spirit  ?
For  human  life,  from  oldest  time,
Is  ever  marked  with  guilt  and  crime  ;
And  man,  betrayer  and  betrayed,
Lurks  like  a  spider  in  the  shade  ;
But  wine  still  plays  a  magic  part,
Exalting  high  the  drooping  heart.
Then,  Saki,  linger  not,  but  give
The  blissful  balm  on  which  I  live.
Come,  bring  the  juice  of  the  purple  vine,
Bring,  bring  the  musky-scented  wine  ;
A  draught  of  wine  the  memory  clears,
And  wakens  thoughts  of  other  years. —
When  blushing  dawn  illumes  the  sky,
Fill  up  a  bumper,  fill  it  high  !
That  wine  which  to  the  fever'd  lip,
With  anguish  parched,  when  given  to  sip,
Imparts  a  rapturous  smile,  and  throws
A  veil l  o'er  all  distracting  woes  :
1  The  Nepenthe  of  Homer.


LAILI  AND  MAJNUN  3

That  wine,  the  lamp  which,  night  and  day,

Lights  us  along  our  weary  way  ;

Which  strews  the  path  with  fruits  and  flowers,

And  gilds  with  joy  our  fleeting  hours  ;

And  lifts  the  mind,  now  grown  elate,

To  Jemshid's x  glory,  Jemshid's  state. —

But  of  the  kingly  race  beware  ;

!Tis  not  for  thee  their  smiles  to  share  :

Smiles  are  deceitful,  fire  looks  bright,

And  sheds  a  lucid,  dazzling  light ;

But,  though  attractive,  it  is  known

That  safety  dwells  in  flight  alone.

The  moth  the  taper's  radiance  tries,

But  'midst  the  flame  in  torment  dies :

And  none  lament  that  foolish  pride

Which  seeks  to  be  with  kings  allied. —

Bring,  bring  the  musky-scented  wine  !

The  key  of  mirth  !  it  must  be  mine  ;

The  key  which  opens  wide  the  door

Of  rapture's  rich  and  varied  store  ;

Which  makes  the  mounting  spirits  glad,

And  feel  the  pomp  of  Kai-Kobad.

1  The  story  of  Jemshid  is  finely  told  in  the  Shah  Xameh.
He  was  one  of  the  early  rulers  of  Persia,  a  prince  surrounded
with  peculiar  splendour  and  magnificence  :  he  was,  however,
suddenly  precipitated  from  his  throne,  and  put  to  a  terrible
death ;  his  body  being  fastened  between  two  planks,  and
divided  with  a  saw.  See  the  Shah  Nameh,  abridged,  in  prose
and  verse,  by  the  author  of  the  present  work.


THE  LOVES  OF

Wine  o'er  the  temper  casts  a  spell
Of  kindness  indescribable  :
Then,  since  I  'm  in  the  drinking  vein,
Brine,  bring  the  luscious  wine  again  !
From  the  vintner  bring  a  fresh  supply,
And  let  not  the  reveller's  lips  be  dry.—
Come,  Saki,  thou  art  not  old,  nor  lame  ;
Thou  'dst  not  incur  from  a  minstrel  blame  ;
Let  him  wash  from  his  heart  the  dust  of  sorrow  ;
And  riot  in  social  bliss  till  the  morrow  ;
Let  the  sound  of  the  goblet  delight  his  ear,
Like  the  music  that  breathes  from  Heaven's  own
sphere.


ii

Mark,  where  instruction  pours  upon  the  mind
The  light  of  knowledge,  simple  or  refined ;
Shaikhs  of  each  tribe  have  children  there,  and  each
Studies  whate'er  the  bearded  sage  can  teach.
Thence  his  attainments  Kais J  assiduous  drew,
And  scattered  pearls  from  lips  of  ruby  hue  ;
And  there,  of  different  tribe  and  gentle  mien,
A  lovely  maid  of  tender  years  was  seen  :

1  Kais  was  the  original  name  of  the  lover,  afterwards  called
MajmiDj  in  consequence  of  the  madness  produced  by  his
passion.


LAILI  AND  MAJNUN  I

Her  mental  powers  an  early  bloom  displayed  ;
Her  graceful  form  in  simple  garb  arrayed  :
Bright  as  the  morn,  her  cypress  shape,  and  eyes
Dark  as  the  stag's,  were  viewed  with  fond  surprise  ;
And  when  her  cheek  this  Arab  moon  revealed,
A  thousand  hearts  were  won  ;  no  pride,  no  shield,
Could  check  her  beauty's  power,  resistless  grown,
Given  to  enthral  and  charm — but  chiefly  one.
Her  richly  flowing  locks  were  black  as  night,
And  Lailf1  she  was  called— that  heart's  delight  :
One  single  glance  the  nerves  to  frenzy  wrought,
One  single  glance  bewildered  every  thought  ;


1  Laili,  in  Arabic,  signifies  night :  the  name,  however,  has
been  referred  to  her  colour,  and  she  is  accused  of  possessing  no
beauty  but  in  the  eyes  of  her  lover,  being  short  in  stature,  and
dark  in  complexion.  A  poet  is  said  to  have  addressed  her,
saying,  '  Art  thou  the  person  for  whom  Kais  lost  his  reason  ?
I  do  not  see  that  thou  art  so  beautiful. '  '  Silence  ! '  she  said,
'thou.&rt  not  Majnun.'  Another  observed  to  Majnun,  'Laili
is  not  surpassing  in  beauty  ;  what  occasions  this  adoration  ? '
'  Thou  dost  not  see  Laili  with  my  eyes  ! '  was  his  brief  replj  .
Laura  and  Eloisa,  and  other  celebrated  fair  ones,  have  been
equally  robbed  of  their  personal  charms  ;  indeed,  Laura  has
been  even  stripped  of  her  mortality.  Gibbon  speaks  of  her
as  a  nymph  so  shadowy,  that  her  very  existence  has  been
questioned,  and  adds,  in  a  note,  '  The  allegorical  interpretation
prevailed  in  the  fifteenth  century  ;  but  the  wise  commentators
were  not  agreed  whether  they  should  understand,  by  Laura,
religion  or  virtue,  or  the  Blessed  Virgin  !'  However,  according
to  Nizami  and  history,  Laili  not  only  existed  in  reality,  but
was  exquisitely  beautiful.


6  THE  LOVES  OF

And,  when  o'er  Kais  affection's  blushing  rose
Diffused  its  sweetness,  from  hirn  fled  repose  :
Tumultuous  passion  danced  upon  his  brow  ;
He  sought  to  woo  her,  but  he  knew  not  how  :
He  gazed  upon  her  cheek,  and,  as  he  gazed,
Love's  naming  taper  more  intensely  blazed.
Soon  mutual  pleasure  warm'd  each  other's  heart ;
Love  concpier'd  both — they  never  dreamt  to  part ;
And,  while  the  rest  were  poring  o'er  their  books,
They  pensive  mused,  and  read  each  other's  looks  :
While  other  schoolmates  for  distinction  strove,
And  thought  of  fame,  they  only  thought  of  love  :
While  others  various  climes  in  books  explored,
Both  idly  sat — adorer  and  adored  :
Science  for  them  had  now  no  charms  to  boast  ;
Learning  for  them  had  all  its  virtue  lost :
Their  only  taste  was  love,  and  love's  sweet  ties,
And  writing  ghazels  to  each  other's  eyes.

Yes,  love  triumphant  came,  engrossing  all

The  fond  luxuriant  thoughts  of  youth  and  maid  ;
And.  whilst  subdued  in  that  delicious  thrall,

Smiles  and  bright  tears  upon  their  features  played.
Then  in  soft  converse  did  they  pass  the  hours, —

Their  passion,  like  the  season,  fresh  and  fair  ;
Their  opening  path  seemed  decked  with  balmiest
flowers,

Their  melting  words  as  soft  as  summer  air.


LAILI  AND  MAJNUN

Immersed  in  love  so  deep,

They  hoped  suspicion  would  be  lulled  asleep,

And  none  be  conscious  of  their  amorous  state  ;
They  hoped  that  none  with  prying  eye,
And  gossip  tongue  invidiously,

Might  to  the  busy  world  its  truth  relate  :
And,  thus  possessed,  they  anxious  thought

Their  passion  would  be  kept  unknown  ;
Wishing  to  seem  what  they  were  not,

Though  all  observed  their  hearts  were  one.


By  worldly  prudence  uncontrolled,

Their  every  glance  their  feelings  told  ;

For  true  love  never  yet  had  skill

To  veil  impassioned  looks  at  will.

When  ringlets  of  a  thousand  curls,

And  ruby  lips,  and  teeth  of  pearls,

And  dark  eyes  flashing  quick  and  bright,

Like  lightning  on  the  brow  of  night—

When  charms  like  these  their  power  display,

And  steal  the  wildered  heart  away —

Can  man,  dissembling,  coldly  seem

Unmoved  as  by  an  idle  dream  1

Kais  saw  her  beauty,  saw  her  grace,

The  soft  expression  of  her  face  ;

And  as  he  gazed,  and  gazed  again,

Distraction  stung  his  burning  brain  :


THE  LOVES  OF

No  rest  he  found  by  day  or  night—

Laili  for  ever  in  his  sight.

But,  oh  !  when  separation  came,

More  brightly  glowed  his  ardent  flame  ;

And  she,  with  equal  sorrow  fraught,

Bewailed  the  fate  upon  them  brought.

— He  wandered  wild  through  lane  and  street,

With  frantic  step,  as  if  to  meet

Something  which  still  his  search  defied,

Reckless  of  all  that  might  betide.

His  bosom  heaved  with  groans  and  sighs,

Tears  ever  gushing  from  his  eyes  ;

And  still  he  struggled  to  conceal

The  anguish  he  was  doomed  to  feel ;

And,  maddened  with  excessive  grief,

In  the  lone  desert  sought  relief.

Thither,  as  morning  dawned,  he  flew  ;

His  head  and  feet  no  covering  knew  ;

And  every  night,  with  growing  pain,

The  woes  of  absence  marked  his  strain.

The  secret  path  he  eager  chose

Where  Laili's  distant  mansion  rose ;

And  kissed  the  door,  and  in  that  kiss

Fancied  he  quaffed  the  cup  of  bliss.

How  fleet  his  steps  to  that  sweet  place  !

A  thousand  wings  increased  his  pace  :

But  thence,  his  fond  devotions  paid,

A  thousand  thorns  his  course  delayed.


LAILI  AND  MAJNUN


in


The  lover  from  his  mistress  parted,
Lingering,  oppressed,  and  broken-hearted,
Sank,  like  the  sun  all  rayless,  down—
Khosrii,1  without  his  throne  or  crown.
With  matted  locks  and  bosom  bare,
Unshielded  from  the  scorching  air,
This  hapless  youth,  absorbed  in  grief,
Hoped  with  his  friends  to  find  relief ;
The  few,  by  strong  affection  bound,
And,  'midst  his  woes,  still  faithful  found.
But  vain  the  refuge — friendship's  smile
Could  not  his  love-lorn  heart  beguile  :
Again  he  hastened  to  that  place  remote,

Where  all  he  loved  in  life  had  gone :
He  called  her  magic  name,  but  she  was  not,

Nor  of  her  kindred,  one,  not  one,
In  that  sequestered  lonely  spot  :
He  called  a  thousand  times,  but  called  in  vain  ;
None  heeded,  for  none  heard  the  strain  ;
And  thence  no  fond  reply  that  hapless  youth  could  gain.

Laili  had,  with  her  kindred,  been  removed

Among  the  Nijid  mountains,  where
She  cherished  still  the  thoughts  of  him  she  loved
And  her  affection  thus  more  deeply  proved

Amid  that  wild  retreat. Kais  sought  her  there  ;
1  Khosrii,  a  king  of  Persia — a  royal  surname.


10  THE  LOVES  OF

Sought  her  in  rosy  bower  and  silent  glade,

Where  the  tall  palm-trees  flung  refreshing  shade.

He  called  upon  her  name  again  ;

Again  he  called,  alas  !  in  vain  ;

His  voice  unheard,  though  raised  on  every  side  ;

Echo  alone  to  his  lament  replied  ;

And  Laili!  Laili!  rang1  around,

As  if  enamoured  of  that  magic  sound.
Dejected  and  forlorn,  fast-falling  dew
Glistened  upon  his  cheeks  of  pallid  hue
Through  grove  and  frowning  glen  he  lonely  strayed,
And  with  his  griefs  the  rocks  were  vocal  made.
Beautiful  Laili  !  had  she  gone  for  ever  1 —
Could  he  that  thought  support  1  oh,  never,  never  !
Whilst  deep  emotion  agonised  his  breast,
He  to  the  morning-breeze  these  words  addressed  :—

'  Breeze  of  the  morn  !  so  fresh  and  sweet,
Wilt  thou  my  blooming  mistress  greet ;
And,  nestling  in  her  glossy  hair,
My  tenderest  thoughts,  my  love,  declare  1
Wilt  thou,  while  'mid  her  tresses  sporting,
Their  odorous  balm,  their  perfume  courting,

1  Thus  Shakespeare,  in  Twelfth  Night,  Act  I.  Scene  v. :

'  Halloo  your  name  to  the  reverberate  hills,
And  make  the  babbling  gossip  of  the  air
Cry  out,  Olivia  ! '


LAILI  AND  MAJNUN  11

Say  to  that  soul-seducing  maid,

In  grief  how  prostrate  I  am  laid  !

And  gently  whisper  in  her  ear

This  message,  with  an  accent  clear  : —

"  Thy  form  is  ever  in  my  sight,

In  thought  by  day,  in  dreams  by  night ;

For  one,  in  spirits  sad  and  broken,

That  mole  would  be  the  happiest  token  ;

That  mole  x  which  adds  to  every  look

A  magic  spell  I  cannot  brook  ;

For  he  who  sees  thy  melting  charms,

And  does  not  feel  his  soul  in  arms,

Bursting  with  passion,  rapture,  all

That  speak  love's  deepest,  wildest  thrall,

Must  be,  as  Kaf  s  2  ice-summit,  cold,

And,  haply,  scarce  of  human  mould.

1  The  mole  is  a  prodigious  beauty  among  Oriental  writers.
Thus  Hafiz  :  'If  that  maid  of  Shiraz  would  accept  my  hand,  I
would  give  for  the  black  mole  on  her  cheek  the  cities  of  Samar-
kand and  Bokara.'  Sir  William  Jones,  in  his  fine  Ode,  has
omitted  the  chief  point  in  the  stanza  which  contains  the  passage
just  cited. He  says  :

•  Sweet  maid,  if  thou  wouldst  charm  my  sight,
And  bid  these  arms  thy  neck  enfold,
That  rosy  cheek,  that  lily  hand,
Would  give  thy  poet  more  delight
Than  all  Bokara's  vaunted  gold,
Than  all  the  gems  of  Samarkand.'
In  these  verses,  however  sweet  they  may  be.  the  original  sen-
timent is  utterly  lost.

2  Kaf,  the  Caucasus.


12  THE  LOVES  OF

Let  him,  unmoved  by  charms  like  thine,
His  worthless  life  at  once  resign —
Those  lips  are  sugar,  heavenly  sweet ;
0  let  but  mine  their  pouting  meet !
The  balsam  of  delight  they  shed  ;
Their  radiant  colour  ruby-red.
The  Evil  eye  has  struck  my  heart,
But  thine  in  beauty  sped  the  dart :
Thus  many  a  flower,  of  richest  hue,
Hath  fallen  and  perished  where  it  grew  ;
Thy  beauty  is  the  sun  in  brightness,
Thy  form  a  Peri's  self  in  lightness  ;
A  treasure  thou,  which,  poets  say,
The  heavens  would  gladly  steal  away —
Too  good,  too  pure,  on  earth  to  stay  ! " '


IV

As  morning  broke,  the  sun,  with  golden  light,
Eclipsed  the  twinkling  stars  of  silvery  white  ;
And  Majniin,  rising,  eagerly  pursued
The  path  which  wound  to  Laili's  solitude,
Grieved  to  the  heart ;  and,  as  he  went  along,
His  lips  breathed  softly  some  impassioned  song  ;
Some  favourite  lay,  which  tenderly  expressed
The  present  feeling  of  his  anxious  breast.
In  fancy  soon  her  image  he  beheld  ;
No  shadowy  cloud  her  lucid  beauty  veiled  ;


LAILI  AND  MAJNUN  13

He  saw  her  fresh l  as  morning's  scented  air —

Himself  exhausted  by  incessant  care  :

He  saw  her  blooming  as  the  blushing  rose —

Himself  dejected  by  unnumbered  woes  :

He  saw  her  like  an  angel  soft  and  bland —

Himself  consuming  like  a  lighted  brand  :

Her  ringlets  flowing  loosely  to  the  ground,

His  ringlets,  fetters  by  affection  bound  ;

And  still,  all  faint  with  grief,  he  passed  his  days,

Pouring  his  soul  out  in  melodious  lays.

His  friends,  to  whom  his  griefs  are  known.
His  altered  aspect  now  bemoan  ;
Alarmed  to  hear  the  sufferer  still
In  frantic  mood  unceasing  fill
The  night-breeze  with  his  plaintive  woes  ;
For  sorrow  with  indulgence  grows.
They  try  to  soothe  his  wildered  mind,
Where  reason  once  was  seen  enshrined  ;
His  father,  with  a  father's  love,
Sought  his  sad  sorrows  to  remove,
And  gave  him  maxims  full  and  clear,
And  counsel  meet  for  youth  to  hear.

1  This  sort  of  antithesis,  or  contrast  of  condition,  is  common
among  the  Persian  poets,  and  they  dwell  upon  it  with  great
pleasure,  if  we  may  judge  from  the  extent  to  which  they
proceed  whenever  an  opportunity  presents  itself.  There  are
several  instances  of  it  in  the  course  of  this  poem.


14  THE  LOVES  OF

But,  though  good  counsel  and  advice
May  often  lead  to  Paradise,
When  love  has  once  the  heart  engrossed,
All  counsel,  all  advice  is  lost ;
And  weeping  Majniin  not  a  word
Of  his  poor  father's  counsel  heard.
Ah  !  when  did  prudence  e'er  control
The  frenzy  of  a  love-lorn  soul  1


Disconsolate  the  father  now

Behind  the  Harern-screen  appears,

Inquiring  of  his  females  how

He  best  might  dry  the  maniac's  tears  ;

And  what  had  drawn  the  sparkling  moon

Of  intellect  from  him  so  soon.

The  answer  of  both  old  and  young

Was  ready  quivering  on  the  tongue —

'  His  fate  is  fixed — his  eyes  have  seen

The  charms  of  his  affection's  queen

In  all  their  winning  power  displayed  ;

His  heart  a  captive  to  that  Arab  maid.

Then  what  relief  canst  thou  supply  ?

What  to  the  bleeding  lover,  doomed  to  die  ?

What  but  fulfilling  his  desires  %

And  this  a  father's  generous  aid  requires.

See  them  united  in  the  bands  of  love  ;

And  that  alone  his  frenzy  will  remove.'


LAILI  AND  MAJNUN  15

These  words  (for  woman's  words  convey
A  spell,  converting  night  to  day,
Diffuse  o'er  troubled  life  a  balm,
And  passion's  fiercest  fever  calm) —
These  words  relieve  the  father's  heart,
And  comfort  to  his  thoughts  impart.
Resolved  at  once,  he  now  with  speed
Marshals  his  followers,  man  and  steed  ;
And,  all  assembled,  bends  his  way
To  the  damsel's  home,  without  delay.

Approaching,  quick  th'  inquiry  rose —
'  Come  ye  hither  as  friends  or  foes  ?
Whatever  may  your  errand  be,
That  errand  must  be  told  to  me  ;
For  none,  unless  a  sanctioned  friend,
Can  pass  the  boundary  I  defend.'

This  challenge  touched  Syd  Omri's  pride  ;

And  yet  he  calmly  thus  replied,—
'  I  come  in  friendship,  and  propose
All  future  chance  of  feud  to  close.'
Then  to  the  maiden's  father  said, —
'  The  nuptial  feast  may  now  be  spread  :
My  son  with  thirsty  heart  has  seen
Thy  fountain  pure  with  margin  green  ;
And  every  fountain,  clear  and  bright,
Gives  to  the  thirsty  heart  delight.


16  THE  LOVES  OF

That  fountain  he  demands. With  shame,

Possessed  of  power,  and  wealth,  and  fame,

I  to  his  silly  humour  bend,

And  humbly  seek  his  fate  to  blend

With  one  inferior. Need  I  tell

My  own  high  lineage,  known  so  well  1

If  sympathy  my  heart  incline,

Or  vengeance,  still  the  means  are  mine.

Treasure  and  arms  can  amply  bear

Me  through  the  toils  of  desert-war  ;

Thou  art  the  merchant,  pedlar-chief,

I  the  buyer  ;  come,  sell, — be  brief !

If  thou  art  wise,  accept  advice  ;

Sell,  and  receive  a  princely  price  ! '


The  sire  of  Laili  marked  his  haughty  tone,
But  smoothly  answered, — '  Not  on  us  alone
Depends  the  nuptial  union — but  on  Heaven,
By  which  all  power,  and  right,  and  truth  are  given.
However  just  our  reasoning  may  appear,
We  're  still  beset  by  endless  error  here  ;
And  proffered  friendship  may  perchance  become
The  harbinger  of  strife  and  of  the  tomb  ;
Madness  is  neither  sin  nor  crime,  we  know,
But  who  'd  be  linked  to  madness  or  a  foe  ?
Thy  son  is  mad — his  senses  first  restore  ;
In  constant  prayer  the  aid  of  Heaven  implore  ;


LAILI  AND  MAJNUN  17

But  while  portentous  gloom  pervades  his  brain,
Disturb  me  not  with  this  vain  suit  again.
The  jewel,  sense,  no  purchaser  can  buy,
Nor  treachery  the  place  of  sense  supply.
Thou  hast  my  reasons— and  this  parley  o'er,
Keep  them  in  mind,  and  trouble  me  no  more  '. '
Abashed,  his  very  heartstrings  torn,
Thus  to  be  met  with  scoff  and  scorn,
Syd  Omri  to  his  followers  turned,
His  cheek  with  kindled  anger  burned  :
But,  scorning  more  to  do  or  say,
Indignant  homeward  urged  his  way.

And  now  for  a  disordered  mind,
What  medicine  can  affection  find  '.
What  magic  power,  what  human  skill,
To  rectify  the  erring  will  1
— The  necromancer's  art  they  tried —
Charms,  philtres  used,  to  win  a  bride,
And  make  a  father's  heart  relent,
As  if  by  Heaven  in  pity  sent. —
Vain  efforts  all. They  now  address
Kind  words  his  mind  to  soothe  and  bless,
And  urge  in  his  unwilling  ear
(Treason  and  death  for  him  to  hear)
'  Another  love,  of  nobler  race,
Unmatched  in  form,  unmatched  in  grace  ;
All  blandishments  and  fairy  wiles  ;
Her  every  glance  the  heart  beguiles  ;

B


18  THE  LOVES  OF

An  idol  of  transcendent  worth,
With  charms  eclipsing  royal  birth  ;
Whose  balmy  lips  like  rubies  glow  ;
Sugar  and  milk  their  sweetness  show  ;
Her  words  like  softest  music  flow  :
Adorned  in  all  the  pride  of  spring,
Her  robes  around  rich  odours  fling  ;
Sparkling  with  gold  and  gems,  she  seems
The  bright  perfection  of  a  lover's  dreams  ;
Then  why,  with  such  a  prize  at  home,
For  charms  inferior  amid  strangers  roam  ?
Bid  all  unduteous  thoughts  depart,
And  wisely  banish  Laili  from  thy  heart.'
When  Majnun  saw  his  hopes  decay,
Their  fairest  blossoms  fade  away  ;
And  friends  and  sire,  who  might  have  been
Kind  intercessors,  rush  between
Him  and  the  only  wish  that  shed
One  ray  of  comfort  round  his  head
(His  fondly  cherished  Arab  maid),
He  beat  his  hands,  his  garments  tore,
He  cast  his  fetters  on  the  floor
In  broken  fragments,  and  in  wrath
Sought  the  dark  wilderness's  path  ;
And  there  he  wept  and  sobbed  aloud,
Unwitnessed  by  the  gazing  crowd  ;
His  eyes  all  tears,  his  soul  all  flame,
Eepeating  still  his  Laili's  name,


LAILI  AND  MAJNUN  in

And  Lailf !  Lailf !  echoed  round,
Still  dwelling  on  that  rapturous  sound.
— In  pilgrim-garb  he  reckless  strayed,
No  covering  on  his  feet  or  head  ;
And  still,  as  memory  touched  his  brain,
He  murmured  some  love-wildered  strain  :
But  still  her  name  was  ever  on  his  tongue,
And  Lailf !  Lailf !  still  through  grove and  fori
rung.

Sad  inmate  of  the  desert  wild,
His  form  and  face  with  dust  defiled  ;
Exhausted  with  his  grief's  excess,
He  sat  him  down  in  weariness.

'Estranged  from  friends,'  he  weeping  cried,

'  My  homeward  course  is  dark  to  me  ;
But,  Lailf,  were  I  at  thy  side,

How  blessed  would  thy  poor  lover  be  !
My  kindred  think  of  me  with  shame  ;
My  friends  they  shudder  at  my  name.

That  cup  of  wine  I  held,  alas  !

Dropped  from  my  hand,  is  dashed  in  pieces  ;
And  thus  it  is  that,  like  the  glass,

Life's  hope  in  one  dark  moment  ceases.
O  ye  who  never  felt  distress,

Never  gay  scenes  of  joy  forsaking,
Whose  minds,  at  peace,  no  cares  oppress,

What  know  ye  of  a  heart  that 's  breaking  ' :


20  THE  LOVES  OF

Worn  out  at  length,  he  sank  upon  the  ground,
And  there  in  tears  the  mournful  youth  is  found
By  those  who  traced  his  wanderings  :  gently  they
Home  to  his  sire  the  faded  form  convey  :
Syd  Omri  and  his  kinsmen  round  him  moan,
And,  weeping  wildly,  make  his  griefs  their  own  ;
And,  garrulous,  recall  to  memory's  eye
The  progress  of  his  life  from  infancy —
The  flattering  promise  of  his  boyish  days —
And  find  the  wreck  of  hope  on  winch  they  gaze.
They  deemed  that  Mecca's  sacred  fane
His  reason  would  restore  again  ;
That  blessed  boon  to  mortals  given,
The  arc  of  earth,  the  arc  of  heaven  ;
The  holy  Kaba  where  the  prophet  prayed,
"Where  Zam-Zam's  waters  yield  their  saving  aid.
'Tis  now  the  season  of  the  pilgrimage,
And  now  assemble  merchant,  chieftain,  sage,
With  vows  and  offerings,  on  that  spot  divine  :
Thousands  and  thousands  throng  the  splendid  shrine.
And  now,  on  that  high  purpose  bent,  await
Syd  Omri's  camels,  ready  at  his  gate  ;
Around  their  necks  the  tinkling  bells  are  hung,
Rich  tasseUed  housings  on  their  backs  are  flung,
And  Majmin,  faint,  and  reckless  what  may  be,
Is  on  a  litter  placed — sad  sight  to  see  ! —
And  tenderly  caressed,  whilst  borne  along
By  the  rough  moving  camel,  fleet  and  strong.


LAILI  AND  MAJNUN  21

The  desert  soon  is  passed,  and  Mecca's  bright
And  glittering  minarets  rise  upon  the  sight ;
Where  golden  gifts,  and  sacrifice,  and  prayer,
Secure  the  absolution  sought  for  there.
The  father,  entering  that  all-powerful  shrine,
Thus  prays  :  'Have  mercy,  Heaven,  on  me  and  mine !
0,  from  my  son  this  frenzied  mood  remove,
And  save  him,  save  him  from  the  bane  of  love  ! :
Majniin  at  this,  poor  wayward  child,
Looked  in  his  father's  face  and  smiled  ;
And  frankly  said  his  life  should  prove
The  truth  and  holiness  of  love.
'  My  heart  is  bound  by  beauty's  spell,
My  love  is  indestructible.
Am  I  to  separate  from  my  own,
From  her  for  whom  I  breathe  alone  ?
What  friend  could  wish  me  to  resign
A  love  so  pure,  so  true  as  mine  ?
What  though  I  like  a  taper  burn,
And  almost  to  a  shadow  turn,
I  envy  not  the  heart  that 's  free-
Love's  soul-encircling  chains  for  me  ! '


The  love  that  springs  from  Heaven  is  blessed  ;
Unholy  passions  stain  the  rest ;
That  is  not  love  :  wild  fancy's  birth,
Which  lives  on  change,  is  constant  never  :


22  THE  LOVES  OF

But  Maj  nun's  love  was  not  of  earth,

Glowing  with  heavenly  truth  for  ever  ;
An  earthly  object  raised  the  flame,
But  'twas  from  Heaven  the  inspiration  came.

In  silent  sorrow  the  aged  sire
Found  all  his  cares  were  vain  ;

And  back  to  his  expecting  tribe
Addressed  his  steps  again  ;

For  Mecca  had  no  power  to  cool
The  lover's  burning  brain  ;

No  consolation,  no  relief

For  the  old  man's  heart-consuming  grief.


Sweet  Laili's  kinsmen  now  describe
To  the  proud  chieftain  of  their  tribe
A  youth  amidst  the  desert  seen,
In  strange  attire,  of  frantic  mien  ;
His  arms  outstretched,  his  head  all  bare.
And  floating  loose  his  clustering  hair  :
'  In  a  distracted  mood  ' — they  say—
'  He  wanders  hither  every  day  ;
And  often,  with  fantastic  bound,
Dances,  or  prostrate  hugs  the  ground  ;
Or,  in  a  voice  the  soul  to  move,
Warbles  the  melting  songs  of  love  ;


LAILI  AND  MAJNUN  23

Songs  which,  when  breathed  in  tones  so  true,
A  thousand  hearts  at  once  subdue.
He  speaks— and  all  who  listen  hear
Words  which  they  hold  in  memory  dear  ;
And  we  and  thine  endure  the  shame,
And  Laili  blushes  at  his  name.'
And  now  the  chieftain,  roused  to  wrath,
Threatens  to  cross  the  maniac's  path.

But,  haply,  to  prevent  that  barbarous  deed,
To  Omri's  palmy  groves  the  tidings  flew,
And  soon  the  father  sends  a  chosen  few

To  seek  the  lost  one. Promptly  they  proceed
O'er  open  plain  and  thicket  deep,
Embowering  glen  and  rocky  steep,
Exploring  with  unwearied  eye
Wherever  man  might  pass  or  lie,
O'ercome  by  grief  or  death. In  vain
Their  sight  on  every  side  they  strain.
No  Majmin's  voice,  nor  form,  to  cheer
Their  anxious  hearts  ;  but  far  and  near
The  yell  of  prowling  beasts  they  hear.
Mournful,  they  deem  him  lost  or  dead,
And  tears  of  bitterest  anguish  shed.
But  he,  the  wanderer  from  his  home,
Found  not  from  beasts  a  living  tomb  ;
His  passion's  pure  and  holy  flame
Their  native  fierceness  seemed  to  tame  ;


24  THE  LOVES  OF

Tiger  and  ravenous  wolf  passed  by  him,

The  fell  hyena  came  not  nigh  him  ;

As  if,  ferocity  to  quell,

His  form  had  been  invisible,

Or  bore  a  life-protecting  spell.

Upon  a  fountain's  emerald  brink

Majniin  had  stooped  its  lucid  wave  to  drink ;

And  his  despairing  friends  descried

Him  laid  along  that  murmuring  fountain's  side,

Wailing  his  sorrows  still ;  his  feeble  voice

Dwelt,  ever  dwelt,  upon  his  heart's  sole  choice.

A  wild  emotion  trembled  in  his  eye,

His  bosom  wrung  with  many  a  deep-drawn  sigh  ;

And  groans,  and  tears,  and  music's  softest  lay.

Successive  marked  his  melancholy  clay.

— Now  he  is  stretched  along  the  burning  sand,

A  stone  his  pillow — now,  upraised  his  hand,

He  breathes  a  prayer  for  Lailf,  and  again

The  desert  echoes  with  some  mournful  strain.

As  wine  deprives  us  of  the  sense  we  boast,

So  reason  in  love's  maddening  draughts  is  lost.

Restored  to  home  again,  he  dreads  to  meet
His  father's  frowns,  and  bends  to  kiss  his  feet  ;
Then,  gazing  wildly,  rises  up,  and  speaks,
And  in  a  piteous  tone  forgiveness  seeks  : —
'  Sad  is  my  fate,  o'ercast  my  youthful  morn,
My  rose's  leaves,  my  life's  sweet  buds  are  torn  ;


LAILI  AND  MAJNUN  25

I  sit  in  darkness,  ashes  o'er  my  head,

To  all  the  world's  alluring  pleasures  dead  ;

For  me  what  poor  excuse  can  soothe  thy  mind  1

Thou  art  my  father  still — 0  still  he  kind  ! '

Syd  Omri  his  unchanged  affection  proved,

And,  folding  to  his  breast  the  child  he  loved,

Exclaimed  :  '  My  boy  !  I  grieve  to  mark

Thy  reason  erring  still,  and  dark  ;

A  fire  consuming  every  thread

Of  which  thy  thrilling  nerves  are  made.

Sit  down,  and  from  thy  eyesight  tear

The  poisonous  thorn  that  rankles  there  :

'Tis  best  we  should  to  mirth  incline,

But  let  it  not  be  raised  by  wine  :

'Tis  well  desire  should  fill  the  breast  ;

Not  such  desire  as  breaks  our  rest.

Remain  not  under  grief's  control,

Nor  taunt  of  foe  which  stings  the  soul ;

Let  wisdom  every  movement  guide  :

Error  but  swells  affliction's  tide  ;

What  though  thy  love  hath  set  thee  all  on  fire,

And  thy  heart  burns  with  still  unquenched  desire,

Despair  not  of  a  remedy  ;

From  seedlings  spring  the  shady  tree  ;

From  hope  continued  follows  gladness,

Which  dull  despair  had  lost  in  sadness  ;

Associate  with  the  wealthy,  they

Will  show  to  glittering  wealth  the  way  ;


26  THE  LOVES  OF

A  wanderer  never  gathers  store,
Be  thou  a  wanderer  now  no  more.
Wealth  opens  every  door,  and  gives
Command,  and  homage  still  receives  :
Be  patient,  then,  and  patience  will
By  slow  degrees  thy  coffers  fill.
That  river,  rolling  deep  and  broad,
Once  but  a  narrow  streamlet  flowed  ;
That  lofty  mountain,  now  in  view,
Its  height  from  small  beginnings  drew.
He  who  impatient  hurries  on,
Hoping  for  gems,  obtains  a  stone,
Shrewdness  and  cunning  gain  the  prize,
While  wisdom's  self  unprosperous  lies  :
The  fox  of  crafty,  subtle  mind
Leaves  the  wolf's  dulness  far  behind  ;
Be  thou  discreet,  thy  thoughts  employ,
The  world's  inviting  pomp  enjoy. —
In  search  of  wealth  from  day  to  day
Love's  useless  passion  dies  away  ;
The  sensual  make  disease  their  guest,
And  nourish  scorpions  in  their  breast.
And  is  thy  heart  so  worthless  grown,
To  be  the  cruel  sport  of  one  %
Keep  it  from  woman's  scathe,  and  still
Obedient  to  thy  own  free  will,
And  mindful  of  a  parent's  voice,
Make  him,  and  not  thy  foes,  rejoice. '


LAILI  AND  MAJNUN  27

Majmin  replied  :  '  My  father  ! — father  still ! —
My  power  is  gone  ;  I  cannot  change  my  will :
The  moral  counsel  thou  hast  given  to  me
(To  one  who  cannot  from  his  bondage  flee)
Avails  me  nothing. 'Tis  no  choice  of  mine,
But  Fate's  decree,  that  I  should  thus  repine  :
Stand  I  alone  ? Look  round,  on  every  side
Are  broken  hearts,  by  sternest  fortune  tried  :
Shadows  are  not  self-made — the  silver  moon
Is  not  self-stationed,  but  th'  Almighty's  boon.
From  the  huge  elephant's  stupendous  form,
To  that  of  the  poor  ant,  the  smallest  worm,
Through  every  grade  of  life,  all  power  is  given,
All  joy  or  anguish,  by  the  Lord  of  Heaven.
I  sought  not,  I,  misfortune — but  it  came  ;
I  sought  not  fire,  yet  is  my  heart  all  flame  :
They  ask  me  why  I  never  laugh  nor  smile,
Though  laughter  be  no  sign  of  sense  the  while.
If  I  should  laugh  in  merry  mood,  agape,
Amidst  my  mirth  some  secret  might  escape.
—A  partridge  seized  an  ant,  resolved  to  kill
The  feeble  creature  with  his  horny  bill  ;
When,  laughing  loud,  the  ant  exclaimed— "Alas  !
A  partridge  thou  !  and  art  thou  such  an  ass  ?
I  'in  but  a  gnat,  and  dost  thou  think  to  float
A  gnat's  slight  filmy  texture  down  thy  throat  1 '
The  partridge  laughed  at  this  unusual  sound,
And,  laughing,  dropped  the  ant  upon  the  ground


28  THE  LOVES  OF

Thus  he  who  idly  laughs  will  always  find
Some  grief  succeed— 'tis  so  with  all  mankind.
The  stupid  partridge,  laughing,  drooped  his  crest,
And  by  that  folly  lost  what  he  possessed.
— This  poor  old  drudge,  which  bears  its  heavy  load,
Must  all  life  long  endure  the  same  rough  road  ;
No  joy  for  him,  in  mortal  aid  no  trust,
No  rest  till  death  consigns  him  to  the  dust.'


Here  paused  the  youth,  and  wept ;  and  now

The  household  smooth  his  furrowed  brow,

And  with  unceasing  eagerness

Seek  to  remove  his  soul's  distress.

But  grief,  corroding  grief,  allows  no  space

For  quiet  thoughts  ;  his  wounds  break  out  anew  ;
His  kindred  every  change  of  feature  trace,

And  unavailing  tears  their  cheeks  bedew  ;
A  deeper,  keener  anguish  marks  his  face  ;
His  faded  form  so  haggard  to  the  view  ;
Useless  the  task  his  sorrows  to  remove,
For  who  can  free  the  heart  from  love,  unchanging
love?

Few  days  had  passed,  when,  frantic  grown,

He  burst  from  his  domestic  prison,
And  in  the  desert  wild,  alone,

Poured,  like  the  morning  bird,  new  risen,


LAILI  AND  MAJNUN  29

His  ardent  lay  of  love. Not  long
The  mountains  echoed  with  his  song,
Ere,  drawn  by  sounds  so  sweet  and  clear,
A  crowd  of  listeners  hovered  near  :
They  saw  him,  tall  as  cypress,  stand,
A  rocky  fragment  in  his  hand  ;
A  purple  sash  his  waist  around,
His  legs  with  links  of  iron  bound  ;
Yet,  unencumbered  was  his  gait  ;
They  only  showed  his  maniac  state.


Wandering  he  reached  a  spot  of  ground,

With  palmy  groves  and  poplars  crowned  ;

A  lively  scene  it  was  to  view,

Where  flowers  too  bloomed,  of  every  hue  ;

In  wonder  lost,  he  saw  the  axe  applied

To  fell  a  cypress-tree  —and  thus  he  cried  :

'  Gardener  !  did  ever  love  thy  heart  control  ?

Was  ever  woman  mistress  of  thy  soul  1

When  joy  has  thrilled  through  every  glowing  nerve,

Hadst  thou  no  wish  that  feeling  to  preserve  ?

Does  not  a  woman's  love  delight,  entrance,

And  every  blessing  fortune  yields  enhance  1

Then  stop  that  lifted  hand,  the  stroke  suspend,

Spare,  spare  the  cypress-tree,  and  be  my  friend  !

And  why  ? Look  there,  and  be  forewarned  by  me,

'Tis  Lailf's  form,  all  grace  and  majesty  ;


30  THE  LOVES  OF

"Wouldst  thou  root  up  resemblance  so  complete,
And  lay  its  branches  withering  at  thy  feet  ?
"What !  Laili's  form  ?  no  :  spare  the  cypress-tree  ;
Let  it  remain,  still  beautiful  and  free  ;
Yes,  let  my  prayers  thy  kindliest  feelings  move,
And  save  the  graceful  shape  of  her  I  love  ! ;
— The  gardener  dropped  his  axe,  o'ercome  with  shame,
And  left  the  tree  to  bloom,  and  speak  of  Laili's  fame.


VI

Laili  in  beauty,  softness,  grace,
Surpassed  the  loveliest  of  her  race  ;
She  was  a  fresh  and  odorous  flower,
Plucked  by  a  fairy  from  her  bower ;
With  heart-delighting  rosebuds  blooming,
The  welcome  breeze  of  spring  perfuming.
The  killing  witchery  that  lies
In  her  soft,  black,  delicious  eyes,
"When  gathered  in  one  amorous  glance,
Pierces  the  heart  like  sword  or  lance  ;
The  prey  that  falls  into  her  snare,
For  life  must  mourn  and  struggle  there  ;
Her  eyelash  speaks  a  thousand  blisses,
Her  lips  of  rnby  ask  for  kisses  ;
Soft  lips  where  sugar-sweetness  dwells,
Sweet  as  the  bee-hive's  honey-cells  ;


LAILI  AND  MAJNUN  31

Her  cheeks,  so  beautiful  and  bright,
Had  stole  the  moon's  refulgent  light  ;
Her  form  the  cypress-tree  expresses,
And  full  and  ripe  invites  caresses.
With  all  these  charms  the  heart  to  win,
There  was  a  cureless  grief  within —
Yet  none  beheld  her  grief,  or  heard  ;
She  drooped  like  broken-winged  bird.1
Her  secret  thoughts  her  love  concealing.
But,  softly  to  the  terrace  stealing,
From  morn  to  eve  she  gazed  around,
In  hopes  her  Majnun  might  be  found,
Wandering  in  sisrht, For  she  had  none
To  sympathise  with  her — not  one  !
None  to  compassionate  her  woes —
In  dread  of  rivals,  friends,  and  foes  ;
And  though  she  smiled,  her  mind's  distres
Filled  all  her  thoughts  with  bitterne>s  ;
The  fire  of  absence  on  them  preyed,
But  light  nor  smoke  that  fire  betrayed  ;
Shut  up  within  herself,  she  sate,
Absorbed  in  grief,  disconsolate  ;
Yet  true  love  has  resources  stdl,
Its  soothing  arts,  and  ever  will  !

Voices  in  guarded  softness  rose
Upon  her  ever-listening  ear  ;

A  common  epithet,  expressive  of  misfortune  and  affliction.


32  THE  LOVES  OF

She  heard  her  constant  lover's  woes,
In  melting  strains,  repeated  near  ;

The  sky,  with  gloomy  clouds  o'erspread,
At  length  soft  showers  began  to  shed  ;
And  what,  before,  destruction  seemed,
With  rays  of  better  promise  gleamed.

Voices  of  young  and  old  she  heard
Beneath  the  harem- walls  reciting

Her  Majniin's  songs  ;  each  thrilling  word
Her  almost  broken  heart  delighting.

Lailf,  with  matchless  charms  of  face,
Was  blessed  with  equal  mental  grace  ;
With  eloquence  and  taste  refined  ;
And  from  the  treasures  of  her  mind
She  poured  her  fondest  love's  confession
With  faithful  love's  most  warm  expression  ;
Told  all  her  hopes  and  sorrows  o'er,
Though  told  a  thousand  times  before  :
The  life-blood  circling  through  her  veins
Kecorded  her  affecting  strains  ;
And  as  she  wrote,  with  passion  flushed,
The  glowing  words  with  crimson  blushed.
And  now  the  terrace  she  ascends
In  secret,  o'er  the  rampart  bends,


LAILI  AND  MAJNUN  :

And  flings  the  record,  with  a  sigh,
To  one  that  moment  passing  by  :
Unmarked  the  stranger  gains  the  prize,
And  from  the  spot  like  lightning  flies
To  where  the  lingering  lover  weeps  unseen.
— Starting  upon  his  feet,  with  cheerful  mien,
He  gazes,  reads,  devours  the  pleasing  tale,
And  joy  again  illumes  his  features  pale.

Thus  was  resumed  the  soft  exchange  of  thought ;
Thus  the  return  of  tenderest  feeling  wrought  :
Each  the  same  secret  intercourse  pursued,
And  mutual  vows  more  ardently  renewed  ;
And  many  a  time  between  them  went  and  came
The  fondest  tokens  of  their  deathless  flame  ;
Now  in  hope's  heaven,  now  in  despair's  abyss,
And  now  enrapt  in  visionary  bliss.


VII

The  gloomy  veil  of  night  withdrawn,
How  sweetly  looks  the  silvery  dawn  ;
Rich  blossoms  laugh  on  every  tree,
Like  men  of  fortunate  destiny,
Or  the  shining  face  of  revelry.
The  crimson  tidip  and  golden  rose
Their  sweets  to  all  the  world  disclose.


34  THE  LOVES  OF

I  mark  the  glittering  pearly  wave
The  fountain's  banks  of  emerald  lave  ;
The  birds  in  every  arbour  sing,
The  very  raven  hails  the  spring  ;
The  partridge  and  the  ring-dove  raise
Their  joyous  notes  in  songs  of  praise  ;
But  bulbuls,  through  the  mountain-vale,
Like  Majniin,  chant  a  mournful  tale.

The  season  of  the  rose  has  led

Ladi  to  her  own  favourite  bower  ;

Her  cheeks  the  softest  vermd-red,
Her  eyes  the  modest  sumbul  flower.

She  has  left  her  father's  painted  hall,
She  has  left  the  terrace  where  she  kept

Her  secret  watch  tdl  evening  fall.
And  where  she  oft  till  midnight  wept.

A  golden  fillet  sparkling  round
Her  brow,  her  raven  tresses  bound  ;
And  as  she  o'er  the  greensward  tripped,
A  train  of  damsels  ruby-lipped,
Blooming  like  flowers  of  Samarkand,
Obedient  bowed  to  her  command.
She  glittered  like  a  moon  among
The  beauties  of  the  starry  throng,
With  lovely  forms  as  Houris  bright,
Or  Peris  glancing  in  the  light ;


LAILI  AND  MAJNUN  35

And  now  they  reach  an  emerald  spot,
Beside  a  cool  sequestered  grot,
And  soft  recline  beneath  the  shade,
By  a  delicious  rose-bower  made  :
There,  in  soft  converse,  sport,  and  play,
The  hours  unnoted  glide  away  ;
But  Laili  to  the  Bulbul  tells
What  secret  grief  her  bosom  swells,
And  fancies,  through  the  rustling  leaves,
She  from  the  garden-breeze  receives
The  breathings  of  her  own  true  love,
Fond  as  the  cooings  of  the  dove.

In  that  romantic  neighbourhood
A  grove  of  palms  majestic  stood  ;
Never  in  Arab  desert  wild
A  more  enchanting  prospect  smiled  ;
So  fragrant,  of  so  bright  a  hue,
Not  Irem  richer  verdure  knew  ;
Nor  fountain  half  so  clear,  so  sweet,
As  that  which  flowed  at  Laili's  feet.

The  Grove  of  Palms  her  steps  invites  ;

She  strolls  amid  its  varied  scenes.

Its  pleasant  copses,  evergreens,
In  which  her  wakened  heart  delights.
Where'er  the  genial  zephyr  sighs,
Lilies  and  roses  near  her  rise  :


36  THE  LOVES  OF

Awhile  the  prospect  charms  her  sight,
Awhile  she  feels  her  bosom  light,
Her  eyes  with  pleasure  beaming  bright :
But  sadness  o'er  her  spirit  steals,
And  thoughts,  too  deep  to  hide,  reveals  :
Beneath  a  cypress-tree  reclined,
In  secret  thus  she  breathes  her  mind  :  —
'  0  faithful  friend,  and  lover  true,
Still  distant  from  thy  Laili's  view  ;
Still  absent,  still  beyond  her  power
To  bring  thee  to  her  fragrant  bower  ;
0  noble  youth,  still  thou  art  mine,
And  Laili,  Laili  still  is  thine  ! '

As  thus  she  almost  dreaming  spoke,
A  voice  reproachful  her  attention  woke.
'  What !  hast  thou  banished  prudence  from  thy

mind  1
And  shall  success  be  given  to  one  unkind  ?
Majnun  on  billows  of  despair  is  tossed,
Laili  has  nothing  of  her  pleasures  lost ;
Majnun  has  sorrow  gnawing  at  his  heart,
Laili's  blithe  looks  far  other  thoughts  impart ;
Majnun  the  poison-thorn  of  grief  endures,
Laili,  all  wiles  and  softness,  still  allures  ;
Majnun  her  victim  in  a  thousand  ways,
Laili  in  mirth  and  pastime  spends  her  days  ;
Majnun's  unnumbered  wounds  his  rest  destroy,
Laili  exists  but  in  the  bowers  of  joy  ;


LAILI  AND  MAJNUN  37

Majnun  is  bound  by  love's  mysterious  spell,
Laili's  bright  cheeks  of  cheerful  feelings  tell  ;
Majnun  his  Laili's  absence  ever  mourns,
Laili's  light  mind  to  other  objects  turns.5

At  this  reproof  tears  flowed  apace

Down  Laili's  pale,  dejected  face  ;

But  soon  to  her  glad  heart  was  known

The  trick,  thus  practised  by  her  own

Gay,  watchful,  ever-sportive  train,

Who  long  had  watched,  nor  watched  in  vain  ;

And  marked  in  her  love's  voice  and  look,

Which  never  woman's  glance  mistook.

Her  mother  too,  with  keener  eye,

Saw  deeper  through  the  mystery,

Which  Laili  thought  her  story  veiled,

And  oft  that  fatal  choice  bewailed  ;

But  Laili  still  loved  on  ;  the  root

Sprang  up,  and  bore  both  bud  and  fruit  ;

And  she  believed  her  secret  flower

As  safe  as  treasure  in  a  guarded  tower.


vi  n

That  day  on  which  she  pensive  strayed
Amidst  the  Grove  of  Palms — that  day

How  sweetly  bloomed  the  Arab  maid,
Girt  by  her  train  in  fair  array  !


38  THE  LOVES  OF

Her  moist  red  lips,  her  teeth  of  pearl,
Her  hair  in  many  a  witchirig  curl ;
Haply,  on  that  devoted  day,
A  gallant  youth,  with  followers  gay,
In  splendid  fashion  passed  that  way  ;
Who  saw  that  lamp  of  beauty  gleaming,
Her  luscious  eye  with  softness  beaming  ;
And  in  his  bosom  rose  the  fire
Of  still-increasing  fond  desire.
Resolved  at  once  her  hand  to  claim
(Ibn  Salam  his  honoured  name),
He  from  her  parents  seeks  success,

Offering  the  nuptial-knot  to  tie  ;
And,  to  promote  that  happiness,

Scatters  his  gold  abundantly,
As  if  it  were  but  common  earth,
Or  sand,  or  water,  little  worth —
But  he  was  of  illustrious  birth.
The  parents  scarce  believed  the  word,
The  marriage-union  thus  preferred  ;
And,  though  consenting,  still  they  prayed
The  nuptial  morn  might  be  delayed  :
In  her  no  ripened  bloom  was  seen,
The  sweet  pomegranate  still  was  green  ;
But  a  future  day  should  surely  deck
With  a  bridal  yoke  her  spotless  neck  ;
'  We  will  then  surrender  the  maiden  to  thee,
The  maiden,  till  now,  unaffianced  and  free  ! '


LAILI  AND  MAJNUN  39

The  promise  soothes  his  eager  heart,
He  and  his  followers,  pleased,  depart.


IX

Majniin,  'midst  wild  and  solitude,
His  melancholy  mood  pursued  ;
In  sterner  moments,  loud  he  raved,
The  desert's  burning  noon-tide  braved,
Or,  where  refreshing  shadows  fell,
Warbled  of  her  he  loved  so  well.

The  Arab  chief  of  that  domain

Which  now  his  wandering  footsteps  pressed,
Was  honoured  for  his  bounteous  reign —

For  ever  succouring  the  distressed.
Noufal  his  name — well  known  to  wield,
Victorious  in  the  battle-field,
His  glittering  sword,  and  overthrow
The  robber-band  or  martial  foe  ;
Magnificent  in  pomp  and  state,
And  wealthy  as  in  valour  great.

One  day  the  pleasures  of  the  chase,
The  keen  pursuit  of  bounding  deer,

Had  brought  the  chieftain  to  that  place
Where  Majniin  stood,  and,  drawing  near,


40  THE  LOVES  OF

The  stranger's  features  sought  to  trace,
And  the  sad  notes  of  grief  to  hear,

Which,  ere  he  saw  the  maniac's  face,
Had,  sorrow-laden,  struck  his  ear.

He  now  beheld  that  wasted  frame,

That  head  and  mien  o'ergrown  with  hair,
That  wild,  wdd  look,  which  well  might  claim

Brotherly  kindred  with  despair,
Dejected,  miserable,  borne

By  grief  to  life's  last  narrow  verge,
With  wounded  feet  and  vestment  torn,

Singing  his  own  funereal  dirge.

Noufal  had  traversed  forest,  copse,  and  glade,
In  anxious  quest  of  game,  and  here  he  found

Game — but  what  game  ? — alas  !  a  human  shade,
So  light,  it  scarcely  seemed  to  touch  the  ground.

Dismounting  straight,  he  hears  what  woes
Had  marred  the  mournful  youth's  repose  ;
And  kindly  tries  with  gentle  words
To  show  what  pleasures  life  affords  ;
And  prove  the  uselessness,  the  folly,
Of  nursing  grief  and  melancholy  ;
But  worse,  when  men  from  reason  flee,
And  willing  steep  their  hearts  in  misery.


LAILI  AND  MAJNUN  41

The  sympathy  of  generous  minds
Around  the  heart  its  influence  winds,
And,  ever  soothing,  by  degrees,
Kestores  its  long-lost  harmonies  :
Majmin,  so  long  to  love  a  prey,
Death  hastening  on  by  swift  decay,

Began  to  feel  that  calming  spell,

That  sweet  delight,  unspeakable,
Which  draws  us  from  ourselves  away.

A  change  now  gently  o'er  him  came  ;

With  trembling  hand  he  took  the  cup,
And  drank,  but  drank  in  Laili's  name,

The  life-restoring  cordial  up.
His  spirits  rose  ;  refreshing  food

At  Noufal's  hospitable  board
Seemed  to  remove  his  wayward  mood,

So  long  endured,  so  long  deplored.

And  Noufal  with  delight  surveyed
The  social  joy  his  eyes  betrayed,
And  heard  his  glowing  strains  of  love,
His  murmurings  like  the  turtle-dove,
While  thinking  of  his  Arab  maid.
Changed  from  himself,  his  mind  at  rest,
In  customary  robes  he  dressed  ;
A  turban  shades  his  forehead  pale,
No  more  is  heard  the  lover's  wail,


42  THE  LOVES  OF

But,  jocund  as  the  vintner's  guest,
He  laughs  and  drinks  with  added  zest ;
His  dungeon  gloom  exchanged  for  day,
His  cheeks  a  rosy  tint  display  ;
He  revels  'midst  the  garden's  sweets,
And  still  his  lip  the  goblet  meets  :
But  so  devoted,  so  unchanged  his  flame,
Never  without  repeating  Laili's  name.


In  friendly  converse,  heart  uniting  heart,

Noufal  and  Majnun  hand  in  hand  are  seen  ;
And,  from  each  other  loathing  to  depart,

Wander  untired  by  fount  and  meadow  green.
But  what  is  friendship  to  a  soul
Inured  to  more  intense  control  1
A  zephyr  breathing  over  flowers,
Compared  to  when  the  tempest  lours  ?
A  zephyr,  friendship's  gentler  course  ;
A  tempest,  love's  tumultuous  force  ;
For  friendship  leaves  a  vacuum  still,
Which  love,  and  love  alone,  can  fill :
So  Majnun  felt ;  and  Noufal  tried,
In  vain,  to  fill  that  aching  void  :
For,  though  the  liquid  sparkling  red
Still  flowed,  his  friend  thus  sorrowing  said  :
'  My  generous  host,  with  plenty  blessed,
No  boding  cares  thy  thoughts  molest  ;


LAILI  AND  MAJNUN  43

Thy  kindness  many  a  charm  hath  given,
But  not  one  solace  under  heaven  ;
Without  my  love,  in  tears  I  languish,
And  not  a  voice  to  check  my  anguish  ;
Like  one  of  thirst  about  to  die,
And  every  fountain  near  him  dry  :
Thirst  is  by  water  quenched,  not  treasure,
Nor  floods  of  wine,  nor  festive  pleasure.
Bring  me  the  cure  my  wounds  require  ;
Quench  in  my  heart  this  raging  fire  ;
My  Laili,  oh  !  my  Laili  give,
Or  thy  poor  friend  must  cease  to  live  ! '
Majniin  had  scarce  his  wish  expressed
Ere  rose  in  generous  Noufal's  breast
The  firm  resolve  to  serve  his  friend,
And  to  his  settled  purpose  bend
Laili's  stern  father  :

Now,  in  arms  arrayed,
And  lifting  high  his  keen  Damascus  blade,
He  calls  a  band  of  veterans  to  his  aid.
■Swift  as  the  feathered  race  the  assembled  train
Rush,  sword  in  hand,  along  the  desert  plain  ;
And  when  the  chieftain's  habitation  bright
Upon  the  blue  horizon  strikes  the  sight,
He  sends  a  messenger  to  claim  the  bride,
In  terms  imperious,  not  to  be  denied  ;
Yet  was  that  claim  derided. '  Thou  wilt  soon
Repent  this  folly  : — Laili  is  the  moon  ;


44  THE  LOVES  OF

And  who  presumes  the  splendid  moon  to  gain  I

Is  there  on  earth  a  man  so  mad,  so  vain  ?

Who  draw  their  swords  at  such  a  hazard  1 None.

Who  strikes  his  crystal  vase  upon  a  stone  1 '

Noufal  again  endeavours  to  inspire

With  dread  of  vengeance  Laili's  haughty  sire  ;

But  useless  are  the  threats — the  same  reply—

'  Alike  thy  power  and  vengeance  I  defy  ! '

The  parley  over,  Noufal  draws  his  sword.

And  with  his  horsemen  pours  upon  the  horde,

Ready  for  battle. Spears  and  helmets  ring,

And  brass-bound  shields  ;  loud  twangs  the  archer's

string ;
The  field  of  conflict  like  the  ocean  roars,
When  the  huge  billows  burst  upon  the  shores.
Arrows,  like  birds,  on  either  foeman  stood,
Drinking  with  open  beak  the  vital  flood  ;
The  shining  daggers  in  the  battle's  heat
Rolled  many  a  head  beneath  the  horses'  feet  ;
And lightnings, hurled by death's unsparing

hand,
Spread  consternation  through  the  weeping  land.
Amidst  the  horrors  of  that  fatal  fight,
Majniin  appeared — a  strange  appalling  sight !
Wildly  he  raved,  confounding  friend  and  foe,
His  garments  half  abandoned  in  his  woe,
And  with  a  maniac  stare  reproachful  cried —
'  Why  combat  thus  when  all  are  on  my  side  ? '


LAILI  AND  MAJNUN  45

The  foeman  laughed — the  uproar  louder  grew —
No  pause  the  brazen  drums  or  trumpets  knew  ;
The  stoutest  heart  sank  at  the  carnage  wrought  ;
Swords  blushed  to see the numerous  heads they

smote.
— Noufal  with  dragon-fierceness  prowled  around,
And  hurled  opposing  warriors  to  the  ground  :
Whatever  hero  felt  his  ponderous  gerz x
Was  crushed,  tho'  steadfast  as  the  Mount  Elberz.
Upon  whatever  head  his  weapon  fell,
There  was  but  one  heart-rending  tale  to  tell.
Like  a  mad  elephant  the  foe  he  met  ;
With  hostile  blood  his  blade  continued  wet ;
— Wearied  at  length,  both  tribes  at  once  withdrew.
Resolved  with  morn  the  combat  to  renew  ;
But  Noufal's  gallant  friends  had  suffered  most ;
In  one  hour  more  the  battle  had  been  lost ;
And  thence  assistance,  ere  the  following  dawn,
From  other  warlike  tribes  was  promptly  drawn.

The  desert  rang  again. In  front  and  rear
Glittered  bright  sword  and  buckler,  gerz  and  spear  ;
Again  the  struggle  woke  the  echoes  round,
Swords clashed, and blood again made red the
ground ;

1  Gerz,  a  mace  or  club.  ElbOrz  is  a  celebrated  mountain  in
Persia,  and  forms  a  favourite  simile  in  the  Shah  Nameh  of
Firdausi.  The  immovable  firmness  of  his  heroes  is  generally
compared  to  the  Mount  ElbGrz.


46  THE  LOVES  OF

The  book  of  life,  with  dust  and  carnage  stained,
Was  soon  destroyed,  and  not  a  leaf  remained.
At  last,  the  tribe  of  Laili's  sire  gave  way,
And  Noufal  won  the  hard-contested  day  ;
Numbers  lay  bleeding  of  that  conquered  band,
And  died  unsuccoured  on  the  burning  sand.

And  now  the  elders  of  that  tribe  appear,
Imploring  the  proud  victor. '  Chieftain,  hear  !
The  work  of  slaughter  is  complete  ;

Thou  seest  our  power  destroyed  ;  allow
Us,  wretched  suppliants,  at  thy  feet,

Humbly  to  ask  for  mercy  now.
How  many  warriors  press  the  plain,

Khanjer  and  spear  have  laid  them  low ;
At  peace,  behold  our  kinsmen  slain,
And  thou  art  now  without  a  foe.

'  Then  pardon  what  of  wrong  has  been  :
Let  us  retire,  unharmed — unstayed —

Far  from  this  sanguinary  scene,
And  take  thy  prize — the  Arab  Maid.'

Then  came  the  father,  full  of  grief,  and  said —
(Ashes  and  dust  upon  his  hoary  head,)
'  With  thee,  alas  !  how  useless  to  contend  !
Thou  art  the  conqueror,  and  to  thee  I  bend.
Without  resentment  now  the  vanquished  view,
Wounded  and  old,  and  broken-hearted  too  ;


LAILI  AND  MAJNUN  47

Reproach  has  fallen  upon  me,  and  has  dared

To  call  me  Persian — that  I  disregard  ;

For  I  'm  an  Arab  still,  and  scorn  the  sneer

Of  braggart  fools,  unused  to  shield  and  spear.

But  let  that  pass. I  now,  o'ercome,  and  weak,

And  prostrate,  pardon  from  the  victor  seek  :

Thy  slave  am  I,  obedient  to  thy  will,

Ready  thy  sternest  purpose  to  fulfil ;

But  if  with  Laili  I  consent  to  part,

Wilt  thou  blot  out  all  vengeance  from  thy  heart  ?

Then  speak  at  once,  and  thy  behest  declare  :

I  will  not  flinch,  though  it  my  soul  may  tear.

My  daughter  shall  be  brought  at  thy  command  ;

Let  the  red  flames  ascend  from  blazing  brand,

Waiting  their  victim,  crackling  in  the  air,

And  Laili  duteously  shall  perish  there.

Or,  if  thou  'dst  rather  see  the  maiden  bleed.

This  thirsty  sword  shall  do  the  dreadful  deed  ;

Dissever  at  one  blow  that  lovely  head,

Her  sinless  blood  by  her  own  father  shed  !

In  all  things  thou  shalt  find  me  faithful,  true,

Thy  slave obsequious, — what wouldst  have me

do?
But  mark  me  ;  I  am  not  to  be  beguiled  ;
I  will  not  to  a  demon  give  my  child  ;
I  will  not  to  a  madman's  wild  embrace
Consign  the  pride  and  honour  of  my  race,
And  wed  her  to  contempt  and  foul  disgrace.


48  THE  LOVES  OF

I  will  not  sacrifice  my  tribe's  fair  fame,

Nor  taint  with  obloquy  her  virtuous  name.

Has  honour  on  an  Arab  heart  no  claim  ?

Better  be  overwhelmed  by  adverse  fate

Than  yield  up  honour,  e'en  for  kingly  state.

Through  all  Arabia  is  her  virtue  known ;

Her  beauty  matched  by  heavenly  charms  alone.

I  'd  rather  in  a  monster  be  enshrined

Than  bear  a  name  detested  by  mankind.

What !  wed  a  wretch,  and  earn  my  country's  ban  ?

A  dog  were  better  than  a  demon-man.

A  dog's  bite  heals,  but  human  gnawings  never  ;

The  festering  poison-wounds  remain  for  ever.'

Thus  spake  the  father,  and  in  Noufal's  breast
Excited  feelings  not  to  be  repressed  :
'  I  hoped  to  win  consent,'  he  said —
'  But  now  that  anxious  hope  is  dead,
And  thou  and  thine  may  quit  the  field,
Still  armed  with  khanjer,  sword,  and  shield  ;
Horseman  and  elder. Thus  in  vain
Blood  has  bedewed  this  thirsty  plain.'

When  Majniin  this  conclusion  hears,
He  flies  incensed  to  Noufal,  and  with  tears
Wildly  exclaims — '  The  dawn,  my  generous  friend  !
Promised  this  day  in  happiness  would  end  ;


LAILI  AND  MAJNUN  49

But  thou  hast  let  the  gazelle  slip  away,

And  rue  defrauded  of  my  beauteous  prey.

Near  where  Forat's *  bright  stream  rolls  on,  reclined,

Staunching  my  wounds,  hope  soothed  my  tortured

mind,
And  gave  me  Laili ;  now  that  hope  is  crossed,
And  life's  most  valued  charm  for  ever  lost.'

Noufal  with  heavy  heart  now  homeward  bent
His  way,  and  Majm'm  with  him  sorrowing  went ;
And  there  again  the  pitying  chieftain  strove
To  calm  the  withering  pangs  of  hopeless  love  ;
To  bless,  with  gentleness  and  tender  care,
The  wounded  spirit  sinking  in  despair  :
But  vain  his  efforts  ;  mountain,  wood,  and  plain,
Soon  heard  the  maniac's  piercing  woes  again  ;
Escaped  from  listening  ear,  and  watchful  eye,
Lonely  again  in  desert  wild  to  lie.


The  minstrel  strikes  his  soft  guitar,

With  sad  forebodings  pale  ;
And  fills  with  song  the  balmy  air,

And  thus  resumes  his  tale  : —

1  The  river  Euphrates. The  scene  is  laid  in  the  country
surrouudiug  Bagdad.

D


50  THE  LOVES  OF

The  pensive  bird,  compelled  to  cower,
From  day  to  day  in  Noufal's  bower,
Tired  of  the  scene,  with  pinions  light,
Swift  as  the  wind  has  urged  its  flight,
And,  far  from  Noufal's  wide  domain,
Enjoys  its  liberty  again  ;
Pouring  aloud  its  sad  complaint
In  wildest  mood  without  restraint.


And  now  remote  from  peopled  town,
Midst  tangled  forest,  parched  and  brown,
The  maniac  roams  ;  with  double  speed
He  goads  along  his  snorting  steed,
Till,  in  a  grove,  a  sportsman's  snare
Attracts  his  view,  and,  struggling  there,
Its  knotted  meshes  fast  between,
Some  newly  prisoned  deer  are  seen  ;
And  as  the  sportsman  forward  springs
To  seize  on  one,  and  promptly  brings
The  fatal  knife  upon  its  neck,
His  hand  receives  a  sudden  check  ;
And  looking  upwards,  with  surprise
(A  mounted  chief  before  his  eyes  !),
He  stops — while  thus  exclaims  the  youth
'  If  e'er  thy  bosom  throbbed  with  ruth,
Forbear  !  for  'tis  a  crime  to  spill
A  gazelle's  blood — it  bodeth  ill ;


LAILI  AND  MAJNUN  51

Then  set  the  pleading  captive  free  ;

For  sweet  is  life  and  liberty.

That  heart  must  be  as  marble  hard,

And  merciless  as  wolf  or  pard,

Which  clouds  in  death  that  large  black  eye.

Beaming  like  Laili's,  lovingly.

The  cruel  stroke,  my  friend,  withhold  ;

Its  neck  deserves  a  string  of  gold.

Observe  its  slender  limbs,  the  grace

And  winning  meekness  of  its  face.

The  musk-pod  is  its  fatal  dower,

Like  beauty,  still  the  prey  of  power  ;

And  for  that  fragrant  gift  thou  "rt  led

The  gentle  gazelle's  blood  to  shed  !

0,  seek  not  gain  by  cruel  deed,

Nor  let  the  innocent  victim  bleed.'

'But,'  cried  the  sportsman,  'these  are  mine  ;

I  cannot  at  my  task  repine  :

The  sportsman's  task  ;  'tis  free  from  blame,

To  watch  and  snare  the  forest-game.'


Majmin,  upon  this  stern  reply,

Alighted  from  his  steed,  and  said —

'  0,  let  them  live  !  they  must  not  die.
Forbear  !  and  take  this  barb  instead.'

The  sportsman  seized  it  eagerly,
And,  laughing,  from  the  greenwood  sped.


52  THE  LOVES  OF

Majin'in,  delighted,  viewed  his  purchased  prize,
And  in  the  gazelle's  sees  his  Laili's  eyes  ;
But  soon,  freed  from  the  snare,  with  nimble  feet
The  tremblers  bound  to  some  more  safe  retreat.
The  simple  maniac  starts,  and  finds,  amazed,

The  vision  vanished  which  his  fancy  raised.

*****

'Tis  night — and  darkness,  black  as  Laili's  tresses,

Veils  all  around,  and  all  his  soul  oppresses  ;

No  lucid  moon  like  Laili's  face  appears  ;

No  glimpse  of  light  the  gloomy  prospect  cheers  :

In  a  rude  cavern  he  despairing  lies,

The  tedious  moments  only  marked  with  sighs.


XI

Behold,  what  clouds  of  dust  emerge
From  the  lone  desert's  distant  verge  !
And,  high  in  dusky  eddies  driven,
Obscure  the  azure  hue  of  heaven  :
And  now  the  tramp  of  steed*  is  heard,
And  now  the  leader's  angry  word —
Now  nearer,  more  distinct  they  grow —
Who  is  that  leader  ? — friend  or  foe  ?
Alas  !  'tis  Laili's  vanquished  sire,
Returning  home,  his  heart  on  fire  ;
For  though  he  has  survived  the  blow,
He  keenly  feels  his  overthrow.


LAILI  AND  MAJNUN  53

His  tale  is  told  :  some  Diw l  or  Ghoul
Had  palsied  his  intrepid  sold,
And  held  his  arm  by  magic  foul,
Or  potion  from  the  enchanter's  bowl  ;
Else  had  he  driven,  with  easy  hand,
The  miscreant  Noufal  from  the  land  ;
For  when  did  ever  braggart  lord
Fail,  but  when  magic  held  his  sword  ?

Now,  shielded  by  the  harem  screen,
The  sweet  Narcissus  sad  is  seen  :
Listening  she  hears,  disconsolate,
Her  father's  words,  which  seal  her  fate  ;
And  what  has  Laili  now  to  bear,
But  loneliness,  reproach,  despair,
With  no  congenial  spirit  to  impart
One  single  solace  to  her  bursting  heart  !

Meanwhile  the  spicy  gale  on  every  side
Wafts  the  high  vaunting  of  her  beauty's  pride
Through  all  the  neighbouring  tribes,  and  more

remote
Her  name  is  whispered  and  her  favour  sought.

i  <  Diw— demon,  giant,  devil,  ghost,  hobgoblin.  The  diws,
genii,  or  giants,  in  Eastern  mythology,  are  a  race  of  malignant
beings.  The  ghoul  is  an  imaginary  sylvan  demon,  of  different
shapes  and  colours,  supposed  to  devour  men  and  animals.
Anything  which  suddenly  attacks  and  destroys  a  man,  or
robs  him  of  his  senses.' — Richardson.


54  THE  LOVES  OE

Suitors  with  various  claims  appear — the  great,
The  rich,  the  powerful — all  impatient  wait
To  know  for  whom  the  father  keeps  that  rare
But  fragile  crystal  with  such  watchful  care.
Her  charms  eclipse  all  others  of  her  sex,
Given  to  be  loved,  but  rival  hearts  to  vex  ;
For  when  the  lamp  of  joy  illumes  her  cheeks,
The  lover  smiles,  and  yet  his  heart  it  breaks  :
The full-blown rose thus sheds its fragrance

round  ;
But  there are  thorns, not  given to charm,  but
wound.

Among  the  rest  that  stripling  came,

Who  had  before  avowed  his  flame  ;

His  cheerful  aspect  seemed  to  say,

For  him  was  fixed  the  nuptial-day.


His  offerings  are  magnificent ;

Garments  embroidered  every  fold,
And  rarest  gems,  to  win  consent,

And  carpets  worked  with  silk  and  gold  :
Amber,  and  pearls,  and  rubies  bright,
And  bags  of  musk,  attract  the  sight ;
And  camels  of  unequalled  speed,
And  ambling  nags  of  purest  breed  : —
These  (resting  for  a  while)  he  sends
Before  him,  and  instructs  his  friends,


LAILI  AND  MAJNUN  55

With  all  the  eloquence  and  power

Persuasion  brings  in  favouring  hour,

To  magnify  his  worth,  and  prove

That  he  alone  deserves  her  love. —

'  A  youth  of  royal  presence,  Yemen's  boast,

Fierce  as  a  lion,  mighty  as  a  host  ;

Of  boundless  wealth,  and  valour's  self,  he  wields

His  conquering  sword  amid  embattled  fields.

Call  ye  for  blood  1  'tis  shed  by  his  own  hand.

Call  ye  for  gold  ?  he  scatters  it  like  sand.'


And  when  the  flowers  of  speech  their  scent  had

shed,
Diffusing  honours  round  the  suitor's  head  ;
Exalting  him  to  more  than  mortal  worth,
In  person  manly,  noble  in  his  birth  ;
The  sire  of  Laili  seemed  oppressed  with  thought,
As  if  with  some  repulsive  feeling  fraught  ;
Yet  promptly  was  the  answer  given — he  soon
Decreed  the  fate  of  Yemen's  splendid  moon  ;
Saddled  the  steed  of  his  desire,  in  sooth,
Flung  his  own  offspring  in  the  dragon's  mouth.
Forthwith  the  nuptial  pomp,  the  nuptial  rites,

Engage  the  chieftain's  household — every  square
Eincs with the rattling drums whose noise
excites

More  deafening  clamour  through  the  wide  bazar.


56  THE  LOVES  OF

The  pipe  and  cymbal,  shrill  and  loud,

Delight  the  gay  assembled  crowd  ;

And  all  is  mirth  and  jollity,

With  song,  and  dance,  and  revelry.

But  Laili  mournful  sits  apart,

The  shaft  of  misery  through  her  heart ;

And  black  portentous  clouds  are  seen

Darkening  her  soft  expressive  mien  ;

Her  bosom  swells  with  heavy  sighs,

Tears  gush  from  those  heart-winning  eyes,

Where  Love's  triumphant  witchery  lies.

In  blooming  spring  a  withered  leaf,

She  droops  in  agony  of  grief ;

Loving  her  own — her  only  one —

Loving  Majnrin,  and  him  alone  ;

All  else  from  her  affections  gone  ;

And  to  be  joined,  in  a  moment's  breath,

To  another  ! — Death,  and  worse  than  death  !

Soon  as  the  sparkling  stars  of  night
Had  disappeared,  and  floods  of  light
Shed  from  the  morn's  refulgent  beam
Empurpled  Dijla's 1  rolling  stream,
The  bridegroom,  joyous,  rose  to  see
The  bride  ecpiipped  as  bride  should  be  :
The  litter  and  the  golden  throne,
Prepared  for  her  to  rest  upon  :
1  The  river  Tigris.


LAILI  AND  MAJNUN  57

But  what  avails  the  tenderest  care,

The  fondest  love,  when  dark  despair

And  utter  hatred  fill  the  breast

Of  her  to  whom  that  fondness  is  addressed  ?

Quickly  her  sharp  disdain  the  bridegroom  feels,1

And  from  her  scornful  presence  shrinks  and  reels  :

A  solemn  oath  she  takes,  and  cries,

With  frenzy  flashing  from  her  eyes, —

'  Hopest  thou  I  ever  shall  be  thine  1

It  is  my  fathers  will,  not  mine  !

Eather  than  be  that  thing  abhorred,

My  life-blood  shall  distain  thy  sword.

Away  !  nor  longer  seek  to  gain

A  heart  foredoomed  to  endless  pain  ;

A  heart,  no  power  of  thine  can  move  ;

A  bleeding  heart,  which  scorns  thy  love  ! !

When  Ibn  Salam  her  frenzied  look  beheld,

And  heard  her  vows,  his cherished hopes were

quelled.
He  soon  perceived  what  art  had  been  employed, —
AIL  his  bright  visions  faded  and  destroyed  ; —
And  found,  when  love  has  turned  a  maiden's  brain,
Father  and  mother  urge  their  power  in  vain.

1  The  original  makes  Laili  rather  Amazonian  at  this  junc-
ture, which  is  not  quite  in  keeping  with  the  gentleness  of  her
character.  It  says,  she  struck  him  such  a  blow,  that  he  fell
down  as  if  he  were  dead.


58  THE  LOVES  OF


XII

The  Arab  poets  who  rehearse

Their  legends  in  immortal  verse,

Say,  when  Majnun  these  tidings  knew,

More  wild,  more  moody  wild,  he  grew  ;

Raving  through  wood  and  mountain  glen  ;

Flying  still  more  the  haunts  of  men.

Sudden  a  perfume,  grateful  to  the  soul,
O'er  his  awakened  senses  stole.
He  thought  from  Lailrs  fragrant  couch  it  came,
It  filled  with  joy  his  wearied  frame.
Ecstatic  with  the  unexpected  pleasure,
The  fond  memorial  of  his  dearest  treasure,
He  sank  upon  the  ground,  beneath  the  shade
Of  a  broad  palm,  in  senseless  torpor  laid.

A  stranger,  quickly  passing  by,
Observed  the  love-lorn  wanderer  lie
Sleeping,  or  dead,  and  checked  his  camel's  pace
To  mark  the  features  of  his  face.
Loud  roaring,  like  a  demon,  he  awoke
The  maniac  from  his  trance,  and  gaily  spoke  :
'  Up,  up,  thou  sluggard  !  up  and  see,
What  thy  heart's-ease  has  done  for  thee  !
Better  drive  feeling  from  thy  mind,
Since  there 's  no  faith  in  womankind  :


LAILI  AND  MAJNUN  59

Better  be  idle,  than  employed

In  fruitless  toil ;  better  avoid

A  mistress,  though  of  form  divine,

If  she  be  fair  and  false  as  thine  !

They  've  given  her  charms  to  one  as  young —

The  bride-veil  o'er  her  brow  is  flung  :

Close,  side  by  side,1  from  morn  till  night,

Kissing  and  dalliance  their  delight  ;

Whilst  thou,  from  human  solace  flying,

With  unrequited  love  art  dying.

— Distant  from  her  adorer's  view.

One  in  a  thousand  may  be  true  :

The  pen  which  writes,  as  if  it  knew

A  woman's  promise,  splits  in  two.

While  in  another's  warm  embrace,

No  witness  to  thy  own  disgrace,

Faithless,  she  wastes  no  thought  on  thee,

Wrapped  in  her  own  felicity.

Woman's  desire  is  more  intense

Than  man's — more  excmisite  her  sense  ;

But,  never  blinded  by  her  flame,

Gain  and  fruition  are  her  aim.

A  woman's  love  is  selfish  all  ;

Possessions,  wealth,  secure  her  fall

How  many  false  and  cruel  prove,

And  not  one  faithful  in  her  love  !

Literally,  Every  day,  ear  in  ear.


60  THE  LOVES  OF

A  contradiction  is  her  life  ;
Without,  all  peace  ;  within,  all  strife  ;
A  dangerous  friend,  a  fatal  foe,
Prime  breeder1  of  a  world  of  woe.
When  we  are  joyous,  she  is  sad  ;
When  deep  in  sorrow,  she  is  glad.
Such  is  the  life  a  woman  leads,
And  in  her  sorcery  still  succeeds.'

These  words  confused  the  lover's  brain  ;
Fire  ran  through  every  swelling  vein  :
Frantic  he  dashed  his  forehead  on  the  ground,
And  blood flowed trickling  from  the  ghastly

wound.
'  What  added  curse  is  this  V  he  groaning  said, —
'  Another  tempest,  roaring  round  my  head  ! '

When  ever  did  a  bleeding  heart
Betray  no  sign  of  blighted  reason  1

Can  the  most  skilful  gardener's  art

Still  keep  his  flowers  or  fruit  in  season  ?

No  ;  hearts  dissolved  in  grief  give  birth

To  madness,  as  the  teeming  earth

1  Afati-jehCm,  the  calamity  of  the  world.  A  common  epithet
applied  in  anger  to  the  fair  sex.  Something  in  the  spirit  of
Otway  :  —

'  Who  lost  Marc  Antony  the  world  ?  a  woman.
Who  was  the  cause  of  a  long  ten-years'  war,
And  laid  at  last  old  Troy  in  ashes  ?  woman,
Destructive,  damnable,  deceitful  woman  ! '


LAILI  AND  MAJNUN  61

Yields  herbs  ;  and  yet  bewildered  mind,

To  all  but  one  bright  object  blind,

Suffers  no  censure  from  the  seer

Who  guides  the  faithful  Moslem  here.

Love  sanctifies  the  erring  thought,

And  Heaven  forgives  the  deed  by  frenzy  wrought.

'  A  rose,  a  lovely  rose,  I  found,

With  thorns  and  briars  compassed  round  ;

And,  struggling  to  possess  that  prize,

The  gardener  in  his  wrath  denies,

Behold  my  heart,  all  torn  and  bleeding,

Its  pangs  all  other  pangs  exceeding  :

I  see  the  leaves  expand  and  bloom,

I  smell  its  exquisite  perfume  ;

Its  colour,  blushing  in  the  light,

Gives  to  my  raptured  soul  delight :

I  weep  beneath  the  cypress-tree,

And  still  the  rose  is  not  for  me.

Alas  !  none  hear,  nor  mark  my  moan  ;

Pride  of  my  soul,  my  rose,  is  gone  !

Another  has,  in  open  day,

Borne  the  heart-winning  prize  away.

Though  wrapped  in  sweetest  innocence,

The  fell  oppressor  snatched  her  thence.

But  who  deserves  the  curse  that 's  sped

Upon  the  foul  betrayer's  head  '?

The  gardener,  in  his  lu3t  for  gold,

That  rose — the  boast  of  Irem— sold.


62  THE  LOVES  OF

'  Poor  wretch  !  if  worlds  of  wealth  were  mine,

Full  willingly  I  'd  make  them  thine  ;

But  not  a  dirhem  for  that  rose,

The  fatal  cause  of  all  my  woes.

I  would  not  play  a  villain's  part,

And  buy  with  gold  a  woman's  heart ;

;Tis  not  in  gold  to  purchase  love,

Above  all  wealth,  all  price  above  ;

For  I  would  rather  die  than  see

A  smile  on  lips  that  are  not  free.

Give  me  the  boundless  swell  of  bliss,

The  heart  upspringing  to  the  kiss,

When  life,  and  soul,  and  breath  combine

To  tell  me,  she  is  only  mine  ;

The  flood  of  joy  o'erwhelming  quite

My  glowing  senses  with  delight.

— Base  wretch  !  and  thou  that  rose  hast  sold  :

A  demon's  curse  upon  thy  gold  ! '


The  traveller  witnessed  with  surprise
How  he  the  maniac's  heart  had  wrung —

What  remedy  could  he  devise  ?
He  from  his  camel  sprung  ;

And  when  the  sufferer  seemed  to  be  restored,

Forgiveness  anxiously  implored  :

'  'Twas  wrong,  and  I  deserve  the  blame  ;

I  marked  with  infamy  her  name  :


LAILI  AND  MAJNUN  63

My  fault  is  of  the  darkest  hue, —
My  crime — for  Lailf  still  is  true  !
What  though  in  nuptial  band  united,
Her  faith,  to  thee  so  often  plighted,
Spotless  remains,  still  hrni,  unbroken,
As  proved  by  many  a  mournful  token.
For  every  moment's  space  can  claim
A  thousand  recollections  of  thy  name  :
Thus  ever  present  to  her  memory,
She  lives,  and  only  lives  for  thee.
One  year  has  passed  since  she  was  made  a  bride  ;
But  what  of  years  ?  whatever  may  betide,
Were  it  a  thousand,  still  her  heart's  the  same,
Unchanged,  unchangeable  her  earliest  cherished  name.'

Now  Majmin,  desolate,  his  fate  perceived,
As  in  a  glass,  the  misery  of  his  lot,

And,  from  the  first  impression  scarce  relieved,
Felt  his  abandonment,  and  only  not  forgot.

Wasted  and  wan,  he  fluttered  where  he  lay  ;

And,  turning  to  that  magic  point  which  led
To  where  his  angel-face  was  wont  to  stay,

Thus,  in  a  melancholy  tone,  he  said  :

'  Alas  !  my  passion  glowed  in  every  part  ;
Thine  in  thy  tongue,  but  never  in  thy  heart ;


64  THE  LOVES  OF

With  thy  new  love  hast  thou  so  amorous  grown  ?
And  am  I  worthless  as  a  clesert-stone  ?
What  is  a  word,  a  promise,  oath,  or  pledge  ?
Mockery,  which  never  can  the  heart  engage.
What was my  garden's  wealth but fruit and

flowers  ?
And  all  that  wealth  a  raven  now  devours  ;
And  what  has  been  my  constant  care  and  toil,
But  for  another  to  prepare  the  spoil  ?
When  first  my  soul  was  destined  to  be  thine,
I  little  thought  that  treasure  to  resign  ;
Think  of  thy  broken  vows,  to  what  they  tend  ;
Think  of  thy  falsehood,  and  lament  its  end.
My  doom  is  fixed  ;  my  choice  no  longer  free  ;
My  martyr-life  devoted  still  to  thee  ! '


XIII

Meantime,  the  father  mourned  his  wretched  state,
Like  Jacob  o'er  his  Joseph's  unknown  fate  ;
No  rest  by  day,  no  sleep  by  night  ;
Grief  o'er  him  shed  its  withering  blight ;
Incessant  yearnings  wrung  his  heart,

He  sat  in  darkness,  silent,  lone  :
'  Why  did  my  child  from  home  depart  1

Where  has  the  hopeless  wanderer  gone  I '
Dreading  that  Death's  relentless  dart

His  best-beloved  had  overthrown.


LAILI  AND  MAJNUN  65

Sudden  he  rose — despair  gave  force
And  vigour  to  his  aged  frame  ;

And,  almost  frantic  with  remorse,
Gathering  upon  himself  the  blame,

He  trod  the  maze  of  wood  and  wild,

Seeking  his  poor  forsaken  child  ;

And  when  the  day  withdrew  its  light,

He  passed  in  cavern  rude  the  night ;

But  never  ceased  his  venturous  quest —

No  peace  for  him— no  strengthening  rest.

In  vain  he  paced  the  desert  round,

For  not  a  trace  of  him  was  found.

At  length  a  herdsman,  falling  in  his  way,

Described  the  spot  where  Majniin  lay  ;

Craggy,  and  deep,  and  terrible  to  view,

It  seemed  a  grave  all  damp  with  noxious  dew.

Thither  proceeding,  by  the  stranger  led,

He  finds  with  horror  that  sepulchral  bed  ;

And,  fearful  of  the  worst,  beholds  the  wreck
Of  Majnun,  his  once-lovely  boy  ; —

He  sees  a  serpent  winding  round  his  neck,
Playful,  not  destined  to  destroy  :
It  stays  but  for  a  moment — all  around,
Limbs  half-devoured,  and  bones,  bestrew  the  ground.
With  cautious  step  descending,  he  surveys
Th'  unconscious  youth,  who  meets  his  anxious  gaze
With  a  wild  look  which  could  not  recognise

The  tottering  form  before  him  :  '  Who  art  thou  ?

E


66  THE  LOVES  OF

And  what  thy  errand  1 ' The  old  man  replies —

'  I  am  thy  father  ! I  have  found  thee  now,
After  long  search  ? ' Embracing',  both  remained
In  deep  compassionate  sorrow,  fondly  strained
Each  to  the  other's  bosom  ;  and  when  he,
The  maniac,  had  regained  his  memory,
And  beams  of  light  burst  through  his  'nighted  brain,
And  he  beheld  and  knew  his  sire  again,
Joy  sparkled  in  his  faded  eye  a  while,
And  his  parched  lips  seemed  curled  into  a  smile.
The  poor  old  father  said,  with  feeble  voice,
'  Thou  makest  my  heart  both  tremble  and  rejoice  :
The  path  o'er  which  thy  feet  are  doomed  to  pass
Shows  blades  of  swords,  not  harmless  blades  of  grass  :
And  I  would  warn  thee  never  more  to  roam  ;
Thy  only  safety  is  to  stay  at  home.
Doo-s  have  a  home,  and  thou  hast  none  to  boast  :
Art  thou  a  man,  to  human  comfort  lost  1
If  man  thou  art,  then  like  a  man  appear,
Or,  if  a  demon,  be  a  demon  here.
The  ghoul,  created  to  perplex  the  earth,
Is  still  a  ghoul,  and  answers  to  its  birth  ;
But  thou  'rt  a  man  ;  and  why,  with  human  soul,
Forget  thy  nature  and  become  a  ghoul  ?
To-day  if  thou  shouldst  throw  the  reins  aside,
To-morrow  thou  mayst  ask,  and  be  denied.
Soon  shall  I  pass  away,  and  be  at  rest ;
No  longer  this  frail  world's  unhappy  guest.


LAILI  AND  MAJNUN  67

My  day  is  mingling  with  the  shades  of  night ;
My  life  is  losing  all  its  wonted  light.
Soul  of  thy  father  !  re-inspired  with  grace,
Rise,  and  protect  the  honours  of  thy  race,
That,  ere  this  frame  be  in  the  grave  laid  low,
I  may  the  guardian  of  my  birthright  know  ;
That,  ere  I  die,  to  sooth  a  parent's  grief,
Thou  mayst  be  hailed in  thine own  home the

chief.
Forbid  it,  Heaven,  that,  when  my  hour  is  past,
My  house  and  home  should  to  the  winds  be  cast  !
That  plundering  strangers,  with  rapacious  hand,
Should  waste  my  treasure  and  despoil  my  land  !
And  Heaven  forbid,  that  both  at  once  should  fall,
(My  greatest  dread),  and  thus  extinguish  all  !
That  when  the  summons  reaches  me  to  die,
Thy  death  should  also  swell  the  funeral  cry  ! '
These  words  sank  deep  in  Majnun's  breast :  he
seemed
Altered  in  mood,  as  through  his  senses  streamed
The  memory  of  his  home,  the  fond  regard
Of  his  dear  mother,  and  the  joys  he  shared
From  her  affection. Days  and  nights  he  tried
To  banish  from  his  thoughts  another's  bride  :
Repentance  came,  and  oft  the  strife  renewed,
But  tyrant  love  that  feeling  soon  subdued  ;
(Love,  a  wild  elephant  in  might,  which  grows
More  powerful  when  opposed  by  friends  or  foes)  ;


68  THE  LOVES  OF

And  the  poor  maniac  thus  his  sire  addressed  :

'  Thy  counsel,  father,  is  the  wisest,  best ;

And  I  would  gladly  to  thy  wish  conform  :

But  what  am  I  I  a  helpless  wretch,  a  worm,

Without  the  power  to  do  what  I  approve,

Enslaved,  the  victim  of  almighty  love.

To  me  the  world  is  swallowed  up — I  see

Nothing  but  Laili — all  is  lost  to  me,

Save  her  bright  image — father,  mother,  home,

All  buried  in  impenetrable  gloom,

Beyond  my  feeling  ; — yet  I  know  thou  'rt  here,

And  I  could  weep  ; — but  what  avails  the  tear,

Even  were  it  at  a  father's  funeral  shed  ?

For  human  sorrows  never  reach  the  dead.

Thou  sayst  the  night  of  Death  is  on  thee  falling  !

Then  must  I  weep,  thy  fostering  care  recalling  ;

But  I  shall  die  in  utter  misery,

And  none  be  left  in  life  to  weep  for  me.'

Syd  Omri,  with  unutterable  grief,
Gazed  on  his  son,  whose  sorrows  mocked  relief  ;
And,  hopeless,  wretched,  every  thought  resigned
That  once  was  balm  and  comfort  to  his  mind.
Then,  showering  blessings  o'er  his  offspring's  head,

Groaning,  he  parted  from  that  dismal  cave  ;
And,  wrapt  in  deepest  anguish,  homeward  sped  ;

But  'twas,  alas  !  to  his  expected  grave.
Gently  he  sank,  by  age  and  grief  oppressed,
From  this  vain  world  to  that  of  endless  rest.


LAILI  AND  MAJNUN  69

Vain  world  indeed  !  who  ever  rested  here  ?
The  lustrous  moon  hath  its  eternal  sphere  ;
But  man,  who  in  this  mortal  prison  sighs,
Appears  like  lightning,  and  like  lightning  flies.
A  pilgrim-step  approached  the  wild  retreat,
Where  Majniin  lingered  in  his  rocky  seat,
And  the  sad  tale  was  told. He  fell
Upon  the  earth  insensible  ;
And,  grovelling,  with  a  frantic  air,
His  bosom  beat — he  tore  his  hair,
And  never  rested,  night  or  day,
Till  he  had,  wandering  far  away,
Reached  the  sad  spot  where  peaceful  lay
His  father's  bones,  now  crumbling  witli  decay.
His  arms  around  the  grave  he  flung,
And  to  the  earth  delirious  clung  :
Grasping  the  ashes  of  the  dead,
He  cast  them  o'er  his  prostrate  head,
And,  with  repentant  tears,  bedewed
The  holy  relics  round  him  strewed.
O'erwhelming  was  the  sharpened  sense
Of  his  contrition,  deep,  intense  ;
And  sickness  wrapped  his  shattered  frame
In  a  slow  fever's  parching  flame  ;
Still,  ceaseless,  'twas  his  wont  to  rave
Upon  his  father's  sacred  grave.
He  felt  the  bitterness  of  fate  ;
He  saw  his  folly  now  too  late  ;


70  THE  LOVES  OF

And  worlds  would  give  again  to  share
His  generous  father's  constant  care  ;
For  he  had  oft,  in  wanton  guise,
Contemned  the  counsels  of  the  wise  ;
Had  with  a  child's  impatience  burned,
And  scorn  for  sympathy  returned  ;
And  now,  like  all  of  human  mould,
"When  the  indulgent  heart  is  cold,
"Which  would  have  sealed  his  happiness,
He  mourns — but  mourns  his  own  distress  ;
For,  when  the  diamond  blazed  like  day,
He  cast  it  recklessly  away.


XIV

Who 's  this  that  wanders  near  that  palmy  glade,
WThere  the  fresh  breeze  adds  coolness  to  the  shade  ?
'Tis  Majniin  ; — he  has  left  his  father's  tomb,
Again  'mid  rocks  and  scorching  plains  to  roam,
Unmindful  of  the  sun's  meridian  heat,
Or  the  damp  dewy  night,  with  unshod  feet  ;
Unmindful  of  the  forest's  savage  brood,
Howling  on  every  side  in  quest  of  blood  ;
Xo  dread  has  he  from  aught  of  earth  or  air,
From  den  or  eyry,  calm  in  his  despair  :
He  seems  to  court  new  perils,  and  can  view
With  unblenched  visage  scenes  of  darkest  hue  ;


LAILI  AND  MAJNUN  71

Yet  is  he  gentle,  and  his  gracious  mien
Checks  the  extended  claw,  where  blood  has  been  ;
For  tiger,  wolf,  and  panther  gather  round
The  maniac  as  their  king,  and  lick  the  ground  ;
Fox  and  hyena  fierce  their  snarling  cease  ;
Lion  and  fawn  familiar  meet  in  peace  ;
Vulture  and  soaring  eagle,  on  the  wing,
Around  his  place  of  rest  their  shadows  fling  ;
Like  Suliman,1  o'er  all  extends  his  reign  ;
His  pillow  is  the  lion's  shaggy  mane  ;
The  wily  leopard,  on  the  herbage  spread,
Forms  like  a  carpet  his  romantic  bed  ;
And  lynx  and  wolf,  in  harmony  combined,
Frisk  o'er  the  sward  and  gambol  with  the  hind.
All  pay  their  homage  with  respect  profound,
As  if  in  circles  of  enchantment  bound.

Among;  the  rest,  one  little  fawn

Skipped  nimbly  o'er  the  flowery  lawn  ;

And,  beautifully  delicate,

Sprang  where  th'  admiring  maniac  sate  :

So  soft,  so  meek,  so  sweetly  mild,

So  shy,  so  innocently  wild,

1  No  name  is  more  famous  in  the  East  than  Solomon.  Om-
nipotence is  said  to  have  placed  under  his  obedience  not  only-
mankind,  but  animals.  The  birds  were  his  constant  attendants,
screening  him  like  a  canopy  from  the  inclemencies  of  the
weather.


72  THE  LOVES  OF

And,  ever  playful  in  his  sight,

The  fondling  grew  his  great  delight ;

He  loved  its  pleasing  form  to  trace,

And  kiss  its  full  black  eyes  and  face,

Thinking  of  Laili  all  the  while  ;

For  fantasies  the  heart  beguile  ;

And,  with  th'  illusive  dream  impressed,

He  hugged  the  favourite  to  his  breast  :

"With  his  own  hand  the  fawn  he  fed,

And  choicest  herbs  before  it  spread  ;

And  all  the  beasts  assembled  there

Partook  of  his  indulgent  care,

And,  day  and  night,  they,  unconstrained,

In  wondrous  harmony  remained.

And  thus,  throughout  the  world,  we  find

'Mid  brutes,  as  well  as  humankind,

A  liberal  hand,  a  friendly  voice,

Bids  e'en  the  savage  heart  rejoice.

There  is  a  curious  story  told

Of  a  despotic  king  of  old,

Which  proves  ferocious  beasts  endued

With  a  deep  sense  of  gratitude.

The  king  had  in  his  palace-bounds

A  den  of  man-devouring  hounds  ;

And  all  on  whom  his  anger  fell

"Were  cast  into  that  dreadful  cell.

Among  the  courtiers  there  was  one,

For  wisdom,  v\  it,  and  shrewdness  known,


LAILI  AND  MAJNUN  73

Long  in  the  royal  household  nursed,

But  still  he  always  feared  the  worst,

Thinking  the  fatal  day  might  come

For  him  to  share  an  equal  doom  ;

And  therefore,  by  a  dexterous  scheme,

His  life  endeavoured  to  redeem.

Unseen,  by  night,  he  often  stood

And  fed  the  hounds  with  savoury  food  ;

And  well  their  bounteous  friend  they  knew

And  in  their  hearts  attachment  grew  ;

When,  just  as  he,  prophetic,  thought,

The  king  his  death  unfeeling  sought  ;

Sternly  his  good  old  courtier  blamed,

And  to  the  ravenous  dogs  condemned.

'Twas  night  when  in  the  den  he  casl

His  victim  for  a  dog's  repast  :

Next  morn,  unshamed  by  such  a  deed

(Dooming  the  innocent  to  bleed),

He  sent  a  page  to  look  for  him.

Torn,  he  expected,  limb  from  limb  :

The  wondering  keeper,  who  obeyed

The  king,  and  not  a  trice  delayed,

Now,  hastening  to  the  presence,  cried,

'  0  king  !  his  virtue  has  been  tried  ;

He  bears  an  angel's  blessed  charm,

And  God  protects  his  life  from  harm  :

Untouched,  though  fettered  fast,  I  found  him,

The  dogs  all  fondly  fawning  round  him  ! '


74  THE  LOVES  OF

The  king  was  struck  with  wonderment
At  this  miraculous  event ;
And  seeing,  in  that  horrid  cell,
The  guiltless  courtier  safe  and  well,
lie  asked,  with  tears  profusely  shed,
By  what  strange  spell  he  was  not  dead  1
'  No  juggling  words  had  I  to  say  ;
I  fed  the  bloodhounds  every  day  ;
And  thence  their  gratitude  arose,
Which  saved  me  from  my  cruel  foes.
But  I  have  served  thee  many  a  year,
And  for  it  thou  hast  sent  me  here  !
A  dog  has  feeling — thou  hast  none —
A  dog  is  thankful  for  a  bone  ;
But  thou,  with  hands  in  blood  imbrued,
Hast  not  one  spark  of  gratitude.'
Abashed  the  despot  saw  his  crimes,
And  changed  his  frightful  course  betimes.

xv

Sweet  slumber  had  diffused  the  charm  of  rest
Through  the  poor  maniac's  agitated  breast,
And  as  the  morn,  magnificently  bright,
Poured  o'er  the  cloudless  sky  its  purple  light,
The  smiling  presage 1  of  a  prosperous  day,

1  Literally,  on  that  day  lie  rose  up  on  the  right-hand  side  ;
a  sign  that  his  fortune  v/ould  be  auspicious.


LAILI  AND  MAJNUN  75

He  rose  refreshed,  and  hailed  the  heavenly  ray.

Graceful  he  stood  amidst  the  varied  herd,

And,  warmed  with  hope,  his  orisons  preferred  ;

When  suddenly  a  horseman  met  his  view,

Who,  as  it  seemed,  the  wandering  lover  knew.

'  Komantic  youth  !  I  see  the  timorous  deer

And  the  fierce  lion  meet  in  concord  here,

And  thou  the  monarch— strange  !  but  mark  !  I  bear

A  secret  tale  of  one,  so  loved,  so  fair.

What  wouldst  thou  feel,  did  I  her  name  declare  I

What  is  the  cypress  to  her  form  divine  I

What  is  the  perfume  from  a  martyr's  shrine  >.

What,  should  that  idol's  fate  be  mixed  with  thine  .'

Her  ringlets  twisted  like  the  graceful  Jim,1

Her  shape  an  Alif,  and  her  mouth  a  Mini  ;

Her  eyes  like  two  Narcissuses,  that  grow

Where  the  pure  waters  of  a  fountain  flow  ;

Her  eyebrows,  joined,  a  double  arch  express  ;

Her  beauteous  cheeks  an  angel  might  caress.

But  what  can  I  of  such  perfection  say  I

How  to  the  blind  Creations  charms  portray  ?

I  saw  her  weep— the  tear-drops  glistening  fell

In  showers  from  eyes  which  their  own  tale  could  tell ;

1  To  make  this  Persian  conceit,  of  not  unfrequent  occurrence,
understood,  it  may  be  enough  to  say  the  letter  Jim,  of  the  Per-
sian as  well  as  Arabic  alphabet,  is  formed  something  like  the
capital  T  of  the  German  text ;  the  Alif,  like  our  number  One
in  writing ;  and  the  Arabic  letter  Mim,  a  small  horizontal  oval.


76  THE  LOVES  OF

And  yet  I  asked  for  whom  she  wept  and  mourned —

For  one  untrue,  or  one  to  dust  returned  ?

Opening  her  ruby  lips,  she  softly  said  :

"  My  heart 1  is  desolate — my  joys  are  fled  ;

I  once  was  Laili — need  I  more  reveal  ?

Worse  than  a  thousand  maniacs  now  I  feel  :

More  wild  than  that  dark  star  which  rules  my  fate,

More  mad  than  Majnun's  my  distracted  state.

If  that  dark  spirit  thou  shouldst  haply  find —

That  mournful  wreck  of  an  enlightened  mind —

How  wilt  thou  recognise  him  1 By  that  sad

Disordered  aspect,  oft  pronounced  as  mad ;

By  that  unutterable  grief  which  preys

Upon  his  heart ;  that  melancholy  gaze,

Which  has  no  sense  of  outward  things  ;  tbat  love

So  pure,  an  emanation  from  above.

0  that  I  could  escape  this  wretched  thrall,
And  leave,  for  ever  leave,  my  father's  hall  !
But  go,  and  seek  the  wanderer  ; — glen  and  cave
Patient  explore — his  refuge,  or  his  grave  :
Find  him  ;  and,  faithful,  with  unwearied  feet
Eeturn,  and  tell  me  his  forlorn  retreat."

'  Silent  I  heard  her  earnest  prayer  :
Marked  her  desponding  voice  and  air  ;

1  The  original  runs,  Salt  is  thrown  upon  my  heart,  expressive
of  anguish.


f-  —


LAILI  AND  MAJNUN  77

And  while  she  still,  in  tenderest  mood,
Bedewed  with  tears,  before  me  stood,
The  story  of  thy  woes,  which  long
Had  been  the  theme  of  many  a  song,
Familiar  to  the  country  round,
I  sang,  and  deep  affection  found  ;
So  deep,  that,  sigh  succeeding  sigh,
She  trembled  in  her  agony,
And,  senseless,  sank  upon  the  ground,
Where  pale  and  motionless  she  lay
As  if  her  life  had  ebbed  away.
But  soon  as  that  dread  swoon  was  o'er,

And  sobs  and  tears  relieved  her  heart  ;
Again  she  pressed  me  to  restore

Him  she  adored — "  If  kind  thou  art,
And  kind  thou  must  be  to  a  wretch  forlorn,

I  feel  thou  wouldst  not  play  a  traitor's  part  ;
Thou  canst  not  view  my  misery  with  scorn.
Alas  !  though  I  may  seem  to  him  untrue,
Pity  is  still  to  woman's  sorrows  due."

'  Her  rosy  fingers  press

The  written  tale  of  her  distress  ;

And,  raising  to  her  ruby  mouth

Tiiat  passionate  record  of  her  truth,

Kissed  it  a  thousand  times,  and  shed

A  flood  of  tears,  whilst  mournfully  she  said-

"  To  him  this  sad  memorial  give —

To  him  for  whom  alone  I  live." '


78  THE  LOVES  OE

Majnun,  perplexed,  with  painful  feelings  riven,
Seemed  to  refuse  what  still  to  him  was  Heaven  ;
Imputed  falsehood  swept  across  his  mind,
But  left  no  dark  distrustful  thoughts  behind.
At  length,  the  writing  eagerly  he  took  ;
But,  as  he  read,  he  faltered,  wept,  and  shook.
Adoring  the  Creator,1  she  began —
'  Beyond  the  praise  of  tongue,  to  mortal  man
His  love  and  goodness,' — thus  her  ndmeh  ran —
'  He  with  the  light  of  wisdom  cheers  the  soul ;
He  bids  the  cheek  to  glow,  the  eye  to  roll,
And  every  mortal  bends  to  His  control.
To  this,  He  scatters  jewels  bright  and  rare,
To  that,  good  sense  to  strive  with  worldly  care  :
To  me  He  gave  the  love  which  time  defies —
The  love  I  bear  thee,  spotless  from  the  skies  ;
Fountain  of  Khizer,2  sparkling  in  the  shade  !
Fountain  of  life  to  thine  own  Arab  maid  !

1  This  is  the  usual  process  in  Oriental  composition  :  and  there
is  not  a  document  ever  written  in  Arabic  or  Persian,  bat  has  the
letter  Alif,  at  least,  jdaced  at  the  top  of  the  page,  signifying,
there  is  but  one  God.  The  poets  are  especially  scrupulous  in
pious  exordiums  to  the  Deity.

2  Khizer  is  the  name  of  a  prophet,  who,  according  to  Oriental
tradition,  was  vizier  and  general  to  an  ancient  king  of  Persia.
They  say  that  he  discovered  and  drank  of  the  fountain  of  life,
and  that,  in  consequence,  he  will  not  die  till  the  last  trumpet.
He  is  by  some  confounded  with  the  prophet  Elias,  and, which
is  somewhat  singular,  likewise  with  St.  George  of  England,
whom  they  call  Khizer  Elias,  imagining  that  the  same  soul
animated  both,  by  transmigration.


LAILI  AND  MAJNUN  79

In  truth  and  love  to  thee  my  heart  was  given, —

That  truth  and  love  remain,  the  gift  of  Heaven.

Though  far  from  thee — a  wife  against  my  will,

I  am  thine  own  affianced  partner  still  :

Still  single — still,  in  purity  and  faith,

Thine  own  unchanged — unchangeable  in  death.

Thou  'rt  all  the  world  to  me — the  very  earth

Thou  treadst  on  is  to  me  of  matchless  worth  ;

Yet  in  a  diiferent  sphere  my  race  is  run  ;

I  am  the  moon,  and  thou  the  radiant  sun  :

By  destiny  thus  sundered — how  can  I

Merit  reproach,  who  at  thy  feet  would  die  !

Since  thus  divided,  pity  thou  my  lot,

With  all  thy  vows  and  raptures  unforgot ;

Life's  sweetest  flowerets,  in  their  brightest  bloom,

Turned  to  the  bitterness  of  fell  Zilcum.' l


Yes,  Majmin  wept  and  shook  ;  and  now
What  answer  could  he  frame,  and  how  ?
A  wanderer,  destitute — no  reed,
No  tablets,  to  supply  his  need —
But  Laili's  messenger  had  brought
The  means — and  thus  the  maniac  wrote  : —
'  To  Him  who  formed  the  starry  throne
Of  heaven,  and  rules  the  world  alone  ;

1  An  infernal  tree,  mentioned  in  the  Koran,  the  fruit  of  which
is  supposed  to  be  the  heads  of  devils.


80  THE  LOVES  OF

Who,  in  the  dark  mysterious  mine,
Maketh  the  unseen  diamond  shine  ;
Who  thus  on  human  life  bestows
The  gem  which  in  devotion  glows  ;
To  Him  be  gratitude  and  praise,
The  constant  theme  of  Moslem  lays  !
— A  burning  heart,  in  sorrow  deep,
What  can  it  do  but  sigh  and  weep  I
And  what  can  this  memorial  bear
To  thee,  but  wailings  of  despair  ?
I  am  the  dust  beneath  thy  feet,
Though  destined  never  more  to  meet.
Thy  beauty  is  my  Kaba  shrine,
The  arc  of  heaven,  for  ever  mine  ;
Garden  of  Irem — hid  from  me,
The  Paradise  I  must  not  see  ;
Yet  thou  hast  cptenched  my  genial  light  ;
My  day  is  now  like  blackest  night.
With  fondness  on  thy  flattering  tongue
Thou  smilest,  and  my  heart  is  wrung  ;
For  those  whose  tongues  are  gentlest  found
Are  wont  to  give  the  deadliest  wound.
The  lily's  petals  oft  appear
As  fatal  as  the  sword  or  spear.
She,  whom  'twas  rapture  to  behold,
Could  she  be  basely  bought  and  sold  ?
Couldst  thou  to  me  thy  promise  break,
And  spurn  me  for  another's  sake  1


LAILI  AND  MAJNUN  81

Acting  a  bland  deceiver's  part,

And  solacing  another's  heart !

But,  peace  ! — no  more  of  thoughts  so  sad,

Or  I  shall  grow  intensely  mad  ;

I  yearn  no  more  those  lips  to  press  ; —

But  is  the  joy  of  memory  less  %

The  morning-breeze  thy  fragrance  brings  ;

And  up  my  heart  exulting  springs  ;

Still  more  when  I  reflecting  see

How  once  the  cup  was  filled  by  thee.

0  Heaven  !  how  rapturous  to  receive

That  which  forbids  the  heart  to  grieve  ;

To  sit  with  thee  in  amorous  play,
And  quaff  the  ruby  every  day  ;
To  kiss  those  lips,  all  honey-dew,
Of  liquid  bright  cornelian  hue  !
0  !  could  I  kiss  them  once  again  !
The  fancy  fires  my  wildered  brain.
— Need  I  the  painter's  art  to  trace
The  lineaments  of  thy  angel  face  ?
No — they  're  indelibly  impressed
Within  my  ever-faithful  breast.
'Tis  ours,  divided,  to  deplore
Scenes  we  can  never  witness  more  ;
But,  though  on  earth  denied  to  rest,
Shall  we  not  both  in  heaven  be  blessed  ? '

*****

F


82  THE  LOVES  OF

Maj ruin's  distracted  state  was  not  unknown
Where  to  the  wretched  kindness  could  be  shown  ;
— A  wealthy  chieftain  (Selim  was  his  name),
Whose  generous  deeds  had  won  the  world's  acclaim  ;
Whose  heart  was  still  on  others'  woes  engaged —
He  healed  their  wounds,  their  anguish  he  assuaged  ;
Raiment  and  various  food  had  oft  supplied,
Where'er  the  love-lorn  wanderer  might  abide.
Mounted  upon  his  rapid  steed,  one  day,
He  sought  the  distant  place  where  Majniin  lay  ;
And  him  at  length,  with  placid  mien,  he  found
By  herds  of  forest-beasts  encompassed  round.
Fearful  of  savage  natures,  he  retired,
Till  Majniin,  beckoning,  confidence  inspired  ;
And  then,  approaching  near,  he  told  his  name,
And  recognised  him,  though  his  wasted  frame
Seemed  an  uncoffined  corse. Ashamed,  he  said —
'  O  let  these  robes  thy  naked  body  shade,
These  robes  for  thee  brought  hither.'  '  Not  for  me  ;
I  want  no  covering, — without  clothes  I  'm  free.
Behold  these  tattered  fragments,  thrown  aside  ;
These  once  were  robes,  and  once  my  foolish  pride.'
But,  pressed  again,  those  tatters  he  resumed,
And  sat  like  one  to  death  and  darkness  doomed. —
Now  savoury  viands  were  before  him  spread,
But  not  a  morsel  raised  he  to  his  head  ;
He  turned  him  round,  and,  scorning  the  repast,
To  his  familiars  all  the  banquet  cast.


LAILI  AND  MAJNUN  83

Then  Selira  asked — '  What  is  thy  food,  my  friend  %

Without  support,  thy  life  must  quickly  end.'

— '  My  spirit's  freshness,  and  its  secret  power,

Come  from  the  breeze  which  marks  the  morning-hour ;

Yes,  every  zephyr  from  my  mistress  brings

Life  to  the  soul  upon  its  fragrant  wings  ;

When  hunger  presses,  from  the  weeping  trees

I  gather  gums,  its  cravings  to  appease  ;

And  herbs  and  grass,  and  the  transparent  rill,

Support  me  in  the  state  thou  seest  me  still ;

But  though  thy  proffered  food  regale  not  me,

The  beasts  around  enjoyed  the  banquetry  :

And  if  I  sought  on  living  thing  to  feed,

Birds  might  be  caught ;  but  I  detest  the  deed  ;

And  he  who  is  contented  grass  to  eat,

Defies  the  world — the  world  is  at  his  feet ;

For  what  can  pomp,  and  wealth,  and  feasts  avail  \

I  live  on  crass  : — but  hear  the  Zahid's  talc.


'  In  ancient  times  a  king,  they  say,
Through  a  wild  forest  took  his  way  ;
And  marking,  as  along  he  rode,
A  Zahid's  desolate  abode,
Asked  his  attendants  if  they  knew
What  the  Recluse  was  wTont  to  do  ;
What  was  his  food,  and  where  he  slept,
And  why  remote  from  man  he  kept. —


84  THE  LOVES  OF

A  courtier  to  the  Zahid  ran,

And  soon  brought  forth  that  holy  man  ; —

"  And  wherefore  dost  thou  pass  thy  days

Shunning  the  world's  inviting  ways,

Choosing  this  dismal  wretched  hole,

Grave  of  the  body  and  the  soul  1 "

— "  I  have  no  friends  to  love  me — none  ;

No  power,  except  to  live  alone."

Then,  where  his  fawns  in  quiet  fed,

Took  up  some  blades  of  grass,  and  said —

"  This  is  my  food — this,  want  supplies  ! '

The  courtier  looked  with  scornful  eyes,

And  answered, — "  Taste  but  royal  food,

And  thou  'it  not  fancy  grass  so  good."

"  Indeed  !  "  the  Zahid  said,  and  smiled,

"  That  is  a  sad  mistake,  my  child  !

Worldlings  are  still  to  luxury  prone  ;

To  thee  its  sweetness  is  unknown  ;

Stranger  to  such  delicious  fare,

No  doubt  thou  'rt  charmed  with  food  more  rare  ; "

— Soon  as  this  speech  the  monarch  heard,

Noting,  attentive,  every  word,

And  wondering  such  a  seer  to  meet,

Fell  at  the  pious  Zahid's  feet,

And  kissed  the  greensward,  as  he  knelt

Where  that  contented  hermit  dwelt.'


LAILI  AND  MAJNUN  85

XVI

O'er  Majniin's  spirit,  long  in  darkness  cast,
A  fitful  gleam  of  homeward  feeling  passed  ;
And  now  lie  asks  for  friends  he  once  preferred,
Asks  for  his  mother,  broken-winged  bird  ;
And  wishes  e'en  to  visit  home  again — ■
As  if  the  maddening  fire  had  left  his  brain.
Selim  at  this  brief  glimpse  of  reason  caught,
And  to  his  mother's  distant  mansion  brought
Without  delay  the  Avanderer. Deep  her  grief
To  see  how  withered  was  that  verdant  leaf —
To  see  the  red  rose  faded  from  his  cheek,
His  eye  so  altered,  and  his  frame  so  weak  ;
From  head  to  foot  she  kisses  him,  and  weeps  ;
His  hair,  all  matted,  in  her  tears  she  steeps,
And  clasps  him  fondly  to  her  beating  heart,
As  if  she  never  from  her  boy  would  part : —
'  My  darling  child  !  the  love-game  thou  hast  played
Has  thus,  alas  !  reduced  thee  to  a  shade  ;
In  that  encounter  sad  of  mortal  scathe
Thou  graspedst  the  two-edged  scimitar  of  death.
Thy  father  gone,  his  troubles  all  are  past,
Heart-broken  man  !  and  I  shall  follow  fast.
Arise  !  and  enter  thy  own  mansion  here  ;
Come,  'tis  thy  own  sweet  home,  and  doubly  dear —
Thy  nest ; — and  birds,  though  distant  in  their  flight,
Always  return  to  their  own  nests  at  night.


86  THE  LOVES  OF

While  yet  an  infant  in  thy  cradle-bed,

I  watched  thy  slumber,  pillowed  thy  sweet  head  ;

And  canst  thou  now  that  mother's  fondness  see,

And  mark  without  remorse  her  love  for  thee  1

Eefuse  the  joy  thy  presence  can  impart,

And  cast  a  shadow  o'er  her  drooping  heart  ? '

A  cloud  again  obscured  the  orb  of  day —
Again  his  wavering  intellect  gave  way  ;
'  Mother,  there  is  no  hope — the  time  is  past ;
With  gloom  eternal  is  my  fate  o'ercast  ;
No  fault  of  mine — no  crime,  to  press  me  down —
But  all  my  countless  woes  to  thee  are  known  ;
Like  a  poor  bird  within  its  cage  immured,
My  soul  has  long  this  prison-life  endured.
Ask  me  not,  mother,  to  remain  at  home  ;
For  there,  to  me,  no  peace  can  ever  come.
Oh,  better  will  it  be  for  me  to  stray
'Mid  mountain-glens,  and  herd  with  beasts  of  prey,
Than  linger  on  a  spot  where  human  care
Only  augments  my  misery  and  despair.'
He  ceased,  and  kissed  his  mother's  feet,  and  fled
Precipitate  along  the  path  which  led
To  the  wild  mountains. Dreadful  was  the  stroke  !
The  mother's  heart,  like  the  old  father's,  broke  ;
In  Death's  cold  ocean,  wave  thus  follows  wave  ;
And  thus  she  followed  to  the  silent  grave.

Selim  again  the  maniac's  haunts  explored,
Again  supplied  his  frugal  board,


LAILI  AND  MAJNUN  87

And,  with  a  mournful  voice,  the  tale  revealed —
Father  and  mother  gone,
Himself  now  left  alone,
Sole  heir — his  doom  of  desolation  sealed —
He  beat  his  brows,  and  from  his  eyes
Fell  tears  of  blood  ;  his  piercing  cries
Rang  through  the  forest,  and  again,
Pouring  the  saddest,  wildest  strain,
He  hastened  from  his  gloomy  cave,
To  weep  upon  his  mother's  grave.
But  when  that  paroxysm  of  grief —
That  agony  intense,  but  brief —
Had,  like  a  whirlwind,  passed  away,

And  left  him  in  a  milder  mood,
To  love  and  Laili  still  a  prey,

He  trod  again  his  mountain-solitude  :
For  what  to  him  was  hoarded  store,
The  wealth  of  parents  now  no  more  ?
Had  he  not  long,  ill-fated  one  !
Abandoned  all  for  love  alone  '


XVII

Laili  meanwhile  had  read  and  seen
What  Majmin's  thoughts  had  ever  been  ;
And  though  her  plighted  faith  seemed  broken,
From  him  she  held  the  tenderest  token  :


88  THE  LOVES  OF

Deep  in  her  heart,  a  thousand  woes

Disturbed  her  days'  and  nights'  repose  :

A  serpent  at  its  very  core,

Writhing  and  gnawing  evermore  ;

And  no  relief — a  prison-room

Being  now  the  lovely  sufferer's  doom.

— Fate1  looked  at  last  with  favouring  eye  :

The  night  was  dark,  no  watchman  nigh  ;

And  she  had  gained  the  outer  gate,

Where,  shrouded,  unobserved,  she  sate.

Gazing  on  every  side  to  find

Some  friend  to  calm  her  troubled  mind  ;

When,  welcome  as  a  cherished  guest,

A  holy  seer  her  vision  blessed,

Who,  ever,  like  an  angel,  strove

The  heart's  deep  anguish  to  remove  ;

Who  lived  to  succour  the  distressed,

To  soothe  and  staunch  the  bleeding  breast :

To  him  she  spake — '  In  pity  hear,

A  wretch  distraught  with  love  and  fear  !

Know'st  thou  the  youth,  of  peerless  grace,

Who  mingles  with  the  forest-race,

Savage  or  tame,  and  fills  the  air,

Alas  !  for  me,  with  his  despair  ? '

— '  Yes,  lovely  moon  ! '  he  answered, — '  well  I  know

That  hapless  wanderer,  and  his  cureless  woe  ;

1  Literally,  The  day  on  which  her  food  was  not  infested  with
flies. A  day  free  from  misfortune  or  annoyance.


LAILI  AND  MAJNUN  89

Laili  still  on  his  tongue,  the  Arab  maid
He  ceaseless  seeks  through  every  bower  and  glade,
Unconscious  of  the  world,  its  bloom  or  blight,
Laili  alone  for  ever  in  his  sight.'

The  Arab  maiden  wept,  and  cried, — '  No  more  !
I  am  the  cause,  and  I  his  loss  deplore  ;
Both  have  our  sorrows,  both  are  doomed  to  feel
The  wounds  of  absence,  which  will  never  heal ;
For  me  he  roams  through  desert  wild  and  drear,
While  Fate  condemns  me  to  be  fettered  here  ! '
— Then  from  her  ear  a  lustrous  gem  she  drew,
Which,  having  kissed,  she  to  the  hermit  threw —
And  said, — '  Forbid  it  I  should  ask  in  vain  !
Let  these  fond  eyes  behold  his  face  again  !
But  caution  must  control  the  zeal  you  show  :
Some  signal  must  be  given,  that  I  may  know
When  he  is  nigh — some  stanzas  of  his  own
Warbled  beneath  my  casement,  where,  alone,
I  sit  and  watch — for  secret  must  we  be,
Or  all  is  lost  to  Majniin  and  to  me  ! '
— Within  his  birdie-fold  the  smilins;  saint
Placed  the  rich  gem,  and  on  his  errand  went.
But  did  no  obstacle  his  task  oppose  ?
A  thousand,  daily,  in  his  progress  rose  :
Where'er  his  arduous  course  he  anxious  urged,
Perplexing  paths  in  various  lines  diverged  ;
Through  tangled  glens,  the  ground  with  creepers  spread,
Meshes  of  shadowy  branches  o'er  his  head,


90  THE  LOVES  OF

Now  a  wide  plain  before  him — mountains  grey,

And  now  an  emerald  greensward  cheered  his  way

At  last,  upon  a  hillock's  shady  side,

The  long-sought  love-sick  wanderer  he  descried,

By  forest-beasts  surrounded, — in  a  ring,

Like  guards  appointed  to  protect  their  king.

Majniin  perceived  him,  and  with  upraised  hand

Made  his  wild  followers  at  a  distance  stand  ;

And  then  the  seer  approached — his  homage  paid—

'  0  thou,  unmatched  in  love  ! '  he  kindly  said,

'  Laili,  the  world  and  beauty's  cpieen,

Who  long  has  thy  adorer  been  ;

And  many  a  year  has  run  its  race,

Since  she  has  seen  that  pensive  face —

Since  she  has  heard  that  tuneful  voice

Which  ever  made  her  heart  rejoice  :

And  now,  at  her  command,  I  bear

Her  earnest,  almost  dying,  prayer.

She  longs  to  see  thee  once  again,

To  sit  with  thee  and  soothe  thy  pain  ;

To  feel,  on  pleasure's  downy  wings,

The  joy  a  lover's  presence  brings.

And  wilt  thou  not,  with  equal  glee,

Behold  thyself  from  bondage  free  ?

The  Grove  of  Palms  thy  feet  must  trace,

Near  Laili's  rural  dwelling-place.

That  is  the  promised  spot ;  and  thou

Wilt  there  receive  both  pledge  and  vow,


LAILI  AND  MAJNUN  91

And  sing,  with  voice  subdued  and  clear,
Thy  sweetest  ghazel  in  her  ear.'
Majmin  uprose  with  joyous  look,
And  for  his  guide  the  hermit  took  :
And,  passing  quick  the  space  between,
Arrived  at  that  romantic  scene
Where  the  majestic  palms  displayed
A  cool,  refreshing  depth  of  shade  ;
And  there  the  tribes  of  wood  and  plain,
Which  formed  the  wanderer's  vassal-train,
Promptly  as  human  retinue,
To  an  adjoining  copse  withdrew.


The  seer,  advancing  with  a  cautious  pace,

To  the  pavilion  of  that  angel-face —

That  star  of  beauty — that  sweet  silvery  moon —

Whispered  the  presence  of  her  own  Majmin.

But  woman's  mind  can  from  its  purpose  range,

And  seem  to  change,  without  the  power  to  change  ;

And  thus  she  said — '  Alas  !  it  cannot  be  :

I  must  not  meet  him— such  is  Fate's  decree  ;

The  lamp  thus  lit,  Love's  temple  to  illume,

Will  not  enlighten,  but  the  heart  consume  ;

For  I  am  wedded— to  another  given —

This  worthless  dust  still  in  the  view  of  Heaven ;

And  though  compelled — let  others  bear  the  blame  '.-

I  was  not  born  to  sacrifice  my  fame.


92  THE  LOVES  OF

Prudence  forbids  such  perils  should  be  mine  ;
Rather  for  ever  let  me  here  repine  ;
But  faithful  still,  with  his  melodious  tongue
How  often  have  the  sweetest  echoes  rung  1
Yes,  faithful  still,  he  may  upon  mine  ear
Chant  the  rich  numbers  which  I  love  to  hear  :
Let  him  with  nectar  fill  his  luscious  cup,
And,  still  adoring,  I  will  drink  it  up.'
Prostrate,  in  tears,  upon  a  fountain's  side,
The  saint  found  Majnun,  who  impatient  cried —
'  What  is  this  amber  incense  round  me  flying  1
Is  it  the  breath  of  spring  o'er  rosebuds  sighing  ?
No — not  the  fragrance  of  the  early  spring —
Laili's  sweet  locks  alone  such  odours  fling  !
So  powerful  is  the  impulse  they  impart,
They  fill  with  dying  ecstasy  my  heart.'

The  saint,  well-taught  in  love's  mysterious  lore,
Knew  what  it  was  the  absent  to  deplore  ;
But  said — '  Thou  canst  not  hope  that  she,
Unsought,  unasked,  will  come  to  thee  !
Woman  demands  a  warmer  suit,
And  none  her  sacred  power  dispute.'


'  Upbraid  me  not  with  maxim  old —
Think'st  thou  that  Majmin's  suit  is  cold
When,  from  the  very  scent,  I  feel
Intoxication  o'er  me  steal  ?


LAILI  AND  MAJNUN  93

Must  I  the  real  bliss  decline
And  never  taste  the  luscious  wine  1 '
So  saying,  seated  in  that  palmy  grove,
To  Laili  thus  he  breathed  his  lay  of  love.

'  0  whither  art  thou  gone  1

And  where  am  1 1 — alone  !
Forsaken,  lost — and  what  remains  ?
Life  only  creeping  through  my  veins  ;
And  yet  that  life  is  not  my  own,
But  thine  ; — I  only  breathe  to  moan  :
A  thing  of  memory,  to  deplore
The  past,  since  hope  can  smile  no  more.
Familiar  to  the  pangs  which  scorn  relief,
Grief1  smiles  upon  me,  and  I  smile  on  grief.
Grief  makes  thee  dearer  still  ;  for  grief  and  thee
Seem  of  each  other  born. Grief  paints  to  me
Thy  matchless  beauty  :— without  grief,  no  thought
Of  thy  perfections  to  my  mind  is  brought.
0  Heaven  !  that  ever  we  were  doomed  to  part  ! —
We  arc  but  one — two  bodies,  and  one  heart.

i  Shakespeare  has  something  like  this  personilicatiou  of  grief
iu  King  John,  Act  in.  Sc.  4  :

Constance.  Grief  fills  the  room  up  of  my  absent  child,
Lies  in  his  bed,  walks  up  and  down  with  me,
Puts  on  his  pretty  looks,  repeats  his  words,
Remembers  me  of  all  his  gracious  parts,
Stuffs  out  his  vacant  garments  with  his  form  :
Then,  have  I  reason  to  be  fond  of  grief  ?


04  THE  LOVES  OF

As  summer  clouds  with  rain  the  meadows  greet,
Majmin  dissolves  in  sorrow  at  thy  feet  ;
Whilst  thy  soft  cheeks  lend  heauty  to  the  sky,
Majmin,  alas  !  is  taught  by  them  to  die.
The  bulbul 1  o'er  thy  roses  joyous  stoops  ;
Majmin,  from  thee  disjoined,  divided,  droops  ;
And  whilst  the  world  devotes  itself  to  strife,
Majmin  would  sacrifice  to  thee  his  life.

0  that  kind  fortune  would  our  joys  approve,
And  yield  the  blessings  of  successfnl  love  !
The  gorgeous  moon,  with  her  pellucid  light,
Converting  into  dazzling  day  the  night ;
And  we  together  seated,  ear  to  ear,

The  sparkling  wine,  our  beverage,  ever  near  ;

1  playing  with  those  ringlets,  which  descend
In  magic  curls,  and  o'er  thy  shoulders  bend  ;
Thou,  with  those  dark  and  love-enkindling  eyes,
In  which  the  living  spell  of  witchery  lies,
Gazing  in  fondness  on  me. That  sweet  lip  !

I  see  it  the  rich  wine  enamoured  sip  :

I  see  us  both — what  happiness  !  and  none

To  drive  the  sovereign  pleasure  from  his  throne  ;

Nor  shame,  nor  fear,  to  crush  affection's  flower,

Happy,  unseen,  in  that  sequestered  bower.

— But  bring  me  wine  !  this  bright  illusion  stay  !

Wine  !  wine  !  keep  sad  realities  away  !

1  The  bulbul  is  the  nightingale. The  reader  need  scarcely  be
reminded  of  the  fabled  loves  of  the  nightingale  and  the  rose.


LAILI  AND  MAJNUN  95

Wine,  Saki,  wine  !  the  house  without  a  light
Is  but  a  prison,  odious  to  the  sight ;
For  broken  hearts,  immured  in  gloom  like  mine,
Are  dungeon-dark,  unblessed  with  light  or  wine  ;
O  God  !  preserve  me  from  this  endless  night  !
Give  me  one  day  of  joy — one  moment  of  delight ! '
Then  strangely  moved,  he  wildly  closed  his  lay,
Sprung  on  his  feet,  and  sudden  burst  away  ;
And  Laili,  who  had  heard  him,  deeply  mourned,
And,  sad,  to  her  secluded  home  returned.


xvm

Through  many  a  town  and  bower  had  spread
The  maniac's  tale— all  anxious  read
In  Bagdad  and  far-distant  plains
The  mournful  lovers  amorous  strains  ;
And  every  heart,  which  had  been  wrung
"With  withered  hopes,  in  pity  hung
O'er  sorrows  which  to  madness  drove —
The  very  martyrdom  of  love.
And  all  aspired  to  seek  the  cave
Which  hourly  might  become  his  grave  ;
To  find  th'  enduring  man  ;  to  view
That  prodigy — but  seen  by  few—
Of  whom  the  world  astonished  spoke,
As  crushed  beneath  misfortune's  yoke  ;


96  THE  LOVES  OF

Whose  truth  and  constancy  excelled
All  that  the  world  had  e'er  beheld.
A  gallant  youth,  who  long  had  known

The  pangs  of  love,  impatient  rose,
And  on  his  camel,  all  alone,

Sought  for  the  man  of  many  woes  ;
Anxious  to  he  the  first  to  see
The  man  pre-eminent  in  misery  ;
And  many  a  farsang x  he  had  rode,
Before  he  reached  the  lover's  wild  abode.

Majnun  beheld  him  from  afar,
And  sent  his  vassals  to  their  lair  ;
And  welcome  gave,  and  asked  his  name,
And  whence  the  hurrying  stranger  came.  -
'  I  come,  my  friend,  to  make  thee  glad  ;
I  come  from  beautiful  Bagdad.
In  that  enchanting  place  I  might
Have  lived  in  transport  day  and  night  ;
But  I  have  heard  thy  tender  lays,
Thy  sorrows,  which  the  world  amaze  ;
And  all  that  now  remains  for  me
Is,  all  life  long,  to  dwell  with  thee.
Thy  tuneful  strains  such  joy  impart,
Each  word  is  treasured  in  my  heart :
In  love,  like  thee,  I  weep  and  sigh —
Let  us  together  live — together  die  ! '

1  A  parasang,  a  league.


LAILI  AND  MAJNUN  97

Astonished  at  this  strange  desire,

Laughing,  the  maniac  thus  replies  :
'  Sir  knight !  so  soon  does  pleasure  tire  ?

And  dost  thou  worldly  pomp  despise,
And  all  that  luxury  can  give,
With  me  in  wood  and  cave  to  live  ?


'  Mistaken  youth  !  what  dost  thou  know

Of  broken  hearts — of  love  like  mine —
That  thou  shouldst  life's  sweet  joys  forego,

And  every  cheering  hope  resign  ?
I  have  companions,  night  and  day  ;
But  forest-inmates — beasts  of  prey  ;
Yet  do  I  ask  no  other — none  ;
I  'd  rather  live  with  them  alone.
What  hast  thou  social  seen  in  me,
When  demons  from  my  presence  flee,
That  thou  wouldst  brave  the  noontide  heat,

The  dangers  of  the  midnight  air,
Unsheltered,  naked  head  and  feet,

To  herd  with  one  not  worth  thy  care,
Nor  worth  a  thought  ? Beneath  the  scorching  sun
I  thread  the  wild  wood,  and,  when  day  is  done,
Lay  myself  down  upon  a  beggar's  throne —
My  canopy,  the  trees — my  pillow,  a  rude  stone.
Houseless  and  poor,  and  oft  with  hunger  pressed,
How  can  I  take  a  stranger  for  my  guest  ?

G


98  THE  LOVES  OF

Whilst  thou,  surrounded  by  thy  friends  at  home,
Moved  by  no  need,  but  by  a  whim  to  roam,
Mayst  pass  thy  hours  in  cheerfulness  and  glee,
And  never  think  of  such  a  wretch  as  me  ! '
The  gallant  youth  now  placed  in  view

Various  refreshments  he  had  thither  brought —
Sweet  cakes  and  fruit — and  from  his  pannier  drew

Heart-easing  wine,  his  purpose  to  promote,
To  win  the  favour  of  the  moon-struck  man  ;
And  thus  his  brief  but  earnest  speech  began  :
'  Friend,  share  my  meal  in  kindness,  and  allow
A  smile  of  joy  to  clear  that  furrowed  brow  !
In  bread  is  life  ;  it  strengthens  every  part,
And, while it  strengthens, cheers the  drooping

heart.'
Majmin  rejoined  :  '  The  argument  is  just ;
Without  refreshment  man  descends  to  dust :
Nerve, power, and strength from nourishment

proceed  ;
But  this  is  not  the  nourishment  I  need.'
'  Yet  mortals  change,  whate'er  their  aim  ;
Nothing  on  earth  remains  the  same  :
I  know  thou  canst  not  be  unmoved  ;

For  ever  thus  thou  canst  not  be  ;
Perpetual  change  the  heavens  have  proved  ;

And  night  and  morn,  successively,
Attest  its  truth. That  thou  hast  loved

I  know  ;  but  thou  mayst  yet  be  free  :


LAILI  AND  MAJNUN  99

The  heavens  are  clothed  in  deepest  gloom  ;

Black  is  the  threatening  day  of  doom  ;

The  clouds  fly  off,  the  storm  is  past,

No  longer  howls  the  scattering  blast ;

The  heavens  resume  their  wonted  sheen,

And  brighter  glows  the  varied  scene  :

So  grief  devours  the  heart  a  while  ;

So  frowns  are  followed  by  a  smile  :

Like  thee  was  I  enchanted,  bound,

Girt  by  love's  galling  fetters  round  ;

But  to  the  winds  my  grief  I  flung,

And  to  my  fate  no  longer  clung.

This  fire  of  love,  which  burns  so  bright,

What  is  it  but  a  treacherous  light  ?

The  type  of  youth  ; — when  that  is  o'er,

The  burning  mountain  flames  no  more  ! '

But  Majniin  spurned  the  traitor-thought,  and  said  :

1  Speak'st  thou  to  me  as  one  to  feeling  dead  ?

I  am  myself  the  king  of  love  ;  and  now

Glory  in  my  dominion  :  and  wouldst  thou

Persuade  me  to  abandon  all  that  Heaven

Has,  'mid  my  sufferings,  for  my  solace  given,

To  quit  that  cherished  hope,  than  life  more  dear,

Which  rivets  me  to  earth,  and  keeps  me  here  1

That  pure  ethereal  love,  that  mystic  flower,

Nurtured  in  Heaven,  fit  for  an  angel's  dower  ?

What !  from  my  heart  expel  the  dream  of  love  ?

First  from  the  oceans  bed  the  sands  remove  !


100  THE  LOVES  OP

Useless  the  effort, — useless  is  thy  aim, —
Thou  canst  not  quench  a  never-dying  flame.
Then  cease  persuasion. Why  to  me  appear
A  master,  teaching,  like  some  holy  seer  ?
He  who  aspires  to  open  locks,  they  say,
To  be  successful,  first  must  know  the  way.'
The  youth  perceived  his  error,  yet  remained

In  friendly  converse  a  few  fleeting  days  ;
And,  by  the  oracle  of  love  enchained,

Listened,  enraptured,  to  his  varied  lays  ;
Companionship  delectable  !  then  rose

To  bid  adieu,  since  there  he  might  not  stay,
And,  sorrowing,  left  the  man  of  many  woes,

Surrounded  by  his  vassal-beasts  of  prey.


XIX

How  beautifully  blue

The  firmament  !  how  bright
The  moon  is  sailing  through

The  vast  expanse,  to-night  !
And  at  this  lovely  hour

The  lonely  Laili  weeps
Within  her  prison-tower,

And  her  sad  record  keeps —

How  many  days,  how  many  years,
Her  sorrows  she  has  borne  !


LAILI  AND  MAJNUN  101

A  lingering  age  of  sighs  and  tears  ;

A  night  that  has  no  morn  :
Yet  in  that  guarded  tower  she  lays  her  head,
Shut  like  a  gem  within  its  stony  bed.
And  who  the  warder  of  that  place  of  sighs  ?
Her  husband  ! — he  the  dragon-watch  supplies


What  words  are  those  which  meet  her  anxious  ear  I
Unusual  sounds,  unusual  sights  appear  ;
Lamps  flickering  round,  and  wailings  sad  and  low,
Seem  to  proclaim  some  sudden  burst  of  woe.
Beneath  her  casement  rings  a  wild  lament ;
Death-notes  disturb  the  night ;  the  air  is  rent
With  clamorous  voices  ;  every  hope  is  fled  ;
He  breathes  no  longer — Ibn  Salam  is  dead  !
The  fever's  rage  had  nipped  him  in  his  bloom  ;
He  sank  unloved,  unpitied,  to  the  tomb.

And  Laili  marks  the  moon  ;  a  cloud

Had  stained  its  lucid  face  ;
The  mournful  token  of  a  shroud,
End  of  the  humble  and  the  proud,

The  grave  their  resting-place.
And  now  to  her  the  tale  is  told,
Her  husband's  hand  and  heart  are  cold  :
And  must  she  mourn  the  death  of  one
Whom  she  had  loathed  to  look  upon  ?


102  THE  LOVES  OF

In  customary  garb  arrayed,

The  pomp  of  grief  must  be  displayed —

Dishevelled  tresses,  streaming  eyes,

The  heart  remaining  in  disguise —

She  seemed,  distraction  in  her  mien,

To  feel  her  loss,  if  loss  had  been  ;

But  all  the  burning  tears  she  shed

Were  for  her  own  Majnun,  not  for  the  dead  !

The  rose  that  hailed  the  purple  morn,
All  glistening  with  the  balmy  dew,
Looked  still  more  lonely  when  the  thorn

Had  been  removed  from  where  it  grew.
But  Arab  laws  had  still  their  claim
Upon  a  virtuous  widow's  fame.
And  what  destroyed  all  chance  of  blame  I
Two  years  to  droop  behind  the  screen  ;
Two  years  unseeing,  and  unseen  !
No,  not  a  glance  in  all  that  time,
Blooming  in  life's  luxurious  prime,
Was  e'er  allowed  to  womankind  ;
Since,  but  to  household  faces  blind,
She  must  at  home  her  vigils  keep,
Her  business  still  to  groan  and  weep.
And  Laili  weeps  ;  but  who  can  tell
"What  secrets  may  her  bosom  swell  ?
The  beauteous  eyes  in  tears  may  swim,
The  heart  may  throb,  but  not  for  him


LAILI  AND  MAJNUN  103

Who  in  the  grave  unconscious  sleeps —
Alone  for  Majmin  Laili  weeps  !
Accustomed  hourly  to  rehearse
Her  distant  lover's  glowing  verse,
Framed  like  a  spell  to  charm  and  bless,
And  soothe  her  heart's  extreme  distress.


'  0  what  a  night !  a  long  and  dreary  night  !
It  is  not  night,  but  darkness  without  end  ;
Awful  extinction  of  ethereal  light,
Companionless  I  sit,  without  one  friend.

'  Is  the  immortal  source  of  light  congealed  1
Or  has  the  dreadful  day  of  judgment  come  ?

Nature's  fair  form  beneath  a  pall  concealed  ;
Oh  !  what  a  night  of  soul-destroying  gloom  !

Can  the  shrill  wakener  of  the  morn  be  dead  1
Is  the  Mowazzin  heedless  of  his  trust  1

Has  the  lone  warder  from  his  watch-tower  fled,

Or,  weary  of  his  task,  returned  to  dust  ?

'  0  God  !  restore  to  me  the  joyous  light
Which  first  illumed  my  heart — the  golden  ray
Of  youthful  love — that  from  this  prison,  night,
I  may  escape  and  feel  the  bliss  of  day  ! '

Years,  days,  how  slowly  they  roll  on  !
And  yet,  how  quickly  life  is  gone  !


104  THE  LOVES  OF

The  future  soon  becomes  the  past —

Ceaseless  the  course  of  time. At  last

The  morning  came  ;  the  king  of  day

Arose  in  festival  array,

And  Laili's  night  had  passed  away  :

Her  morn  of  beauty  o'er  her  face,

Shining,  resumed  its  wonted  grace  ;

And  with  soft  step  of  fairy  lightness

She  moved,  a  glittering  moon  in  brightness.

And  what  was  now  her  highest  aim  ?

The  impulse  quivering  through  her  frame  ?

Her  secret  love,  so  long  concealed,

She  now  without  a  blush  revealed.

And  first  she  called  her  faithful  Zyd,

On  many  a  tender  mission  tried,

In  whom  her  heart  could  best  confide  :

'  To-day  is  not  the  day  of  hope,

Which  only  gives  to  fancy  scope  ;

It  is  the  day  our  hopes  completing,

It  is  the  lover's  day  of  meeting  !

Eise  up  !  the  world  is  full  of  joy  ;

Else  up  !  and  serve  thy  mistress,  boy  ;

Together,  where  the  cypress  grows,

Place  the  red  tulip  and  the  rose  ;

And  let  the  long-dissevered  meet —

Two  lovers,  in  communion  sweet.'


LAILI  AND  MAJNUN  105

They  met  ;  but  how  ?  hearts  long  to  joy  unknown

Know  not  what  'tis  to  be,  except  alone  ;

Feeling  intense  had  checked  the  power  to  speak  ;

Silent  confusion  sat  upon  each  cheek  ;

Speechless  with  love  unutterable,  they

Stood  gazing  at  each  other  all  the  day.

Thus  when  a  chamber  holds  no  golden  store.

No  lock  protects  the  ever-open  door  ;

But  when  rich  hoards  of  gold  become  a  lure,

A  lock  is  placed  to  keep  that  wealth  secure  ;

So  when  the  heart  is  full,  the  voice  is  bound —

For  ready  speech  with  grief  is  rarely  found.

Laili,  with  looks  of  love,  was  first  who  caught

The  soft  expression  of  her  bursting  thought  :

'  Alas  ! :  she  said,  as  over  him  she  hung,

'What  wondrous  grief  is  this  that  chains  the  tongue?

The  bulbul,  famed  for  his  mellifluous  note,

Without  the  rose  can  swell  his  tuneful  throat  ;

And  when  in  fragrant  bowers  the  rose  he  sees,

He  warbles  sweeter  still  his  ecstasies.

Thou  art  the  bulbul  of  the  bright  parterre,

And  I  the  rose — why  not  thy  love  declare  ?

Why,  being  absent,  whilst  unseen  by  thee,

Arose  to  heaven  thy  voice  and  minstrelsy  ?

And  now,  at  length,  when  we  are  met,  alone,

Thy  love  has  vanished,  and  thy  voice  is  gone  ! '

A  gush  of  tears  to  Majmin  gave  relief  :
Words  came :  'The  misery  mine,  and  mine  the  grief :


106  THE  LOVES  OF

The  memory  of  those  lips,  so  balmy  sweet,

Bound  up  my  tongue,  which  would their  charms

repeat.
When  I,  a  falcon,  through  the  woodlands  flew,
The  spotted  partridge  never  met  my  view  ;
And  now  when  I  'm  unequal  to  the  flight,
The  long-sought  beauteous  bird  has  come  in  sight  :
The  substance  thou,  in  angel-charms  arrayed,
And  what  am  I  ? I  know  not — but  a  shade  ;
Without  thee  nothing. Fancy  would  enthrone
Us  both  together,  melted  into  one  ;
And  thus  united  to  each  other,  we
Are  equal — equal  in  our  constancy  :
Two  bodies  with  one  heart  and  soul  the  same  :
Two  tapers  with  one  pure  celestial  flame  ;
Of  the  same  essence  formed,  together  joined.
Two  drops  in  one,  each  soul  to  each  resigned.1
He  paused,  and,  with  ineffable  delight,

Laili  gazed  on  his  glowing  countenance,
So  long  estranged  and  hidden  from  her  sight.

Now  throbs  his  heart  at  every  fondling  glance  :
The  fragrance  of  her  ringlets  which  enwreath
Her smooth round neck, her jasmine  -  scented

breath,
The  sweet  confession  of  her  tremulous  eyes,
The  ardent  love  which  time  and  chance  defies,
The  chin  of  dimpled  sweetness,  the  soft  cheek,
The  open  ruby  lips  prepared  to  speak,


LAILI  AND  MAJNUN  107

Madden  his  finer  feelings,  and  again
A  sudden  tempest  rushes  through  his  brain  ;
Furious  he  gazes  round  him  for  a  while,
Then  looks  at  Laili  with  a  ghastly  smile  ;
Eends  off  his  Jama-dress  in  frantic  mood,
Starts,  as  with  more  than  human  force  endued,
And,  shouting,  hurries  to  the  desert  plain,

Followed  by  all  his  savage  vassal-train.

*  *  *  *  *

His  love  was  chaste  and  pure  as  heaven  :

But  by  excess  to  madness  driven,

Visions  of  rapture  filled  his  soul  ;

His  thoughts  sublime  despised  control  :

A  joy  allied  to  joys  above

Was  mingled  with  his  dreamy  love  :

0  Majnun  !  lost,  for  ever  gone  ;

The  world  is  full  of  love,  but  none,

None  ever  bowed  at  beauty's  shrine

With  such  a  sinless  soul  as  thine.

*  *  *  *  *

In  summer  all  is  bright  and  gay  ;
In  autumn  verdure  fades  away,
The  trees  assume  a  sickly  hue,
Unnourished  by  the  fragrant  dew  ;
The  genial  sap,  through  numerous  rills,
From  root  and  branch  and  leaf  distils  ;
But,  drying  in  the  chilly  air,
The  groves  become  despoiled  and  bare  ;


108  THE  LOVES  OF

Sapless,  the  garden's  flowery  pride

The  winds  disperse  on  every  side,

And  all  that  sight  and  smell  delighted

Is  by  the  ruthless  season  blighted.

So  Laili's  summer  hours  have  passed  ;

And  now  she  feels  the  autumnal  blast ;

Her  bowers,  her  blooming  bowers,  assailed,

The  perfume  of  the  rose  exhaled,

Its  withered  leaves  bestrew  the  ground,

And  desolation  reigns  around  :

For  from  the  moment  she  beheld

Her  lover's  mental  state  unveiled,

Her  heart  no  consolation  knew,

Deprived  of  hope's  refreshing  dew.

Ere  that  o'erwhelming  misery  came,

Thoughts  of  new  life  upheld  her  frame  :

Amidst  her  bitterest  weeping  and  distress,

'Mid  the  dark  broodings  of  her  loneliness,

Though  crushed  her  feelings,  and  the  man  she

loved
A  wanderer  of  the  forest,  strangely  moved,
Still  was  there  hope,  still  was  her  mental  gaze
Fixed  on  the  expected  joys  of  after-days.
But  now  all  hope  had  perished  ! — she  had  seen
The  frenzied  workings  of  that  noble  mien  :
The  fit  delirious,  the  appalling  start,
And  grief  and  terror  seized  her  trembling  heart.


LAILI  AND  MAJNUN  109

No  tears  she  sheds,  but  pines *  away

In  deep  entire  despair  ;
The  worm  has  seized  its  destined  prey,

The  blight  is  on  that  face  so  fair,
And  fearful  symptoms  of  a  swift  decay
Come  o'er  her  delicate  frame,  that  in  the  strife
She  almost  sinks  beneath  the  load  of  life.
Feeling  the  ebbing  of  the  vital  tide,
She  calls  her  weeping  mother  to  her  side.
'Mother  !  my  hour  is  come,  thou  need'st  no  longer

chide ;
For  now  no  longer  can  my  heart  conceal
What  once  'twas  useless  to  reveal ;
Yet,  spite  of  thy  affection,  thou
Mayst  blame  my  fatal  passion  now.
But  I  have  in  my  rapture  quaffed
Poison  in  love's  delicious  draught  ;
And  feel  the  agony  which  sears
The  soul,  and  dries  the  source  of  tears.
0  mother  !  mother  !  all  I  crave,
When  I  am  pillowed  in  my  grave,
Is  that  the  anguish-stricken  youth,
Whose  wondrous  constancy  and  truth


1  Nizami  is  here  rather  undignified,  but  only,  perhaps,
according  to  our  European  notions.  Literally,  That  beautiful
cypress-tree  became  as  thin  as  a  tooth-pick  !  '  As  slender  as
the  new  moon  '  is  the  usual  simile.


110  THE  LOVES  OF

Blended  our  souls  in  one,  may  come

And  weep  upon  his  Laili's  tomb.

Forbid  him  not ;  but  let  him  there

Pour  forth  the  flood  of  his  despair.

And  no  unhallowed  step  intrude

Upon  his  sacred  solitude.

For  he  to  me,  my  life,  my  stay,

Was  precious  as  the  light  of  day.

Amazing  was  his  love,  sublime,

Which  mocked  the  wonted  power  of  time  ;

And  when  thou  seest  him  grovelling  near,

Wildly  lamenting  o'er  my  bier,

Frown  not,  but  kindly,  soothingly  relate

Whate'er  thou  knowest  of  my  disastrous  fate.

Say  to  that  woe-worn  wanderer, — "All  is  o'er  ;

Laili,  thy  own  sad  friend,  is  now  no  more  ;

From  this  world's  heavy  chains  for  ever  free,

To  thee  her  heart  was  given — she  died  for  thee  !

With  love  so  blended  was  her  life,  so  true

That  glowing  love,  no  other  joy  she  knew.

No  worldly  cares  her  thoughts  had  e'er  oppressed  ;

The  love  of  thee  alone  disturbed  her  rest ;

And  in  that  love  her  gentle  spirit  passed,

Breathing  on  thee  her  blessing  to  the  last." '

The  mournful  mother  gazed  upon  her  child,
Now  voiceless — though  her  lips  imploring  smiled  ;
Saw the dread change, the sudden  pause of
breath —


LAILI  AND  MAJNUN  111

Her  beauty  settled  in  the  trance  of  death ; l

And,  in  the  frenzy  of  her  anguish,  tore

Her  hoary  locks,  the  'broidered  dress  she  wore  ;

Dissolved  in  tears,  her  wild  and  sorrowing  cries

Brought  down  compassion  from  the  weeping  skies  ;

And  so  intense  her  grief,  she  shivering  fell

Prostrate  upon  the  corse,  insensible,

And  never,  never  rose  again — the  thread

Of  life  was  broke — both,  clasped  together,  dead  !


0  world  !  how  treacherous  thou  art  !
With  angel-form  and  demon's  heart  ;
A  rosary  of  beads  in  hand,
And,  covertly,  a  trenchant  brand.
The  rolling  heavens  with  azure  glow,
But  storms  o'erwhelm  our  hopes  below  ;
The  ship  is  tossed  upon  the  shore,
The  wanderer  meets  his  friends  no  more  :
On  flowery  field,  or  boisterous  wave,
Alike  is  found  a  yawning  grave  ;

1  Richardson  has  observed,  in  the  dissertation  prefixed  to
his  Arabic  and  Persian  Dictionary  :  '  Dying  for  love  is  con-
sidered among  us  as  a  mere  poetic  figure ;  and  we  certainly
can  support  the  reality  by  few  examples  ;  but  in  Eastern
countries  it  seems  to  be  something  more ;  many  words  in  the
Arabic  and  Persian  languages,  which  express  love,  implying
also  melancholy,  madness,  and  death.'  Majnun,  for  instance,
signifies  furious,  frantic,  mad.


112  THE  LOVES  OF

For  formless,  riding  through  the  air,
Devouring  death  is  everywhere  ;
Khosrii,  and  Kai-kobad,  and  Ji'im,
Have  all  descended  to  the  tomb  ;
And  who,  composed  of  mortal  clay,
The  universal  doom  can  stay  ?
For  this,  in  vain,  have  youth  and  age
Pondered  o'er  learning's  mystic  page  ;
No  human  power  can  penetrate
The  mysteries  of  all-ruling  fate ;
Frail  life  is  but  a  moment's  breath  ;
The  world,  alas  !  is  full  of  death.

How  many  wept  that  fair  one,  gone  so  soon  !
How  many  wept  o'er  that  departed  moon  ! —
How  many  mourned  with  broken  hearts  for  her  !
How  many  bathed  with  tears  her  sepulchre  !
Round  her  pure  dust  assembled  old  and  young,
And  on  the  sod  their  fragrant  offerings  flung  ;
Hallowed  the  spot  where  amorous  youth  and  maid
In  after-times  their  duteous  homage  paid.

Again  it  was  the  task  of  faithful  Zyd,
Through  far-extending  plain  and  forest  wide,
To  seek  the  man  of  many  woes,  and  tell
The  fate  of  her,  alas  !  he  loved  so  well,
Loved,  doted  on,  until  his  mind,  o'erwrought,
Was  crushed  beneath  intolerable  thought.


LAILI  AND  MAJNUN  113

— With  bleeding  heart  he  found  his  lone  abode,
Watering  with  tears  the  path  on  which  he  rode,
And  beating  his  sad  breast,  Majmin  perceived
His  friend  approach,  and  asked  him  why  he  grieved  ;
What  withering  sorrow  on  his  cheek  had  preyed,
And  why  in  melancholy  black l  arrayed.
'  Alas  i '  he  cried,  '  the  hail  has  crushed  my  bowers  ;
A  sudden  storm  has  blighted  all  my  flowers  ;
Thy  cypress-tree  o'erthrown,  the  leaves  are  sear  ;
The  moon  has  fallen  from  her  lucid  sphere  ;
Laili  is  dead  ! ' No  sooner  was  the  word
Uttered,  no  sooner  the  dread  tidings  heard,
Than  Majmin,  sudden  as  the  lightning's  stroke
Sank  on  the  ground,  unconscious,  with  the  shock,
And  there  lay  motionless,  as  if  his  life
Had  been  extinguished  in  that  mortal  strife.
But,  soon  recovering,  he  prepared  to  rise,
Rewakened  frenzy  glaring  in  his  eyes,
And,  starting  on  his  feet,  a  hollow  groan
Burst  from  his  heart. '  Now,  now,  I  am  alone  !
Why  hast  thou  harrowing  words  like  these  expressed  ?
Why  hast  thou  plunged  a  dagger  in  my  breast;?
Away  !  away  ! ' The  savage  beasts  around,
In  a  wide  circle  couched  upon  the  ground,
Wondering  looked  on,  whilst  furiously  he'rent
His  tattered  garments,  and  his  loud  lament

1  Literally,  Why  hast  thou  put  on  a  black  upper-garment?
The  usual  mourning  of  Mohammedans  is  green.

H


114  THE  LOVES  OF

Rang  through  the  echoing  forest. Now  he  threads
The  mazes  of  the  shadowy  wood,  which  spreads
Perpetual  gloom,  and  now  emerges  where
Nor  hower  nor  grove  obstructs  the  fiery  air  ;
Climbs  to  the  mountain's  brow,  o'er  hill  and  plain
Urged  quicker  onwards  by  his  burning  brain,
Across  the  desert's  arid  boundary  hies  ;
Zyd,  like  his  shadow,  following  where  he  flies  ;
And  when  the  tomb  of  Laili  meets  his  view,
Prostrate  he  falls,  the  ground  his  tears  bedew  ;
Rolling  distraught,  he  spreads  his  arms  to  clasp
The  sacred  temple,  writhing  like  an  asp  :
Despair  and  horror  swell  his  ceaseless  moan.
And  still  he  clasps  the  monumental  stone.
'  Alas  ! '  he  cries — '  No  more  shall  I  behold
That  angel-face,  that  form  of  heavenly  mould.
She  was  the  rose  I  cherished — but  a  gust
Of  blighting  wind  has  laid  her  in  the  dust.
She  was  my  favourite  cypress,  full  of  grace,
But  death  has  snatched  her  from  her  biding-place.
The  tyrant  has  deprived  me  of  the  flower
I  planted  in  my  own  sequestered  bower  ;
The  Basil  sweet,  the  choicest  ever  seen,
Cruelly  torn  and  scattered  o'er  the  green.
0  beauteous  flower  !  nipped  by  the  winter's  cold,
Gone  from  a  world  thou  never  didst  behold.
0  bower  of  joy  !  with  blossoms  fresh  and  fair,
But  doomed,  alas  !  no  ripened  fruit  to  bear.


LAILI  AND  MAJNUN  115

Where  shall  I  find  thee  now,  in  darkness  shrouded  !

Those  eyes  of  liquid  light  for  ever  clouded  !

Where  those  carnation  lips,  that  musky  mole

Upon  thy  cheek,  that  treasure  of  the  soul !

Though  hidden  from  my  view  those  charms  of  thine,

Still  do  they  bloom  in  this  fond  heart  of  mine  ;

Though  far  removed  from  all  I  held  so  dear,

Though  all  I  loved  on  earth  be  buried  here,

Remembrance  to  the  past  enchantment  gives,

Memory,  blest  memory,  in  my  heart  still  lives.

Yes  !  thou  hast  quitted  this  contentious  life,

This  scene  of  endless  treachery  and  strife  ;

And  I  like  thee  shall  soon  my  fetters  burst,

And  quench  in  draughts  of  heavenly  love  my  thirst :

There,  where  angelic  bliss  can  never  cloy,

We  soon  shall  meet  in  everlasting  joy  ;

The  taper  of  our  souls,  more  clear  and  bright,

Will  then  be  lustrous  with  immortal  light  ! '

He  ceased,  and  from  the  tomb  to  which  he  clung
Suddenly  to  a  distance  wildly  sprung,
Aud,  seated  on  his  camel,  took  the  way
Leading  to  where  his  father's  mansion  lay  ;
His  troop  of  vassal-beasts,  as  usual,  near,
With  still  unchanged  devotion,  front  and  rear  ;
Yet,  all  unconscious,  reckless  where  he  went ;
The  sport  of  passion,  on  no  purpose  bent,
He  sped  along,  or  stopped  ;  the  woods  and  plains
Resounding  with  his  melancholy  strains  ;


116  THE  LOVES  OF

Such  strains  as  from  a  broken  spirit  flow,

The  waitings  of  immitigable  woe  ;

But  the  same  frenzy  which  had  fired  his  mind

Strangely  to  leave  his  Laili's  grave  behind,

Now  drove  him  back,  and  with  augmented  grief,

All  sighs  and  tears,  and  hopeless  of  relief,

He  flings  himself  upon  the  tomb  again,

As  if  he  there  for  ever  would  remain

Fatally  mingled  with  the  dust  beneath,

The  young,  the  pure,  the  beautiful  in  death.

Closely  he  strained  the  marble  to  his  breast,

A  thousand  kisses  eagerly  impressed,

And  knocked  his  forehead  in  such  desperate  mood,

The  place  around  him  was  distained  with  blood.

Alone,  unseen  ;  his  vassals  keep  remote
Curious  intruders  from  that  sacred  spot ;
Alone,  with  wasted  form  and  sombre  eyes,
Groaning  in  anguish  he  exhausted  lies  ;
No  more  life's  joys  or  miseries  will  he  meet,
Nothing  to  rouse  him  from  this  last  retreat ;
Upon  a  sinking  gravestone  he  is  laid,
The  gates  already  opening  for  the  dead  !

Selim,  the  generous,  who  had  twice  before
Sought  his  romantic  refuge,  to  implore
The  wanderer  to  renounce  the  life  he  led,
And  shun  the  ruin  bursting  o'er  his  head,
Again  explored  the  wilderness,  again
Crossed  craggy  rock,  deep  glen,  and  dusty  plain,


LAILI  AND  MAJNUN  117

To  find  his  new  abode. A  month  had  passed
'Mid  mountain  wild,  when,  turning  back,  at  last
He  spied  the  wretched  sufferer  alone,
Stretched  on  the  ground,  his  head  upon  a  stone.
Majnun,  up-gazing,  recognised  his  face,
And  bade  his  growling  followers  give  him  place  ;
Then  said  :  '  Why  art  thou  here  again,  since  thou
Left  me  in  wrath  ? What  are  thy  wishes  now  ?
I  am  a  wretch  bowed  down  with  bitterest  woe,
Doomed  the  extremes  of  misery  to  know,
Whilst  thou,  in  affluence  born,  in  pleasure  nursed,
Stranger  to  ills  the  direst  and  the  worst,
Can  never  join,  unless  in  mockery,
With  one  so  lost  to  all  the  world  as  me  ! '
Selim  replied  :  '  Fain  would  I  change  thy  will.
And  bear  thee  hence, — be  thy  companion  still :
Wealth  shall  be  thine,  and  peace  and  social  joy,
And  tranquil  days,  no  sorrow  to  annoy  ;
And  she  for  whom  thy  soul  has  yearned  so  long
May  yet  be  gained,  and  none  shall  do  thee  wrong.'
— Deeply  he  groaned,  and  wept  :  '  No  more,  no  more  !
Speak  not  of  her  whose  memory  I  adore  ;
She  whom  I  loved,  than  life  itself  more  dear,
My  friend,  my  angel-bride,  is  buried  here  !
Dead  ! — but  her  spirit's  now  in  heaven,  whilst  I
Live,  and  am  dead  with  grief — yet  do  not  die.
This  is  the  fatal  spot,  my  La  ill's  tomb, —
This  the  lamented  place  of  martyrdom.

h2


118  THE  LOVES  OF

Here  lies  my  life's  sole  treasure,  life's  sole  trust  ;
All  that  was  bright  in  beauty  gone  to  dust  ! '

Selim  before  him  in  amazement  stood,
Stricken  with  anguish,  weeping  tears  of  blood  ;
And  consolation  blandly  tried  to  give.
What  consolation  ? Make  his  Laili  live  ?
His  gentle  words  and  looks  were  only  found
To  aggravate  the  agonising  wound  ;
And  weeks  in  fruitless  sympathy  had  passed,
But,  patient  stdl,  he  lingered  to  the  last ;
Then,  with  an  anxious  heart,  of  hope  bereft,
The  melancholy  spot,  reluctant,  left.

The  life  of  Majnun  had  received  its  blight ;
His  troubled  day  was  closing  fast  in  night.
Still  weeping,  bitter,  bitter  tears  he  shed,
As  grovelling  in  the  dust  his  hands  he  spread
In  holy  prayer. '  0  God  !  Thy  servant  hear  !

And  in  Thy  gracious  mercy  set  him  free
From  the  afflictions  which  oppress  him  here.

That,  in  the  Prophet's  name,  he  may  return  to  Thee  !
Thus  murmuring,  on  the  tomb  he  laid  his  head,
And  with  a  sigh  his  wearied  spirit  fled.


And  he,  too,  has  performed  his  pilgrimage.
And  who,  existing  on  this  earthly  stage,
But  follows  the  same  path  1  whate'er  his  claim
To  virtue,  honour, — worthy  praise,  or  blame  ;


LATLI  AND  MAJNUN  119

So  will  he  answer  at  the  judgment-throne,
Where  secrets  are  unveiled,  and  all  things  known  ;
Where  felon-deeds  of  darkness  meet  the  light,
And  goodness  wears  its  crown  with  glory  bright.
Majnun,  removed  from  this  tumultous  scene,
Which  had  to  him  unceasing  misery  been,
At  length  slept  on  the  couch  his  bride  possessed,
And,  wakening,  saw  her  mingled  with  the  blessed.
There  still  lay  stretched  his  body,  many  a  day,
Protected  by  his  faithful  beasts  of  prey  ;
Whose  presence  filled  with  teiTor  all  around,
Who  sought  to  know  where  Majnun  might  be  found  :
Listening  they  heard  low  murmurs  on  the  breeze,
Now  loud  and  mournful,  like  the  hum  of  bees  ;
But  still  supposed  him  seated  in  his  place,
Watched  by  those  sentinels  of  the  savage  race.
— A  year  had  passed,  and  still  their  watch  they  kept,
As  if  their  sovereign  was  not  dead,  but  slept :
Some  had  been  called  away,  and  some  had  died —
At  last  the  smouldering  relics  were  descried; ;
And  when  the  truth  had  caught  the  breath  of  fame,
Assembled  friends  from  every  cpuarter  came  ;
Weeping,  they  washed  his  bones,  now  silvery  white,
With  ceaseless  tears  performed  the  funeral  rite,
And,  opening  the  incumbent  tablet  wide,
Mournfully  laid  him  by  his  Laili's  side.
One  promise  bound  their  faithful  hearts — one  bed
Of  cold,  cold  earth  united  them  when  dead.


120  THE  LOVES  OF

Severed  in  life,  how  cruel  was  their  doom
Ne'er  to  be  joined  but  in  the  silent  tomb  !


The  minstrel's  legend-chronicle

Which  on  their  woes  delights  to  dwell,

Their  matchless  purity  and  faith,

And  how  their  dust  was  mixed  in  death,

Tells  how  the  sorrow-stricken  Zyd

Saw,  in  a  dream,  the  beauteous  bride,

With  Majmin,  seated  side  by  side.

In  meditation  deep,  one  night,

The  other  world  flashed  on  his  sight

With  endless  vistas  of  delight —

The  world  of  spirits  ; — as  he  lay

Angels  appeared  in  bright  array,

Circles  of  glory  round  them  gleaming,

Their  eyes  with  holy  rapture  beaming  ;

He  saw  the  ever-verdant  bowers,

With  golden  fruit  and  blooming  flower*  :

The  bulbul  heard,  their  sweets  among,

Warbling  his  rich  mellifluous  song  •

The  ring-dove's  murmuring,  and  the  swell

Of  melody  from  harp  and  shell  :

He  saw  within  a  rosy  glade,

Beneath  a  palm's  extensive  shade,

A  throne,  amazing  to  behold,

Studded  with  glittering  gems  and  gold  ;


LAILI  AND  MAJNUN  121

Celestial  carpets  near  it  spread

Close  where  a  lucid  streamlet  strayed  ;

Upon  that  throne,  in  blissful  state,

The  long-divided  lovers  sate,

Resplendent  with  seraphic  light  :—

They  held  a  cup,  with  diamonds  bright  ;

Their  lips,  by  turns,  with  nectar  wet,

In  pure  ambrosial  kisses  met ;

Sometimes  to  each  their  thoughts  revealing,

Each  clasping  each  with  tenderest  feeling.

— The  dreamer  who  this  vision  saw

Demanded,  with  becoming  awe,

What  sacred  names  the  happy  pair

In  Irem-bowers  were  wont  to  bear.

A  voice  replied  :  '  That  sparkling  moon

Is  Laili  still — her  friend,  Majniin  ;

Deprived  in  your  frail  world  of  bliss,

They  reap  their  great  reward  in  this  ! '

Zyd,  wakening  from  his  wondrous  dream,
Now  dwelt  upon  the  mystic  theme,
And  told  to  all  how  faithful  love
Eeceives  its  recompense  above.


O  ye,  who  thoughtlessly  repose
On  what  this  nattering  world  bestows,
Reflect  how  transient  is  your  stay  !
How  soon  e'en  sorrows  fade  away  !


122 THE  LOVES  OF  LAILI  AND  MAJNUN

The  pangs  of  grief  the  heart  may  wring

In  life,  but  Heaven  removes  the  sting  ;

The  world  to  come  makes  bliss  secure, —

The  world  to  come,  eternal,  pure.

What  other  solace  for  the  human  soul,

But  everlasting  rest — virtue's  unvarying  goal  !

Saki  !  Nizami's  strain  is  sung  ;
The  Persian  poet's  pearls  are  strung ;
Then  fill  again  the  goblet  high  !
Thou  wouldst  not  ask  the  reveller  why  ?
Fill  to  the  love  that  changes  never  !
Fill  to  the  love  that  lives  for  ever  !
That,  purified  by  earthly  woes,
At  last  with  bliss  seraphic  glows.


Printed  by  T.  and  A.  Constable,  Printers  to  Her  Majesty,
at  the  Edinburgh  University  Press.


Nizami  PK

The  loves  of  laili .L33
and  Majnun.  a$  *
