THROUGH TIBET TO EVEREST
By Captain John B. L. Noel — London: Edward Arnold, 1927
========================================================================

PROVENANCE NOTE (Tower of Babel staging): This text reproduces the 1927 first edition as scanned by the Internet Archive (identifier dli.pahar.2337). The 1927 publication is in the public domain. The work is complete, including the 'Legendary Hairy Man of the Mountains' chapter.

========================================================================

CAPTAIN Nok tN Tineran DREss, 1013. 





THROUGH 
TIBET TO EVEREST 


BY 


CAPTAIN J. B. L. NOEL 


FELLOW ROYAL GEOGRAPHICAL SOCIETY, ASSOCIATE ROYAL 
PHOTOGRAPHIC SOCIETY OF GREAT BRITAIN, HONORARY LIFE 
MEMBER AMERICAN MUSEUM OF NATURAL HISTORY 


LONDON 
EDWARD ARNOLD & CO. 


COPYRIGHT 
FIRST PUBLISHED, 1927 
REPRINTED, 1927 
FIRST ISSUED IN THE KINGFISHER LIBRARY 


1931 
Lf 
* oe 
f ae 
Go SD 
2G . 
e 
PRINTED BY 


LOWE & BRYDONE (PRINTERS) LTD. 
LONDON, N.W IE 


To 
MY FATHER 
FROM WHOM I INHERITED 
A LOVE OF TRAVEL 


FOREWORD 


This account of great enterprises is written 
primarily for those who are not ordinarily interested 
in mountaineering and Himalayan exploration. In 
it I have tried to tell of the lure which led men to 
adventure in fascinating forbidden lands, and to the 
lofty summits of the world’s highest mountain. I 
have tried to write always from the human point 
of view; those who are interested in the scientific 
aspects, which I have deliberately only lightly 
touched upon, I refer to the admirable official 
accounts of the Everest Expeditions. 

If the story fosters the love of adventure, and 
evokes emulation of the dauntless spirit of the men 
of whose exploits it tells, then I shall feel indeed 


rewarded. 
J. B. L. NOEL. 


For the incorporation in this book of some material 
previously published in the Sunday edition of the 
New York World, I thank the Editor of that journal. 
I would like also to mention Mr. J. M. O’Connor for 
his assistance in the final preparation of the manu- 
script for the Press when I was occupied in a long 
journey in America. I have to thank the Editor of 
Punch for an extract, the editor of the Sphere for 
the use of a drawing, Messrs. Johnson & Hoffman, 
Calcutta, for a photograph, and Mr. Francis Helps 
for the sketches. 


J. B. L. NOEL. 


CONTENTS 


PART I 
OHAP. PAGE 
THE CHALLENGE OF THE MOUNTAIN 
I Tae Buanxk SPACE ON THE Map . . : 19 
II In Diseuist to TIBET. ‘ A : 30 
III Wrrsein Forty MILes oF THE Goa ; , 46 
IV Trset—rwHe FAscrnaTING. : : ‘ 63 
V Dr. Kewuas’s Phan. : ; : : 87 
PART II 
THE FIRST EXPLORATION AND CLIMB 
VI FinvmaG THE Way d , 95 
VII THe Expiorine EXPEDITION ( 1921) . 106 
VIII Tue First Curmmsina ExpepIrIon ( 1922) . 115 
IX On tHe Roap To Everest AGAIN ‘: . 126 
X THe Roncespuk MONASTERY . : . 136 
XI TackiLinae THE MOUNTAIN IN EARNEST . . 148 
XII How Cuimsers LIve at GREAT ALTITUDES . 160 
XIII Comsat! ACHIEVEMENT! REPULSE! . . 178 
PART III 


THE SECOND CLIMBING EXPEDITION 
AIV Tue Stconp CrirmBina EXpepiTion (1924) . 203 


XV How WE Met a DEFEaT. ; ; . 221 
XVI <A SEconp GREAT VICTORY . ‘ 3 . 240 
XVII THe CuLmrmnatTina TRAGEDY. : ‘ . 258 

XVIII Some Finat ConsiIpERATIONS : é . 270 
APPENDIX A. OXYGEN . : : . . 279 
APPENDIX B. SCIENCE VERSUS NATURE ; ‘ . 283 
APPENDIX C. To EVEREST BY AIR . ; : . 296 
INDEX. . ‘ ‘ - ‘ : : . 299 


11 


LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS 


PAGE 
Captain Noel in Tibetan Dress, 1913. Frontispiece 
The Fashions of Lhasa ‘ ; . ; j . 16 
The Darjeeling Railway. : : : facing 34 
Camp on the Tibetan Plateau, 1913. j facing 52 


The Wheel of Life, from a Tibetan Monastery. .. wi 
A Tibetan Lama é ‘ ‘ ‘ « . % .  T4 


The Fortress of Khamba Dzong . z ; i . 9+ 
A Sherpa boy with the Expedition —. ; facing 118 
Tibetan method of salutation —. 5 s facing 118 
The * Shining Crystal * Monastery, Shekar . facing 134 
The Rongbuk Monastery and Everest . ‘ facing 135 
A Lama with Prayer Wheel and Rosary : facing 148 
The Base Camp i ; . . ; facing 149 
Frozen Lake Camp, 19,500 ft... : ° facing 174 
A Fairyland of Ice. ; ‘ : . : . 202 


Mallory’s last note, written at the 27,000 ft. bivouae facing 220 


George Leigh Mallory : : ‘ ; facing 220 
A Group at the Dzongpen’s, Shekar . . facing 221 
The Cliff Camp, 28,000 ft. . ‘ ; ; facing 244 
Lamas brought to England by Captain Noel facing 245 
Odell's last view of Mallory and Irvine é facing 268 
The Summit of Everest —. : 2 * facing 269 


13 


14 LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS 


Specimens of Tibetan Design— 
No. I 
No. II . 
No. IIT. 

Spider 


PAGE 





SPECIMEN OF TIBETAN DESIGN. NO. I. 





THe FASHIONS OF LHASA. 


PART I 


THE CHALLENGE OF THE 
MOUNTAIN 


CHAPTER I 
THE BLANK SPACE ON THE MAP 


The first scene in the series of dramas which 
together constitute the Story of Everest has for 
its setting prosaic Indian Government Offices where 
one day in 1852 the Bengali Chief Computer rushed 
into the room of the Surveyor-General, Sir Andrew 
Waugh, breathlessly saying: ‘Sir, I have dis- 
covered the highest mountain in the world!” 

The Office of the Trigonometrical Survey had 
been long engaged on a series of observations of the 
peaks of Nepal from the plains of India. Native 
names had been Officially adopted where native 
names were known, but many of these mountains, 
sO numerous, massed together and towering one 
above the other, were nameless even to natives. 
Numbers therefore had to be given to distinguish 
them. Among these unnamed peaks was one 
‘Peak XV.” Observations of it were recorded in 
1849, but were not worked out for some three years 
afterwards. 

Then, leisurely working over the accumulated 
data, the Computer made his dramatic discovery 
and immediately hastened to his Chief with the 


hews. 
19 


20 THROUGH TIBET TO EVEREST 


Excited as he was, he could have had no concep- 
tion of the adventures to which his mathematical 
calculations were destined to lure men. The sequel 
was to be a struggle with gods and demons— 
existing only in the minds of the dwellers in the 
remote country of the mountain, but none the less 
teal opponents. It was to be a contest with Nature 
in her cruellest moods, waged where the earth, 
surging upwards, thrusts herself, stark, bleak, and 
lonely, through her enveloping atmosphere into the 
Great Void. 

Immediately the officials got busy. Carefully the 
observations from all six stations whence this Peak 
XV had been observed were checked, and the mean 
height of 29,002 feet was arrived at. The measure- 
ment was in later years carefully re-checked and 
raised to 29,145 feet. Sir Andrew Waugh named 
the mountain after Sir George Everest, his pre- 
decessor, the Surveyor-General of India, under whose 
directions the triangulations had been started,‘ but 
afterwards the Everest Expeditions discovered that 
the Tibetan name is Chomolungma, which means 
“The Goddess Mother of the World.’ 

All sorts of people have from time to time told 
stories of mountains higher than Everest; but it 
is definitely known that there is no higher mountain. 
Thus it became the dream and goal of explorers and 


1Some nations have named the mountain Gaurisankar, 
but this is wrong, for explorers have ascertained that this is 
the native name of a mountain in Nepal, over a hundred miles 
from Mount Everest. 


THE BLANK SPACE ON THE MAP 21 


mountaineers. But nobody could reach it, although 
it was so tantalizingly near. It was computed to 
be only 110 miles, as the crow flies, from Darjeeling, 
and to be situated on the borders of Nepal and 
Tibet ; but the Tibetans refused, as also did the 
Nepalese, to give permission to approach it. 
Access to the giant peak was not to come for 
many years. The mountain land of the Himalaya 
that bounds India on the north like a huge wall of 
rock and stretches beyond to the east and the west, 
might be called the backbone of the world. There 
are 2,000 miles of giant mountains, one hundred 
peaks each 24,000 feet in height, higher than any 
mountains in other parts of the world; twenty 
giants 26,000 feet in height; six super-giants of 
27,000 feet ; and finally the culminating summit of 
Mount Everest, 29,145 feet—5} miles high. This 
mountain range, one of the youngest in the world, is 
still being pushed up, so geologists tell us, by the 
pressure of the oceans on the crust of the earth.} 
What were the secrets guarded by these colossal 
natural ramparts? Now we know the geography, 
but it is not long since Central Asia, from the Pamirs 
to Tibet and the Gobi Desert as far as ‘the steppes 
of Siberia, were white space on the best of maps, 
except where dotted lines marking the routes taken 
by rare explorers, such as the Abbé Huc, Bogle, 


1“ Odell, & geologist and climber of the last Mount Everest 
expedition, found fossils at a height of 25,000 feet. They 
belonged to a period over one hundred million years ago when 
Everest was below the level of the ocean.” 


22 THROUGH TIBET TO EVEREST 


Turner, Manning, and some Russians from the 
other side, stretched tenuously. 

The position of Lhasa, the mysterious home of 
Buddhism in the heart of Tibet, was only guessed at. 
Such data as its latitude and longitude were un- 
known. Only vague knowledge existed of the 
Tsanpo, the great river of Tibet which becomes 
the Brahmaputra in India, and of the great Indus 
which comes down from Tibet, carving its way 
through a series of terrific gorges in the mountains. 

All this geographical knowledge had to be sought. 
But how ? 

The Himalayan passes were walled, barricaded, 
and guarded by hostile Tibetan soldiery. Beyond 
the passes the lamas in their fortress monasteries 
ceaselessly spied the land for foreigners, and cap- 
tured and tortured any they found. It was 
hopeless for any white man to attempt to go. 

The story of how the prayer wheels and rosaries 
of the Tibetans, instruments of piety, were cunningly 
turned to use against them, is one of the most fascin- 
ating romances of Asiatic exploration. 

In 1860 Captain Montgomery, an active officer of 
the Indian Survey, hit upon the idea of training 
certain intelligent Indians in the use of scientific 
instruments. They became known as the ‘“‘ Pundit 
Explorers.” They were not all Hindoos, although 
styled Pundits. Some were Mohammedans, like 
Ata Mahomed “The Mullah,” who explored the 
gorge of the Indus. Another was a Persian, the 


THE BLANK SPACE ON THE MAP 23 


intrepid Mirza Shuja, who found his way through 
North Afghanistan and the Pamirs, but in later 
years was foully murdered in his sleep at Bokhara. 
Because of the secrecy of their explorations the 
names of these men were not published until later 
years. They were known by two letters, Kalian 
Singh becoming “‘ A.K.”; Hari Ram, who explored 
towards Mount Everest, ‘‘ M.H.” 

They were trained in the making of route traverses 
by compasses and the pacing of steps. They 
travelled in disguise and were allowed a free hand, 
earning only a few rupees a month. They were re- 
warded only when they returned—if they returned ! 

What perseverance in the face of danger and what 
skill they showed in their scientific observations ! 
‘““ A.K.” from his traverse fixed the longitude of 
Yarkand as 77° 15’ 55”, and seven years later this 
was checked by wireless telegraphy and found to 
be actually 77° 15’ 46’. 

They would leave on their journeys and disappear 
sometimes for years, reappearing unexpectedly with 
the geographical knowledge so laboriously collected. 
They counted their every step by the revolution of 
their prayer wheels, or by the beads on their rosaries. 
At night they would write their notes on a roll 
of paper hidden inside the prayer wheel. They 
recorded compass bearings of mountains and rivers 
passed, by means of little compasses cleverly dis- 
guised as amulets worn round their necks. They 
carried boiling-point thermometers inside hollow 


24 THROUGH TIBET TO EVEREST 


walking sticks for the measurement of altitudes. 
Some pretended to be pilgrims and others traders, 
carrying medicines in order to ingratiate themselves 
with the lamas and officers they met in Tibet. 

The physical hardships and nerve-racking effects 
of such travels told heavily upon them, and not 
more than two or three journeys could any one 
explorer accomplish in his lifetime. If he survived 
these he was withdrawn and employed to teach and 
train other men to continue the work. Time after 
time they suffered robbery by bandits or desertion 
by companions and caravans to which they had 
attached themselves, as in the case of ‘‘ A.K.”’’, who, 
after he had been away for four years and had been 
given up as lost, made his way back through China, 
destitute except for the knowledge gained of another 
two thousand miles of the Forbidden Land. 

One of the most romantic of all these adventures 
was that of the Pundit, Kintup. He was sent to 
trace the course of the great Tibetan river, the 
Tsanpo, and to find out if it was the same stream 
as the Brahmaputra which pours into India from 
the Himalayas through the impenetrable forests of 
the Abor Savages. 

For two whole years, every day and night, Captain 
Harman of the Indian Survey, who sent Kintup on 
his hazardous mission, had the river watched in 
India for the special blocks of wood that Kintup 
was to cut and throw into the river in Tibet. But 
never a block was seen. Then Captain Harman fell 


THE BLANK SPACE ON THE MAP 25 


seriously ill, left India, and the watch was aban- 
doned. So also was hope that Kintup would ever 
return. 

Kintup meanwhile had fallen a prisoner in Tibet, 
and been sold as aslave. Four years later, however, 
he gained his freedom and then—such was the 
amazing devotion to duty of the man—instead of 
making his way home, he set out to accomplish the 
work for which lice had been sent. He followed the 
course of the Tibetan river into the unknown, within 
60 miles of the plains. There he came to forest lands 
where he cut logs and threw them into the river. 
But more than four years of dwindling hope had 
gone by and there was no longer anyone watching 
for them. 

Brave Kintup got back to India at length, and 
went to report to the Survey Officers and to ask 
who had found his logs. The story he gave of his 
wanderings was so romantic that many disbelieved 
him, but the Survey Department trusted his account 
officially ; and, indeed, later his discoveries were 
proved true. Kintup received just reward for his 
devotion. The Geographical Society honoured him, 
while the Indian Government gave him the Order 
of Commander of the Indian Empire and a gift 
of a prosperous village where he could spend the 
remainder of his days. 

The Explorer Hari Ram, ‘‘ M.H.,”’ was sent in the 
direction of Everest. He made his way from India 
secretly, disguised as a pilgrim, by the Kosi, one of 


26 THROUGH TIBET TO EVEREST 


the great rivers of Nepal. He crossed a pass, 20,000 
feet high, west of Everest, and reached Dingri, north 
of the mountain, in Tibet. He gained valuable know- 
ledge of the surroundings of Everest, particularly 
to the north, but he found himself so blocked in by 
enormous peaks that he could not reach or identify 
his real objective. Vague rumours, however, he 
heard of the ‘‘ Lamasery of the Snows.” 

This journey of ‘*‘ M.H.”’ and that of Sarat Chandra 
Das in 1879 were the nearest foreign approaches 
made to Mount Everest. Sarat Chandra Das made 
@ journey to satisfy a religious ambition, travelling 
from India to Lhasa. He was not a trained geo- 
grapher and his account of the country along the 
eastern approaehes to Mount Everest was vague, but 
interesting as showing the hardships of travel over 
high mountain lands. He wrote a delightful book, 
A Journey to Lhasa and Central Tibet (John Murray, 
1904). 

The plateau north of Everest was known as the 
Dingri Maidan. Besides the work of “‘ M..”’, the 
Dingri Maidan had been crossed by some Capuchin 
Friars, who established a Mission at Lhasa in the 
eighteenth century and who reached Tibet via Khat- 
mandu in Nepal, where they had their headquarters. 
It is significant to observe the influence which these 
Roman Catholic monks had upon the Tibetan lamas 
in matters of ritualand ceremony. The lamas copied 
from the Friars many things now seen in their vest- 
ments, etc. But these Franciscans were permitted 


THE BLANK SPACE ON THE MAP 27 


to remain for only a short while and then they were 
banished from Tibet. 

The route they followed was far to the north of 
Everest, and their writings contain no mention of 
the mountain. For Everest is shy and retiring. 
She hides behind a wall of other mountains, which 
are nearer and appear to be higher. 

At the conclusion of Sir Francis Younghusband’s 
military mission to Lhasa in 1904, Captain Rawling 
and Major Ryder passed by Shigatse and surveyed 
the Tsanpo Valley and the mountains forming the 
watershed between the Tsanpo and Dingri rivers. 
But owing to the lateness of the season and the length 
of the journey that they had to accomplish to Rudok, 
they did not deviate sufficiently far to the south 
to reconnoitre the Dingri Plain, and the northern 
approaches to Mount Everest. As late therefore as 
the early years of the present century, the journeys 
of Sarat Chandra Das who passed by the east, and 
of the Explorer ‘‘ M.H.’? who passed by the west, 
comprised the sum total of our knowledge of the 
approaches to Mount Everest. It was known that 
on the east side was a deep gorge, where the Arun 
River breaks through from the plains of Tibet ; while 
on the west side there appeared to be no river break- 
ing the chain of mountains, and only high and difficult 
passes between Nepal and Tibet, with no practicable 
pass anywhere near the mountain. No explorer had 
penetrated to Everest’s glacier valleys. Surround- 
ing the great summit, which had been plotted by 


28 THROUGH TIBET TO EVEREST 


observation from India, was a blank white space on 
the map. The mountain stood, stupendous ; seen 
through telescopes ; its slopes untrodden by human 
beings as far as we knew. 

Lord Curzon, when Viceroy of India, had sug- 
gested the exploration of Everest to the Royal 
Geographical Society and the Alpine Club. Sir 
Francis Younghusband had previously talked the 
matter over with General Bruce, then Colonel Bruce, 
when they were together at Chitral in 1893. General 
Bruce had tried several times with Mumm and other 
distinguished Alpine climbers to organize an Expedi- 
tion, but always political difficulties intervened. 
The Tibetans would not let white men approach. 
Nepal, an alternative through which the mountain 
might be reached, was closed to whites except to 
the political representative of the Indian Govern- 
ment, who is permitted to reside at Khatmandu, 
the capital. The Indian Government supports 
this policy of independent buffer States round her 
frontiers, into which she refuses to allow even her 
own subjects to enter. In return the Native States 
refuse ingress to foreigners from the other side. 

But mountaineers, although barred from Everest, 
had made assaults on other giant mountains of the 
Himalaya. Mr. W. H. Johnson, of the Indian 
Survey, reached an altitude of 22,000 feet as far 
back as the sixties in the last century. Then in 1883 
Graham raised the record by another 2,000 feet, and 
in 1909 the Duke of Abruzzi, accompanied by the 


THE BLANK SPACE ON THE MAP 29 


Brockerels, the celebrated Alpine guides, reached 
24,600 feet on the Bride Peak in Kashmir, breaking 
down when only 400 feet from the summit, from 
sheer lack of air to breathe. The achievement, a 
marvel which astonished the world, was considered 
by scientists and explorers as approximately the 
limit to which human beings could ever climb. 
When the North and South Poles had been reached, 
the ambitions of explorers centred more than ever 
on Everest. Here was a last task perhaps even more 
stupendous than the others. Here was a challenge 
to man’s skill and courage, the alluring, fascinating 
challenge of Nature’s last secret stronghold. 


CHAPTER II 
IN DISGUISE TO TIBET 


Having already accomplished a good deal of 
mountain travel on the borders of India and Tibet, 
I decided in 1913 to seek out the passes that 
led to Everest and if possible to come to close 
quarters with the mountain. Everest! hitherto 
unapproached by men of my race; guarded, 
so fantastic rumour said, by the holiest lamas 
dwelling in mystic contemplation of the soul of 
the giant peak, communing with its demons and 
guardian gods! It was an alluring goal. 

I thought that if I went with only a few hillmen 
from the borders of Tibet and India, I should avoid 
the attention a group of white men would attract. 
This proved to be the case. I was within 40 miles 
of Everest before a force of soldiers turned me back. 

To defeat observation I intended to avoid the 
villages and settled parts generally, to carry our 
food, and to keep to those more desolate stretches 
where only an occasional shepherd was to be seen. 
My men were not startlingly different from the 
Tibetans, and if I darkened my skin and my hair I 
could pass, not as a native—the colour and shape 


of my eyes would prevent that—pbut as a Moham- 
30 


IN DISGUISE TO TIBET 31 


medan from India. A Moslem would be a stranger 
and suspect in Tibet, but not as glaringly so as a 
white man. 

I dared not hope to escape observation entirely, 
but thought I could minimize it and perhaps reach 
my goal before an intercepting party would catch 
me up. I planned the route from the writings of 
Sarat Chandra Das. 

I intended to cross the mountains by a high pass 
which was not used by the Tibetans nor watched by 
them. It cut off the populated districts of Southern 
Tibet round Khamba Dzong and Tinki, and it would 
open, I hoped, a high level road behind Kangchen- 
junga to the gorge of the Arun, and then to Everest’s 
eastern glaciers. 

All this was an ambition of years, and the result 
of careful study and preparation. It would have 
been impossible of accomplishment but for the help 
of the men who had travelled with me before. I 
could impart my plans to them. They were simple 
wild men of the mountains. I talked their tongue 
and they trusted me as I did them. If you travel 
with a man, you must either fall out with him or 
make him your good friend. 

Adhu was a Bhutia with all the vigour of his race 
and the youth of the twenties. His broad Bhutia 
face smiled all day long whatever happened—that 
is chiefly why I took him. 

Tebdoo was a Sherpa Nepalese, a rough but 
golden-hearted fellow who knew everything that 


32 THROUGH TIBET TO EVEREST 


there is to be known about mountains and wild sheep. 
After this journey he said he would come to work 
for me in India; and refused to believe that there 
were no wild sheep to hunt there. But at the end 
of the journey I had to part with him and send him 
back to wild Nepal. I honestly regretted doing so. 

Badri, a little man from the mountains of Garhwal, 
had always been a favourite companion of mine on 
journeys in the Himalaya. I kept him beside me 
to carry the rifle and camera. He had a keen 
appreciation of mountain scenery ; perhaps not for 
the beauty an artist would find in it, but born and 
bred among mountains, he felt their peculiar charm, 
that something which draws, gladdens and mas- 
ters the soul of a hillsman. How impatient and 
miserable he was on the plains of India before we 
were able to start for the Himalaya! The keen, 
hardy, vigorous little figure felt lonely among the 
Hindoo people in that flat land. But as the days 
went on and the time for the start came nearer he 
responded to the delight of making ‘‘ bandobast.” 
Then all day he was light-hearted and happy. 

I intended to be free to wander where I wished, 
unencumbered, so took no more baggage than would 
go into two small tin trunks from the native bazaar, 
a supply of blankets and two native tents. I con- 
cealed in the trunks two cameras and instruments 
for drawing and mapping; a boiling-point ther- 
mometer for altitudes; a good take-down model 
American rifle, that could be tucked away in any 


IN DISGUISE TO TIBET 33 


blanket, with plenty of ammunition; also my 
revolver, and automatic pistols for the men. 
Enthusiasm filled me for this adventure. Dar- 
jeeling was to be made the base for meeting Adhu 
and Tebdoo and buying ponies. Then we would 
plunge into the heart of the great forests that clothe 
the foot-hills of the Himalaya. We would pass 
through the tangled thickets of the tropical forest, 
climb into the regions of pine, larch, juniper and 
rhododendron, then beyond the tree line through 
snow-bound passes into unmapped Tibet. 


“Why, look, Sahib! There are the moun- 
tains!” 

I was awakened by little Badri, who had climbed 
into my carriage on the Bengal Express that runs 
from Calcutta overnight to Jalpaiguri and Siliguri. 
At Jalpaiguri at daybreak the traveller gets his 
first sight of the forests of the Terai with their stag- 
nant morasses, clearings of ricefields and tea gardens. 
A dull green forest-clad wall of hills rises abruptly 
out of the hazy stretch of plain. Here and there 
on the distant slopes the white tin roofs of the tea- 
planters’ bungalows flash in the sunlight. Some of 
them occupy solitary clearings in the green mantle 
of forest which covers every inch of the hills. 

If the morning is clear, far to the north, over- 
topping the tangle of green hazy foot-hills and rising 
to an incredible height, may be seen a serrated line 
of dazzling white peaks extending the whole length 

Cc 


34 THROUGH TIBET TO EVEREST 


of the horizon from east to west, the great range 
of the Himalaya. 

A little toy-like train starts from Siliguri. It is 
called the crookedest, and it is the tiniest mountain 
railway in all the world. Yet it does a giant’s work. 
It climbs 8,000 feet in 40 miles to Darjeeling on the 
hill-top. It journeys from the plains through the 
heat of the tropical forests, through the Terai where 
tigers lurk and tea-planters cultivate clearings. Up 
and up it goes, turning and twisting and shunting 
backwards and forwards. A dozen times it makes 
figures of eight and zigzags and loops, where the 
engine passes the tail of the train, and the driver leans 
out and talks to the passengers in the end coach. 

The track is laid along the cart road; and the 
engineer whistles to wake up the bullock carts and 
frighten away chickens and children in the village 
strects. At night time a man sits in front of the 
engine, holding a great tar torch to light the track 
and see that no stray tigers or elephants cause a 
bump! 

At Ghoom comes the first view of the snows. 
That view rewards hours of waiting, when finally it 
reveals itself as the train, rocking from side to side, 
flies round a corner. So unexpected is the height 
of Kangchenjunga, the third highest mountain 
in the world, 28,000 feet, that people often mistake 
its silver spearhead for a cloud formation. 

I remember the remarks of the people in the 
compartment, mostly residents, some invalids, and 


"AYATIVY ONITAIVG AHS 





i. 





, Cee x 


+ maleate a te 


_-* 


, 
wr 


Na a as 


IN DISGUISE TO TIBET 35 


business men who would not leave their newspapers 
to look at any mountains. They agreed that 
Kangchenjunga, a spire of ice that pierces the 
heavens, is a mighty sight, but their attention was 
given to collecting their parcels and guessing if 
‘“‘ So-and-so” would perhaps be at the station to 
meet them. We were running into Darjeeling. 

Darjeeling, like all Indian hill stations, is built 
on the very top of the hill. It has its fine club 
houses—its Gymkhana Club where a London quart- 
ette plays for dances, apparently all day and all 
night. There is a Scotch Mission, a Barracks, a 
Hospital, and an Observation Point to which tourists 
ride in a rickshaw, to lean over an iron railing and 
look down 6,000 feet into the steaming valleys 
below. From there the eye can sweep in a panorama 
embracing tropical forests and eternal snow. 

At two o’clock in the morning, the hotel porter 
rings a 12-inch brass bell outside your door, and 
comes again every ten minutes to make certain that 
you do not forget that ponies and rickshaws are 
waiting to take you to Tiger Hill where people go 
to see the run rise on Kangchenjunga and Mount 
Everest. It is an unforgettable spectacle. Kang- 
chenjunga commands the attention because it is 
80 prominent, so near, and so huge. Far away to the 
west is a mass of huge peaks. Among them the 
guide points out a pyramid peeping behind the others 
and seeming to be smaller; that mountain is 
Everest. 


36 THROUGH TIBET TO EVEREST 


Just as interesting as the first sight of the moun- 
tains is a first acquaintance with the hill people. In 
the market place on Sunday morning may be seen 
a throng entirely different from the people of the 
plains of India. They are jovial, happy folk, and 
you see no veiled women’s faces. There are jolly 
Bhutia girls—very pretty some of them, but they 
win you most by their high spirits and their laughter. 
Everyone of them is naughty. They smoke cigar- 
ettes all day long. They do most of the hard work, 
while the Bhutia men collect in circles to gamble for 
hours with dice at the street corners, or else lounge 
against walls, grin broadly, and doff their hats to 
anyone from whom they think they can get bak- 
sheesh. They are good-humoured; handsome; 
with gaily coloured clothes, raucous joking voices, 
and tangled, loose, flowing hair. They earn enough 
to get drunk on by pulling rickshaws or by carrying 
luggage to the Everest Hotel. Both men and 
women are immensely powerful. There is a true 
story told of how a Bhutia woman porter once 
carried a grand piano unaided 500 feet from the 
station to this same hotel. 

It is these people with whom one lives when 
wandering in the forests and mountains beyond 
Darjeeling. They make jovial travelling com- 
panions; but the traveller must understand them 
and know how to manage them. They have a 
habit of calling at their pet drinking houses in out- 
lying villages and getting hopelessly drunk, leaving 


IN DISGUISE TO TIBET 37 


him without bed and supplies the first night 
out. 
I selected my ponies with great care. A man can 
entrust his life to a good pony and not even bother 
about holding the reins along the narrow paths 
through gorges and across precipices, they are so 
sure-footed. 

Adhu and Tebdoo having been met according to 
plan, all was ready for the start. The cool of 
Darjeeling and the breeze that refreshed the hill- 
tops changed rapidly as we dropped down and down 
into the Tista Valley nearly 7,000 feet below. We 
found ourselves entering the humid forest, whose 
vegetation grew thicker and thicker until the trees 
and the twisted creepers that climb over them, 
interlaced above, formed a tunnel of greenery 
hiding the sky. 

We were dropping down mile after mile. The 
road was the hottest I had ever felt. The blazing 
sun boiled the thick, damp, rotting jungle into a 
thousand oppressive smelling vapours. Swarms of 
insects filled the air with incessant hum and buzz. 
There came land leeches to attack our legs from the 
ground and fix themselves to our boots; others on 
the trees above, warned by some instinct,—wonder- 
ful but horrible, since they are blind,—swung their 
bodies in the air on our approach and dropped down 
on US a8 we passed below. There is no escape from 
the leech. You must make up your mind that you 
are going to lose a lot of blood. To compensate 


38 THROUGH TIBET TO EVEREST 


slightly there were remarkable butterflies on this road. 
They were gigantic, measuring up to 4 inches across 
the wings and unequalled for colour and diversity. 

During the next few days’ march, each bend of 
the road—and the track was twisting and turning 
continuously through the forests following the bank 
of the river—opened a new peep of the Tista, here 
a broad flood broken into foam by large boulders in 
mid-stream, and flanked by steep mountain walls, 
from which the superabundant vegetation hung 
down and trailed into the water. We crossed a 
chasm by a wire suspension bridge, a frail structure 
swinging and lurching under every step, where the 
torrent below had carved itself a gorge, only some 
30 feet wide, but almost 300 feet deep. 

As we continued day by day the path climbed 
higher and higher, and the scenery changed as if by 
magic. The tangled jungle dropped away and we 
entered a smiling valley. There were meadows 
dotted with pine, larch, and rhododendron, with 
Alpine flowers and primulas beside clear streams 
that meandered through the pasturages. 

Lachen occupies a shelf high above the torrent 
which tears and foams through a 500-foot cleft below. 
The village stands on a shelf thrown out from the 
flanks of snow-capped Lamadong, in a recess snug 
and protected from the cold. It was here I planned 
to leave the ponies and get six of the hardy billmen 
of this village to come on with me to Tibet. They 
had been hunting with me on a former occasion. 


IN DISGUISE TO TIBET 39 


Here, while making these arrangements, my men 
first seemed to realize the nature of our journey. 
They became filled with doubts and fears. ‘‘ We 
have no man who knows those parts,” they said. 
‘‘ How will we find the way to this mountain in 
Nepal that the Sahib wishes to see?’ They had 
little faith in my map; and, truth to tell, I had 
little too. They feared maltreatment should we 
enter Nepal; and they told stories of the fierceness 
and exclusiveness of the Nepalese. 

We went on to a high grazing ground called Tangu, 
13,000 feet, where I could acclimatize and prepare 
for the rough work. One day, in order to spy out 
the geography and to exercise my men, I decided 
to make the ascent of one of the surrounding peaks, 
which promised from its position to reveal the 
panorama ahead. We started before dawn to climb 
the snow-covered slopes. The ground was smooth 
and of even inclination, and there was no difficulty 
in making good pace all the way. Finally we gained 
the summit of the ridge, and found that we could not 
have taken a more lucky direction. We were looking 
at the giants of the Himalaya from their very midst. 

It was shortly after dawn. The slanting rays of 
the sun caught the fantastic crest of the immense 
mountain Tsenguikang in a bright flaming glow. 
Mists scattered, and flying erratically in whirls and 
eddies, chased each other over the shining ridges, 
now hiding the peak entirely, now evaporating and 
revealing fresh vistas of ice and rock and precipice. 


40 THROUGH TIBET TO EVEREST 


Looking west in the direction of Kangchenjunga 
we saw the first pass over the ridge towards the 
tangle of snow mountains into the heart of which we 
were to go. Deep below us was the cleft of the 
valley through which we had come from India. It 
continued to the north towards the Koru Pass that 
leads to Tibet, but is watched by Tibetans and 
guarded by the fortress of Khamba Dzong on the 
other side of the divide. There was no way for us 
into Tibet there. To the north we saw the land- 
scape broadening, and in the far distance we got a 
glimpse of the plateau land of Tibet that stretches 
on for hundreds of miles, bleak deserted plains that 
roll away to Central Asia. 

I could not have struck a better place for observa- 
tion. The boiling-point thermometer measured the 
altitude as 16,700 feet. There was not a cloud to 
spoil the splendid view; and I lingered, contem- 
plating the solitudes and admiring and storing in 
memory the beauties of the crystal air and turquoise 
sky. The men grew cold in the biting wind that 
blew in fitful gusts over the ridge. Although fine 
a8 a view-point, an exposed ridge at this height is 
no place for a doze. 

From here I was to strike to the west and take a 
high level track that would take us out of the Indian 
Empire behind Kangchenjunga into Southern Tibet. 

We carried fourteen days’ food with us. The 
first pass of 16,000 feet was no great obstacle. In 
two days we were across, spending one night at a 


IN DISGUISE TO TIBET 41 


Tibetan camping ground called Chabru, where there 
is a cave making a fine shelter. From there we 
looked down to the high verdant pasture lands of 
Lhonak where the Tibetan shepherds come in the 
height of summer by the Naku Pass from Khamba 
Dzong. The valley is a lofty secluded basin at an 
elevation of 16,000 feet, surrounded by walls of 
snow. Ina hidden nook deep in the heart of undis- 
covered lands we stood alone among the solemn 
majesty of the sentinel mountains. 

We sampled the variable Tibetan climate, where 
the sun shines in the rarefied air with dazzling 
brightness and burning heat. The rays parch the 
lips and tan the skin, even blistering it. Suddenly 
the sun may veil over and the wind spring up. Then 
—pile on your thickest clothes if you would not feel 
perished with cold. 

I challenged Tebdoo to a race down the hill. In 
the mountains it is often easier to run down slopes 
than to walk; and, indeed, when one is tired, it is 
often a relief to break into a run. But you must 
have strong knees and a good stick to lean back upon. 
Tebdoo, who was at heart only a boy, delighted in 
amusements of this kind, and won the race, at the 
cost of his skin boots. However, he could mend 
them quickly by sewing on a new piece of the un- 
tanned sheepskin which all hillmen carry in their 
bokkus. 

We pressed forward through this country and 
got behind Kangchenjunga, where our course turned 


42 THROUGH TIBET TO EVEREST 


again to the north to cross the high Chorten Nyim 
Pass. The pass is a cleft in the mountains, blocked 
by snow and the debris of rock avalanches. I 
had learned that the Tibetans had abandoned the 
pass, and by crossing it I hoped to get into Tibet 
unobserved. 

The day before crossing we made camp on a shelf 
looking right across to Kangchenjunga’s precipices 
to the south. That evening I spent watching. It 
is in the evening that these mountains wear their 
most fairy-like aspect. Vapours and mists, evapora- 
ting, form themselves again, and coil worshipfully 
round the cliffs and ridges. Kangchenjunga’s pre- 
cipices rise 12,000 feet sheer from the glacier below. 
As I watched, the slanting shafts of light crept up the 
fluted precipices and caused their draperies of ice 
to scintillate as with fire. On the eastern side the 
shadows gathered. Twilight conquered, the depths 
became a dark chaos,—in such shadows might have 
been enacted the primal mysteries before Time 
began — but the summits of Kangchenjunga re- 
mained aflame, like beacons high above the night- 
enveloped world below, and seemed to shine with a 
luminosity all their own. 

With the darkness came biting frost; and I 
turned quickly to creep into the tent and wrap a 
blanket round me. 

I brought three of the men into my tent, as there 
was plenty of room, while their tent was overcrowded. 
They curled themselves up side by side, wrapped 


IN DISGUISE TO TIBET 43 


tightly in blankets, and so kept each other warm. 
I woke in the cold and darkness of the night to stir 
the smouldering juniper logs of the fire. Outside 
all was silent, and nothing could be seen except 
the still shining ghost-like mountain spires of 
Kangchenjunga. 

Unable to sleep because of the cold, I remembered 
eerily how once, in a previous Himalayan adventure, 
I had seen at the monastery of Gantok, the capital 
of Sikkim, the annual festival of the worship of the 
god of Kangden-Dzod-Nga, Kangchenjunga—this 
mountain. The pageant took place in the presence 
of the Maharaja and Maharani before the Chief 
Magician’s temple in the garden of their palace, with 
a retinue of brightly clad Lepcha guards. 

The god is called Dzod-Nga, meaning “ Five 
Treasures.” He is the war god, and every year the 
ceremony must be held to placate him, and to foster 
the martial spirit of the nation, while the lamas 
invite Dzod-Nga to guard the faith of the State and 
to bring peace and security to the people. 

Flashing sword dances are accompanied by the 
blare of lamas’ trumpets, processions of temple 
gods, and other religious ceremonies. 

In the dance of the Dorge-Gro-Dosjidros—the 
mystic step—the triumph of Truth over Evil is 
believed to be accomplished. This dance is held 
with loud cries, led by the Maharaja at his throne, 
and echoed in a chorus of thousands from his 
assembled subjects—‘‘ Ki-Kihubu! Ki-Kihubu! ” 


44 THROUGH TIBET TO EVEREST 


It is the voice, as is also the thunder in the heaven, 
of the war god who consumes mountains of dead 
as his food and drinks oceans of blood as draughts 
and relishes the organs of the senses for dessert. 
‘“¢ Ki-Kihubu—I am the blood-drinking and destroy- 
ing god! Glory to Mahba-Kala! Should any love 
his life, keep out of my way. Any wishing to die, 
come into my presence. [I will cut the red stream 
of life—glory to Maha-Kala-Ki-Kihubu.” 

The dancers work themselves into a frenzy, 
wounding each other with their swinging swords, 
and imitate a fight between the followers of the war 
god and his enemy. Heralds of the Sword chant 
loudly : 

‘This blood-dripping sword is the despatcher of 
lives. It is made of the substance of the thunder- 
bolt, welded by a thousand wizard smiths. In the 
summer it has been tempered in the white mountain 
tops, in the winter it has been tempered in the ocean 
beds. It has imbibed the heat of fire and the venom 
of the ocean. It has been dipped in poisons. Its 
edge has been ground on the man-slaughtering 
boulder. When waved over the head it emits sparks 
of fire. When lowered point downwards it drips 
blood and fat. It is my dearest and most cherished 
friend—My name is the Lightning-like Life Taker! 
Ki-Kihubu ! ” 

All very ludicrous, and to the Western mind, when 
the first impressions begin to pall, even rather tire- 
some. But alone in these remote mountains, in the 


IN DISGUISE TO TIBET 45 


icy depths of their night, those raucous cries came 
“echoing through my memory. This was the very 
home of that mountain god. Giant shapes flung 
themselves to the skies all round me. Who was I 
to violate with impudent temerity these forbidden 
solitudes? The wind howled, now miserably, now 
angrily round our tiny tent. I shivered, and 
although I told myself that it was the bitter cold, I 
began to wonder, if—after all ...! 


CHAPTER III 
WITHIN FORTY MILES OF THE GOAL 


Next morning we shook ourselves up at an early 
hour; our blankets stiff with frozen dew. We 
had a hard march before us. 

The pass looks like the work of a giant axe that 
has split a narrow cleft in the mountains, and left 
the bottom raw and splintered. Huge fingers of 
rock point vertically between cliffs on either side. 
When we reached the foot we found the debris of 
avalanches precipitated from above—the danger 
that had caused this pass to be abandoned by the 
Tibetans. Rocks fell as we climbed, and we met 
an exhausting obstacle in the loose shingle that 
slipped beneath our feet. Even the highest and 
loneliest Himalayan passes are crossed occasionally, 
as this one used to be, by shepherds, and in their 
migration in search of grass they perform amazing 
feats getting their yaks and sheep and goats, their 
families and foodstuffs across. The animals, each 
carrying a light load of tsampa and tea sewn into 
little wooden bags, balanced and strapped to each 
side, find their own way. The yaks are so sure- 
footed, on ice and rock, that they can go almost 


anywhere a man or goat can go. The shepherds 
46 


WITHIN FORTY MILES OF THE GOAL 47 


sing and whistle shrilly and hurl stones from their 
slings to urge and guide them. 

But we were not yaks, and the men felt the burden 
of their loads, heavily laden as they were with our 
reserve food. One man complained of noises in the 
head; Adhu’s nose started to bleed. The air was 
dead—mountain climbers know this condition as 
stagnant air ’—but the men called it ‘ La-druk,” 
the Poison of the Pass. They say it is the evil 
breath of the Zhidag—the Spirit of the Mountains. 

But on the top we found good air and the men 
became happy and began to sing mountain songs. 
They built cairns, tied strips of coloured rags to 
them, lifted their caps and cried, ‘Om mani padme 
hum.’’ These cairns were to counter the evil spirits. 

But their flags did not drive away the low spirits 
which began to assailme. WhenI looked down to the 
desolation below, I felt discouraged. Ahead was the 
unknown—a foodless, inhospitable, forbidding waste. 
Moreover the obstacle of the pass we had just crossed 
would lie like a barrier across our homeward tracks. 
We did not dare to look back to the lovely grassy 
meadows of Lhonak, lest they should lure us from 
our goal. We had to nerve ourselves to go forward 
to the north—to Tibet. We would have to find 
some shelter by the glacier to spend the night. 
Next day, we would look for the pilgrim’s shrine 
of Chorten-Nyim, reported by the early native 


explorers as lying where the mountains drop to the 
plaing. 


48 THROUGH TIBET TO EVEREST 


The men became anxious for our safe descent to 
Tibet, for the prospect was indeed threatening. 
A. staircase of rocky ledges conducted to the terraces 
of ice which formed the head of the glacier below. 
Where glaciers at their source break away from 
the rock walls of the mountains, they leave gaping 
cracks, sometimes invisible under snow crusts, and 
a great danger when descending passes. We had 
to make our way, cautiously avoiding immense 
cracks down which we could look, sometimes 50 
feet, into dark recesses. 

That night we sheltered in a nook by a glacial 
lake. In the mountains I think one can scarcely 
find a prettier sight than these glacial lakes. They 
are like pale blue translucent cups filled with emerald 
water. 

A night spent on a glacier holds many sensations. 
The stars at night in the rare air seem to be 
larger and brighter than you have ever known 
before. The slowly moving ice gives out weird 
noises as it rends itself, opening out new fissures 
with reports like pistol shots. Surface stones slip 
and gurgle down into the thinly frozen water of 
the lakes. Now and then louder noises, sometimes 
reaching a deafening crash, tell of rocks falling 
from above. The melted snow water, lodging in 
cracks during the day, freezes at night, and expands 
and loosens the rock. You will hear also what the 
natives name “the music of the wind.” Ice 
pinnacles whistle shrilly as their sharp edges cut 


WITHIN FORTY MILES OF THE GOAL 49 


the wind and the ice caverns moan deeply as it 
eddies in their hollows. Wrapped in your blanket, 
your breath freezing on its edge, uncomfortable on 
rough stones, your native companions—for you 
feel no colour bar when sleeping out in such con- 
ditions—huddle close. You are glad to have them 
near, a8 you wait for the dawn to come. 

Morning showed no signs of life or vegetation. 
We found the way, avoiding boulders and crevasses, 
left the broken ice and walked to the side of the 
valley, After some miles we came unexpectedly 
to a little stone hut on a promontory where the valley 
closes to a neck. The hut was deserted. I expect 
it was the identical one mentioned by Sarat Chandra 
Das as the first Tibetan guard post; but it was no 
longer inhabited by any Tibetan guard. 

Adhu discovered the shrine by following the line 
of chortens which are put up to guide pilgrims from 
the north and are built on the hillocks. The shrine, 
a place of special sanctity, lies hidden in a secluded 
nook. Numbers of tame birds and blue pigeons 
inhabit the cliffs and are fed by the nuns who live 
at the shrine. The spot has a special beauty in 
its solitude and in its gaunt surroundings. The 
valleys converge with white tongues of glaciers 
protruding from the cavernous mouths of the 
mountains that stand belind dark and solid. 

The shrine is circled by a well-worn pilgrim’s 
path, marked with mendongs, and poles with flying 
prayer flags. As we approached we behaved as pil- 


50 THROUGH TIBET TO EVEREST 


grims, lifted our hats, cried, ‘‘ Om mani padme hum,” 
and contributed stones to the foot of the chortens. 

We entered and I took a dark corner to hide in 
while Adhu conversed with the nuns. We found 
that the chief nun and two others were quite blind, 
which relieved me of some anxiety. There were 
altogether seven nuns living at the shrine. 

“Are you pilgrims?” they asked. 

“No, we are travellers from India.” 

‘“* Make offering to our shrine that no misfortune 
may overtake your journey. And take these 
potions to bring strength and love to your lives, 
for you Outer Men ”’ (meaning men of earthly affairs) 
‘‘ prize these things for the body more than those 
things for the soul. Live more for the inner life,” 
they said. 

We made suitable offerings to the shrine, placed 
grains of rice in the bowls by the butter lamps 
beneath the god images; accepted the pills and 
love potions the nuns gave us. Then the nuns 
brought out goat-bladders of yaks’ milk and chung 
from their bokkus and gave us to drink. Adbu 
talked with them and obtained information for our 
journey. The nuns said we were brave to come by 
the snowy road; they even said we might sleep 
here, but we feared other people might arrive. We 
thanked the nuns for the wise things they had told 
us, to which they answered, ‘‘ We know your dark- 
ness’ (ignorance) ‘“‘and we will pray for you.” 
Then we took our departure. 


WITHIN FORTY MILES OF THE GOAL 51 


Here at Chorten Nyim we were at the exit from 
the high mountains. To the north we contem- 
plated the plateau of Tibet, the highest desert of 
the world. It has much of the character and 
appearance of an Arabian or an Arizona desert, with 
the same breadth and space of sandy, rocky soil, 
intersected with ranges of undulating hills, bare of 
trees ; but it has this difference, that the far horizons 
show snowy peaks. 

In depressions between the hills, more like shallow 
basins than defined valleys, is seen the green of the 
marsh-lands along the banks of lakes and winding 
rivers. Beyond the grass-lands sandy wastes con- 
tinue ruffed and blown into dunes by the wind. 
As in all deserts, there is shimmering sunshine and 
clear sky, yet the sky of Tibet seems to have a 
special blue all its own. As in other deserts, the 
day is hot and the night iscold. Here is experienced 
a difference of 50° between day and night. All is 
peace and breadth and solitude; guarded by snowy 
mountain barriers that wall away the outer world 
and lend an impression of majestic loftiness to this 
peaceful plateau. We felt ourselves to be above 
the other world,—veritably on the roof of the world. 

We continued due west, following a high level 
line over the spurs of the mountains, switchbacking 
over ridges and across deep glacier valleys. We 
could make little headway, and finally we were 
stopped altogether by deep canyons. We descended 
to the bottom of one by a funnel, but could not find 


52 THROUGH TIBET TO EVEREST 


any way out beyond. We were obliged to turn back 
and take a lower level route by the plain, hiding 
ourselves and passing villages at night, making 
detours to avoid the dogs that, hearing every move- 
ment of men and animals within the distance of a 
mile, barked and howled. These Tibetan mastiffs, 
found in all the Dok-pa shepherds’ encampments, 
are magnificent yet savage animals. Attacking, 
they show fangs like wolves, and their ferocious 
appearance is heightened by the immense scarlet 
ruffs of yak hair which the Tibetans place round 
their necks like Elizabethan collars. These dogs 
are prized for their ferocity, and the mark of their 
breeding is the depth of their bark. The Tibetans 
say their bark must ring like a well-made gong. 
Once I had to shoot one of these mastiffs that rushed 
out and bit one of my men badly. 

We had now fairly well escaped the fortresses of 
Khamba Dzong and Tinki Dzong; and I wanted 
to bear into the valleys in the direction of Nepal, 
which promised more friendly concealment than 
the plains. But I was vague as to the way to the 
Langbu Pass, so we decided boldly to turn into 4 
certain village that we saw in the opening of 4 
valley leading south-west. 

Our approach caused the keenest excitement, the 
barking of dogs and the barring of doors. Along 
the sky line of the roofs were the flying prayer flags 
and bunches of dried grass, and we noted peeping 
heads observing us from the apparently deserted 


‘161 ‘AVALWIQ NVL@dI[ AHL NO aKy¥y 





WITHIN FORTY MILES OF THE GOAL 53 


houses. Keeping on our way, and meeting people, 
we boldly insisted on being given a house to live in. 

The people are forbidden by the lamas and Dzong- 
pens to furnish information to strangers ; but they 
do not do more than offer a passive resistance and 
answer “No” or “I do not know” to everything. 
They would, however, always give information in 
return for presents secretly conveyed, and at night 
time they would give us food in return for money. 
The Tibetan peasant himself is friendly, generous 
and hospitable, although with the same freedom 
that he gives his own things to you he will also 
make you a present of other people’s things and 
take what he fancies of yours. In the spacious 
folds of his bokkus he stows away anything up to 
the size of a cooking pot. 

A man and woman befriended us at this village, 
which we found was called Eunah, and gave us to 
eat and drink at their house. We climbed a wooden 
staircase to the living-room above the stable which 
always occupies the lower floor of a Tibetan house. 
There were no windows, but a circular hole in the 
ceiling let in light and let out the smoke of the yak- 
dung fire burning in the chula, or earthenware pot. 
There was also the dim light of the butter lamps 
burning before the family shrine. We sat round 
the fire on sheepskins and Tibetan woollen rugs 
and brought out our wooden tea bowls from our 
bokkus to drink buttered tea and eat tsampa. 

I behaved just as one of my own men, except 


54 THROUGH TIBET TO EVEREST 


that I conversed in the Indian language, using a 
few Tibetan words that I knew. 

Our visit, although no doubt causing our presence 
in the country to be reported to the governors of 
the fortresses, served its purpose, in that we found 
out from the people the way to the Langbu Pass. 
We got the information out of two boys who said, 
“Go to Changmu to-morrow—bridge to cross— 
go little along the river to two chortens. Then go 
up between high stones and you will find yak 
paths.” 

This we did, passing the curious rock-hewn settle- 
ment of Changmu, consisting of about a hundred 
caves like huge pigeon-holes high up on the sheer 
face of a sandstone cliff. They were cave dwellings 
and we kept some distance away, not knowing what 
the hidden inhabitants would do. In Tibet there 
are many such caves, and they are said to be con- 
nected with passages leading out to the tops of the 
cliffs. They make splendid dwellings, protected 
from cold and heat and enemies alike. 

We found the chortens the boys spoke of, and 
the yak paths that led into the mountains to the 
west. We breasted the bridge which separated 
us from the valley of the Langbu Pass. Below 
our feet was the winding valley of the Gye river. 
A track could be seen along the open red sandy 
hillsides. On we went, doing about 18 miles that 
day by my paceometer, and camped by the stream, 
where we found fuel and could light a fire. 


WITHIN FORTY MILES OF THE GOAL 55 


By climbing 1,500 feet up the hillsides I observed 
that evening the position of the Langbu Pass, also 
that of another pass to the south, leading back 
over the main chain to Nepal and giving access 
probably to the Kambachen Valley somewhere 
near the foot of the Kangchen Glacier. This 
would make a back door from Lhonak to Southern 
Tibet through a corner of Nepal. There is still 
another pass that way, the Chabuk-la; but it is 
said to be very difficult. 

Next day we struck out towards the Langbu 
Pass, crowned by the fine mountain called the 
Langbu Singha. The all-important question was: 
Could Everest be seen from the top of the pass ? 

When I reached the top, I was staggered by a 
magnificent view of towering snow mountains. 
The centre peak of the range rose as a glittering 
Spire of rock clothed with clinging ice and snow. 
Beyond rose a higher peak twisted like a hooked 
tooth, a precipice on the north side and a névé on 
the south. To the left of this again was a long-flat- 
ridged peak, fantastically corniced with overhanging 
ridges of ice. 

What fine mountains! But they were none of 
them Everest: they were too near. Everest was 
still about 60 miles away. These mountains were 
about 23,000 feet in height. I named them— 
Taringban (meaning “‘ Long knife” in the Lepcha 
language) and Guma Raichu (meaning “ Guma’s 
tooth” in Tibetan). 


56 THROUGH TIBET TO EVEREST 


Presently, while watching the panorama, the 
shifting of the clouds revealed other high mountain 
masses in the distance; and directly over the crest 
of Taringban appeared a sharp spire peak. This, 
through its magnetic bearing by my compass, 
proved itself to be none other than Mount Everest. 
A thousand feet of the summit was visible. 

Although this fine panorama and the discovery of 
mountains hitherto unknown was in itself a reward, 
still it was also a disappointment, because it indi- 
cated an utter barrier. The only existing map 
showed the Kama Valley joining the Arun at the 
same place as the Tashirak River. I had planned 
to follow down the Tashirak Valley to reach the 
Kama Valley and then to go up this valley to Mount 
Everest. The maps were entirely wrong. This 
mountain range stood between me and Mount 
Everest; and the Tashirak River flowed south 
instead of west. I was opposed by an enormous 
mountain obstacle; and I felt it was impossible 
to overcome it. After remaining an hour on the 
top of the pass, during which time the men said 
copious prayers and built a chorten, to which they 
attached the usual strips of cloth, we went steeply 
down to the open meadows which surround the 
village of Guma; and there we found a shelter for 
the night among some dirty sheep pens and huts 
plastered with mud and dung. The people were 
not unfriendly. 

We proceeded towards Tashirak in some trepida- 


WITHIN FORTY MILES OF THE GOAL 57 


tion as to whether we would be stopped by the 
Dalai Lama’s Rice Officer, who holds the toll bridge 
with a guard of soldiers. There was nothing for it 
but to go straight on and talk to him. He requested 
us not to cross, s0 we went away and made a camp 
on our side of the river some distance off. We 
struck camp, however, at about two o’clock in the 
morning, forded the river in the dark under terrible 
difficulties, and so lost two loads of our food. But 
I breathed again. 

I hoped the valley would bend west towards the 
Arun. But it went on persistently south and we 
eventually found ourselves descending to forest 
lands with the valley becoming more and more 
narrow. 

We met an encampment of Nepalese traders with 
their yaks carrying borax, salt, wool, skins and yak 
tails. They are enterprising, honest, engaging and 
handsome men and women, these Nepalese who 
spend their lives crossing the mountains, trading 
between Tibet and Nepal. They talked openly and 
pleasantly and told no lies in answer to my ques- 
tions. 

“This road does not go to Kharta,” they said. 
‘Down the river you will come to Hatia, which 
is in Nepal, and the Maharaja’s guards live there 
to see that no strange people enter. Go up that 
valley,” they said, pointing to a lateral valley to 
the west, ‘‘and you will find a Gompa (monastery) 
high up, from which you can see all mountains.” 


58 THROUGH TIBET TO EVEREST 


They spoke of a great mountain Kangchen Lemboo 
Geudyong. Could this be Mount Everest? They 
knew Kangchenjunga, which they called Kang- 
chenzeunga. They spoke of another great moun- 
tain which had a lake in its centre, which might 
well be a reference to Makalu, the “ Arm-chair 
Peak,’ which has been observed from India to 
have a curious cup-like formation near its summit. 
Geographers think this is filled with a glacier. 

These Nepalese invited me and my men to stay 
in their camp, which we did for a little while, and 
they replenished our supplies of mutton, butter, 
ghee, salt and tea. 

We regretfully parted from them; and struck 
off to the westerly valley to reach the Monastery 
they had spoken of, and to look across, as I hoped, 
to Mount Everest. 

We found a strongly fortified wall built across 
the valley—a wall that had been made during the 
wars between Nepal and Tibet. I little thought 
how useful that wall would soon be in other ways. 
Now we used it as a shelter against the wind where 
we made our camp; pretty soon it was to protect 
us against Tibetan bullets. 

Next morning Adhu came to the tent to say that 
a Tibetan Captain and guard sent to prevent us 
following the upper road to Pherugh were watching 
some little distance away. I went down with my 
men and, forcing the Captain to dismount, asked 
him what he meant by posting soldiers on us as if 


WITHIN FORTY MILES OF THE GOAL 59 


we were common thieves. I found that he was the 
Captain of the Tashirak guard, and in the back- 
ground was no less a personage than the Tinki 
Dzongpen himself and his followers. 

They rode shaggy Tibetan ponies bridled in brass 
and silver and saddled in coloured numdahs. Each 
pony carried bulky slung leather saddle-bags and 
blankets ; and from the general appearance of the 
party it was obvious they had travelled far. We 
learned later that the Dzongpen, hearing of our 
presence, had ridden 150 miles to meet us, covering 
the distance in three days. 

An interview was arranged which lasted two hours, 
and was carried on for some time in rather a heated 
manner. The Dzongpen showed his surprise that 
we had been able to find our way into Tibet over 
the high pass, and was suspicious because we had 
chosen to come by such an unusual way. 

“For what reason have you come to Tibet? 
At the time of the War” (the 1904 Mission to Lhasa) 
“‘many white men and men of India came, but since 
that time no one has entered the country.” 

They repeated again and again the same sen- 
tences: ‘‘ No foreigners may come to Tibet. We 
do not know what you want, or for what reason 
you come.” 

I complained that I had received only discour- 
tesy and opposition in Tibet, whereas all Tibetans 
coming to India were free to travel where they 
wished, and were received as welcome visitors. 


60 THROUGH TIBET TO EVEREST 


This was, I protested, indeed a disgrace to Tibetan 
civilization and Tibetan culture. 

The whole party became very excited at this 
juncture and all started to shout and talk together. 
The soldiers crowded round and unstrapped their 
matchlocks in a threatening manner. It was 
impossible to understand what they were shouting 
about or what plan they might be proposing. All 
I could make out was the Dzongpen saying: ‘“ Go 
back the way you came.”’ 

I argued, but he was insistent. Then I tried the 
Tibetan game. I temporized, told him I would 
think it over and give him a reply the following day. 
The discussion then took another turn. He dropped 
his blustering authoritative tone, and became 
delightfully courteous. He told me he would have 
to get permission from Lhasa for us to pass through 
his province, and he begged me by no means to 
travel on or it would cost him his head. So I 
consented to wait for instructions from his superior. 
But such a permission, in the unlikely event of his 
even seeking it, and in the unlikelier event of its 
being accorded, would take weeks to arrive. I 
knew they were only procrastinating. Ina very few 
days the Dzongpen would inform me that Lhasa 
had refused, and that I was to quit Tibet immedi- 
ately. I was tempted to steal away and push on 
with my hillmen. I was nettled, meeting this 
opposition when so near to my goal, and at the 
prospect of failure after so much effort. 


WITHIN FORTY MILES OF THE GOAL 61 


I knew that his force of soldiers could not deter 
me. They were armed with an ancient variety of 
matchlocks, and at 30 yards range the charge of 
slugs they would fire would be harmless; but the 
Dzongpen had, in the latter part of the interview 
at least, been so polite that I naturally hated to do 
anything that would cause him to be beheaded ! 

Happily, this idea of fighting the Dzongpen 
forces was quickly dismissed. Certainly it would 
be impolite, and moreover there seemed to be no 
need of it. He returned to the charge and again 
urged me to quit Tibet immediately. 

But it was my turn to procrastinate. Delay 
might produce an opportunity to steal away un- 
observed. When he saw that I would give him 
no decided answer, he said he would not remain in 
that inhospitable gorge until I had madeup my mind, 
but would go home. He ordered me to remain 
where I was. He would return on the following 
day for my decision. 

He galloped down the ravine, his party stringing 
along behind him. I watched them, none too pleased 
with the turn of events, and well ‘on the boil.” 
Life at high altitudes does not conduce to placidity 
and evenness of temper, and the arrogance of the 
soldiers, and their unconcealed smug satisfaction 
at having discovered and made us halt, had dis- 
tinctly got on my nerves. One of the men remained 
behind longer than the rest. Finally he too started, 
but in passing he jostled his horse against me rudely. 


62 THROUGH TIBET TO EVEREST 


JY jumped ahead and seized his bridle. I meant to- 
hold him and complain to the Dzongpen, but he 
struck me across the face with his whip and tore 
the bridle from my grasp. Highly enraged, I ran 
after him. He galloped for several hundred yards 
with mein pursuit. Then he dismounted and swung 
his clumsy matchlock into action. 

I was fired on by that grotesque instrument! It 
made enough noise for a cannon. Where the slugs 
went I could never tell—all over the place, I think. 
I slipped behind the ruins of the Tibetan wall. I 
placed a shot from my American rifle over his head, 
and he went off so fast, and made me laugh so much, 
that I did not think it worth while to follow it with 
another one. 

Things seemed to be none the worse for this 
incident, save that my face smarted a bit from the 
blow of the whip; but my men thought otherwise. 
They were tremendously excited and highly per- 
turbed. With the exchange of fire they thought 
the whole of Tibet would descend on us. They 
absolutely refused to go on. 

There was nothing to be done but to turn our 
backs on the approaches of Everest, the mysterious 
Lamasery and the valley of the mountain. 

Within forty miles, and nearer at that time than 
any white man had been! I leave you to imagine 
my chagrin and disappointment. 

It took us six long weeks to get back to India. 


CHAPTER IV 
TIBET—THE FASCINATING 


There is in this terrible country, which its in- 
habitants think the most beautiful in the world, 
an unforgettable fascination. Life in Tibet is 
life at its -hardest, but the traveller always longs 
to get back to the wild grandeur of mountain and 
stretch of rocky plain. The Tibetan people—sunk 
in the most fantastic superstition—possess a char- 
acter which charms by its gentleness and yet, like 
the placid glacial lakes of the country, mirrors 
things which affright and repel. You see things 
by turns; the prettiest and the most ghastly. 
Let me tell two episodes ! 

There is a large, beautiful lake high up among 
the lifted plains, and in the middle of it is the Island 
of Birds. This island refuge is the general mating 
and nesting place for the geese and ducks that 
migrate to India in the winter. For generations, 
possibly for centuries, it has been the custom of the 
Dalai Lamas at Lhasa to send a lama to the island 
during the breeding season. This lama, deputed 
year after year to the task, has the duty of feeding 
the birds. He lives there among them: during his 


stay, and scatters grain for their sustenance. 
63 


64 THROUGH TIBET TO EVEREST 


He knows his birds as individuals and even has 
names for them. He calls them, they rest on his 
shoulders and he talks to them. Here is a Tibetan 
Saint Francis and the Birds, high among the 
Himalaya Mountains. 

The second episode, not so pretty, also concerns 
birds. On a journey to Gyantse I once attended 
a Tibetan funeral. The people give their dead to 
the vultures, the only exceptions being the lamas 
and victims of infectious diseases. These are buried. 
Why the lamas are excepted I don’t know. The 
people seem to regard the fate of being eaten by 
vultures, after death, as a desirable one. Those 
who die of infectious diseases are buried out of 
regard for the birds’ health. 

The dead man was placed on a high crag, where 
watchers waited beside him through the night. At 
dawn all the family, headed by lamas, gathered 
around him. They chanted prayers, beat gongs 
and blew on ceremonial trumpets while the light 
grew above the mountains. They were waiting 
for the vultures. 

Soon a black spot appeared in the sky, followed 
by another and another. A vulture alighted on 4 
rock a hundred feet or so away, and his fellows 
perched beside him. Meanwhile others were com- 
ing, and they gathered, a score of them in a chatter- 
ing group. Their croaking and screeching combined 
eerily with the weird chanting of the mourners, the 
banging of cymbals and blaring of horns. They 


TIBET—THE FASCINATING 65 


made a hideous company, with their filthy feathers 
and naked necks, and the stench from them was 
unbearable. They were quite at home at this 
ceremony, whose import they seemed clearly to 
understand. They spread out in a half-circle, and 
began to hop closer. 

Now came a most unseemly interruption and 
disturbance. Having got into the good graces of 
the local Tibetans, I had persuaded them to permit 
me to photograph their funeral rites. I stood 
watching, with my camera on the ground, waiting 
for a good moment to take a picture. The vultures 
Seemed a fitting subject. I picked up the camera 
and focused it on them. At this unusual sight 
they screeched in wild alarm. There was a vast 
flapping and away they went, winging up into the 
sky. 

The Tibetans were furious. I had frightened the 
sacred vultures, a most impious thing, and I had 
held up the funeral. Nothing could be done without 
the vultures. 

I pacified the mourners as well as I could as they 
gathered chattering shrilly round me. Through 
my interpreter I assured them with fervour that I 
would keep my camera on the ground thereafter, 
and that the vultures would soon return. My 
reasonings finally convinced them and they returned 
to their prayers and music, squatting round the 
corpse and waiting. 

The vultures did return, wheeled in the sky, then 


66 THROUGH TIBET TO EVERESLT 


circled closer for an inspection, and finally their 
hunger got the better of them. Once more they 
sat in a row, and with occasional hops drew nearer. 
When they were within 20 feet two butchers (they 
are called Ragyabas) approached the corpse. One 
had a hatchet and another a large wooden hammer. 
The body must be dismembered and the bones 
crushed, so that everything would go into the 
gullets of the vultures and nothing be left save 
bloodstains on the rocks. 

A new set of visitors then arrived on the scene— 
ravens. They gathered in a circle at a respectful 
distance. They were most unwelcome guests. It 
is very bad luck for a Tibetan. to have any bit of 
his corpse eaten by a raven. 

Anxious to join in the feast, the ravens kept 
trying to come closer. A couple of Tibetans who 
had the duty of keeping them away threw stones 
at them with their slings, weapons with which the 
Tibetans are expert. Occasionally the squeal of 
a raven hit by a stone was added to the general 
din. At times hunger would nerve one of the 
smaller birds to a feat of desperation. He would 
wing his way high up in the sky and then swoop, 
darting swiftly down. Skimming among the 
vultures he would seize a2 morsel from them. On 
these occasions the uproar was dreadful. The 
Tibetans screamed with rage, and a shower of 
stones swept towards the swift gliding bird. There 
would be a loud screech when a misdirected stone 


TIBET—THE FASCINATING 67 


chanced to hit a native or a vulture. One had to 
dodge nimbly to avoid the promiscuous missiles. 

When the ceremony was over everybody adjourned 
to the bottom of the hill, There a huge pot of 
Tibetan chung was waiting, and the family passed 
the rest of the day getting drunk. I drank nothing, 
nor was I able to eat for a day or so. That grue- 
some business had nauseated me, with a horror 
which was mingled with pity. The disgust of the 
sight clung to me. Perhaps I would have forgotten 
it sooner, but a little bit of the pulped bloody flesh 
had spurted out and splashed my face. I slashed 
it off with my sleeve. The Tibetans treat a corpse 
as a shell to be got rid of as completely and quickly 
a8 possible since the soul has fled to another incar- 
nation—to some other baby newly born or perhaps 
to some animal shape. Tibetan religion demands 
fantastic beliefs about reincarnation. 

I once saw at the Palkor Choide, the Temple of 
Gyantse, a painting—The Tibetan Wheel of Life. 
It occupied a whole wall space near the massive 
lacquer temple doors, which remain locked by an 
enormous rusty iron padlock, a foot in size, held 
to a more rusty iron chain, with hasps knocked 
crookedly into the woodwork of the doorstep. 
These ‘‘ wheels of life’? remind pious Tibetans of 
their fate, and incidentally also of the power which 
the lamas alone possess of helping the wandering 
Spirit along the upward path. 

In the picture a cock, a pig, and a snake bite each 


68 THROUGH TIBET TO EVEREST 


other’s tails in a circle, whirling round and round. 
They are the three cardinal sins, lust, ignorance and 
hate. As long as a man possesses these sad defects 
he must continue endlessly to be born and reborn, 
to follow either the white road to perfection led by 
saintly lamas or the black road down, to the chains 
of hell’s demons. 

Holding the Wheel of Life in his talons is the 
fearful figure of the three-eyed, skull-crowned 
monster god of wisdom, Nyalwae Thubpa Cheegyal 
Mlyinzin, who controls the reincarnations. In hell 
he rules on his judgment throne, judging spirits 
brought before him by the good and wicked angels. 
Good deeds and bad deeds are weighed as pebbles 
and black and white stones in the balance. 

In their picturing of hell, the lamasery artists 
express the terror of the demon torture that the 
lamas teach the people from infancy. Suppose the 
balance weighs down on the side of the black 
pebbles. The wretched soul is seized and carried 
off to either the hot or the cold hells—because 
Tibetans have hells both of flame and ice. He is 
fleshed by vultures and gnawed by wild dogs. 
Knives falling from trees pierce his body through 
and through as he is led off to have his skull sawed 
open, or is thrown by the fierce Cow-headed Demon 
Huggausten and the Stag-headed Monster into pots 
of burning oil, to emerge and continue existence a8 
@ skeleton with his flesh boiled off. 

In the Tibetan hell punishment fits the crime. 


TIBET—THE FASCINATING 69 


The lama who has not read his holy book will be 
crushed under the weight of the sacred book ‘“‘ Gya- 
thomba ’’ itself. Degraded people who have lived 
sordid lives will be condemned to the “ Filthiest 
place in Hell,” where they are devoured by vermin 
and worms, and monster reptiles with dragons’ 
bodies and vulture-beaked heads will tunnel their 
carcasses. There is a fine punishment for liars. 
Their tongues are stretched to ten thousand times 
their size and then ploughed across by teams of 
yaks. 

But from the torments of hell souls may yet 
arise to continue the cycle of reincarnation through 
the spirit world of purgatory, where pure gods 
encourage them with words of wisdom. Chen- 
zaizi, the God of Love; Jumley-yung, the God of 
Knowledge ; and Chana-Dorje, the God of Inter- 
cession, live in the upper regions of purgatory among 
clouds and mountains; but, below, Yadaktsupa, 
enthroned in his flaming chorten, herds the spirits 
called Yi-dwags or Preta, ever unhappy, repre- 
sented by Tibetan artists as giants with pot-bellies 
whose needle necks prevent them from satisfying 
their huge appetites. 

How easy it becomes for the lama to terrify the 
poor Tibetan with threats of this tortured future! 

Legends tell of a White Lion that is said to live 
on Everest. The milk of the White Lion, if it can 
ever be obtained by man, will give him a miraculous 
remedy for all ills of the body and mind. Only 


70 THROUGH TIBET TO EVEREST 


one Dalai Lama, of all men, has ever obtained the 
coveted milk, so tradition in Tibet narrates. When 
the Mount Everest Expedition came to Tibet, the 
people believed the Expedition’s object was to 
reach the summit of the mountain in order to obtain 
the milk of this White Lion. 

In the Wheel of Life picture, among the moun- 
tains, you will also find the dreaded Sukpa—the 
Legendary Hairy Man of the Mountains. 

The Tibetan sees in his every misfortune a relent- 
less fate pursuing him for the sins of his former life. 
In animals he sees, reincarnated in a lower state, 
the souls who once were men, descending along 
the black path. Saintly lamas carry this belief of 
reincarnation to such an extent that they become 
unwilling to walk or move from the motionless 
Buddha posture lest they take the life of some 
minute insect beneath their feet. Others even 
allow their clothing and the skins of their bodies to 
offer perpetual hospitality to vermin. 

The whole of life is looked upon as a burden, & 
pain and a punishment. The hope of all Tibetans 
is to escape the infernal cycle of reincarnation. 
The highest state of earthly existence is typified in 
the hermit lama in his cell in the mountains. 

By the way, Tibetan artists, whenever they depict 
a white man and woman among the inhabitants of 
the human world, put them down with the lowest 
stages of society, among the Ragyaba, the profes- 
sional butcher scavengers, the breakers-up of the 


« 





San Ret: 
mee Vee 


THe Woeen or Lire, From A TinkrTan MONASTERY 





no. 


SPECIMEN OF TIBETAN DESIGN. 





eee 


ed 





Tue 


linkran Lama 


\ 


TIBET—THE FASCINATING 75 


dead. The hermit lama, by long meditation and 
fasting, will one day obtain such purity of soul and 
knowledge that he will transport himself miracu- 
lously from this world to the region of the demi- 
gods and the ‘“ Gods-past-the-strife-of-war-waged- 
over-the-Wish-Giving-Tree ’’ whose roots are in the 
department of the demi-gods, but whose fruit is 
in the kingdom of the gods. 

The state of the gods is the highest of all states ; 
but from it a man may yet fall back to the darkest 
stages of hell before the final state of Nirvana and 
the presence of the Divine Buddha himself is reached. 

The goddess of war is Baldan Llamo. She is 
depicted in monastery frescoes as a fierce goddess 
riding a mule with a saddle of human skin and reins 
of serpents. She uses a human skull as a cup to 
drink the blood of men. At the time of Queen 
Victoria’s glory in India, when many pictures were 
published of the Queen on horseback among the 
troops, the Tibetans, to whom traders brought some 
of these pictures, declared her to be the rein- 
carnation of the goddess Baldan Llamo. This 
curious story is well known. 

If some one intending to go exploring in Tibet 
were to ask me for advice, I should say at once: 
Get on the good side of the lamas. The moment 
you arrive in the country set about cultivating the 
favours of the gentlemen who dwell in the monas- 
teries. 

During the Mount Everest Expeditions we got 


76 THROUGH TIBET TO EVEREST 


along quite well with the red and the yellow gowned 
monks, and that, I should say, was one of the 
important elements in accounting for the measure 
of success we achieved. The Expedition’s chiefs, 
Howard-Bury, Bruce and Norton, were all experi- 
enced Asiatic travellers, who knew how to establish 
friendship.with Asiatic people. 

The great armies of lamas are the absolute rulers 
of the land. Every Tibetan is required to give a 
third of his produce to the monasteries. The 
smallest details of life are considered religious, 
and are governed by the lamas. From the govern- 
ment of the Dalai Lama at Lhasa to the smallest 
village functionary, the lamas dominate everything. 
. They are shrewd fellows, and understand that 
outside influences, from China, Russia or India, 
would tend to weaken their dominion. For that 
reason they have followed a policy of excluding 
foreigners, in the process of which they have sedu- 
lously cultivated in the minds of their followers a 
mistrust of all strangers from other lands. They 
teach the Tibetans that Tibet is the most beautiful 
and opulent country in the world, the terrestrial 
paradise. There are three other countries, which 
adjoin Tibet—China, India, and Russia. They are 
not nearly so desirable as Tibet, therefore their 
people want to possess Tibet, most delightful of 
gardens. When foreigners come in, it means & 
conspiracy of the outlanders to seize Tibet. 

But as a solemn fact, Tibet, in spite of its charm, 


TIBET—THE FASCINATING TT 


is unquestionably the most frightful and desolate 
country in the whole world. No other land can be 
so harsh and forbidding as that vast tableland raised 
15,000 feet, where stone and ice and mountain seem 
to conspire against all life. The people live in the 
most extreme poverty and discomfort. It is so cold 
and the land is so poor that the only crop they can 
grow is barley. There is even a scarcity of air to 
breathe. Yet the icy winds blow endlessly with a 
biting velocity. . 

What an amazing life these Tibetan monks lead !— 
a life of seclusion and peace. They are contented 
and happy, devoted to their gods, revelling in the 
multitude of their demons. They avoid intercourse 
with other nations. They live in their mountains, 
despising machinery, science, and all that is Western. 
It is their ambition to live in isolation from the 
outer world in their mountain monasteries, without 
change or progress in the future as they have lived 
in the past. 

There are many fabulous stories of mysterious 
powers, of trances, and of the lamas’ ability to 
leave their bodies and travel to other planes. They 
claim to predict the future; and the casting of 
horoscopes is one of their regular functions. But 
they are very secretive about this and they are loth 
to talk about it to white men. Perhaps if one lived 
among them and gained their confidence fully they 
would speak. My wife, who stayed at Chumbi, in 
Southern Tibet, during 1924, for the special purpose 


78 THROUGH TIBET TO EVEREST 


of studying the folk-lore and legends of Tibet, 
collected much fascinating material on this subject. 

Leading such a rough life on their lofty plains, 
in a fearful climate and with a scarcity of food, you 
would expect the Tibetans to be a sad people. But 
they are some of the most cheerful and happy people 
in the world. They are always full of good coarse 
humour. They laugh and sing all day. Watch a 
gang of labourers at work, men and women, on 4 
mud roof of a monastery, flattening it down with 
water and rammers—Tibetan mud, like the Indian, 
dries hard as a brick and makes a good roof or wall. 
For hours they will work, keeping in dance step and 
singing in chorus all the time. Then watch the 
villagers ploughing the barley fields. You will 
find men and women singing behind the yak and 
wooden plough. You will wonder perhaps why 
they plough in circles, narrowing to the corner of 
the field. That is to push the devil towards the 
corner and freeze him out of the field, then no harm 
can come to the barley! In another part of the 
field you may be attracted by other choruses of 
high-pitched songs where parties of women are 
digging. The digging is always done by two people 
with one wooden spade. One pushes the spade slowly 
by the handle and the other draws it by a rope. 
At 15,000 feet above the sea manual labour is tough 
and a strain on the heart. Besides, what does time 
matter in Tibet ? When tending herds of grazing 
yaks, men and women sing and spin wool. From 


TIBET—THE FASCINATING 79 


the pure wool of the sheep and the hair of the yaks 
they weave the material to make the tents of the 
Dok-pa (the shepherds) and the bokkus, the loose 
blanket coats girdled at the waist, that the people 
wear—coats so voluminous that bags of tsampa, 
wooden bowls, cooking pots, bladders of milk, and 
prayer wheels may all find storage place therein. 
In the winter time over the woollen bokkus they will 
wear a raw-cured sheepskin coat, the wool inside 
and the leather outside. It stinks, but it is warm! 

When a child is considered big enough to wear 
a bokkus one is woven for him. The material is 
immensely strong. As he grows older and taller, 
pieces are sewn in to keep him covered. When the 
native tailor says to the proud mother, ‘‘ There’s 
@ fine suit that will wear for the little fellow’s life- 
time,””—believe me, it is a real guarantee ! 

Tibetan mothers rely upon horoscopes entirely 
to decide about the marriages of their children. In 
Tibet they count the years in cycles of sixty by the 
hames of animals, the earth, fire, wood, iron, etc. 
The year of the first Everest Expedition, 1921, was 
called the Iron Bird Year. Now if a boy born, 
say, in the Fire Year loves a girl born, say, in the 
Water Year, the lamas will forbid the marriage— 
the boy and girl would obviously not get on together. 

From the day when born they tumble to the 
earth, until the day their dead bodies are hacked 
to pieces on the stone slab, they will never have a 
bath with water. They wash with oils and butter. 


80 THROUGH TIBET TO EVEREST 


I have seen the babies getting these baths, and being 
besmeared from head to foot with yaks’ butter by 
their fond mothers, who work the butter into every 
pore. It helps the children, who have a hard time 
in the struggle for life in their tender years, to stand 
the winter gales of the Tibetan plateau, with the 
thermometer at zero. 

The mothers love and fondle their little ones, for 
it is difficult to rear them, but their fathers care 
little. Relationships on the father’s side are not 
kept—the children do not know who their fathers 
are in polyandrous Tibet. 

But it is only among the shepherd people that 
polyandry is practised and the woman marries all 
@ man’s brothers as well as himself. The Tibetan 
men and women live without jealousy in this 
peculiar way. When one husband, who has been 
grazing his herds in the hills or trading in a town, 
returns home he will not intrude on his brother 
husband if he finds the other’s prayer beads hanging 
on the wife’s door, but will go quietly away. Nor 
do they make much fuss or ceremony when getting 
married. The lamas consult their horoscopes and 
say “ Yes” or “No.” If “ Yes,” the man and 
woman light a fire together and so set up a home. 
But the richer people who live in single couples, 
without polygamy or polyandry, indulge in court- 
ships and marriage festivals. 

The Tibetan baby is in a curious position a8 
regards his parents, who are looked upon only 268 


TIBET—THE FASCINATING 81 


a “vehicle of reincarnation.”» From the parents 
the reincarnated spirit obtains flesh and bones and 
blood to make another step for himself on the cycle 
of the endless Wheel of Life. 

So the children are given only first names, usually 
the names of deities. Sickness, accident, or bad 
luck pursuing a child, is a sign that its patron deity 
does not like the child. Lamas are called in to 
perform a ceremony, and the child’s name is altered, 
perhaps simply to the name of the day of the week 
on which it was born. 

I spoke about a child “ tumbling to the earth ”’ ; 
so I will explain the superstition and the manner of 
child-birth in Tibet. The belief is that to be 
hear cattle at the time of child-birth will make 
it as easy for the women as it is for the beasts. 
A woman therefore will go down to the stables on 
the ground floor of. the house, alone, or with a single 
friend, and will not tell anybody else, because another 
superstition says that her delivery will be delayed 
by exactly the same number of hours as there are 
people who are aware of her condition. 

If a family has more than one son, one of the boys 
goes straight to a monastery to become a lama. 
He goes when he is quite small. His head will be 
shaved ; he will don maroon or yellow gowns; he 
will become a little embryo god. 

You must not think that Tibetan ladies have no 
charms, nor good looks. In Tibet, meeting mainly 
shepherd women of the yak-hair tents on the windy 


82 THROUGH TIBET TO EVEREST 


plains, or women of the mud houses of the villages, 
you form the opinion that all Tibetan women are 
ugly, with skins like crocodiles. These people have 
to live out in the glare of the sun and against the 
blasts of wind on the plateau, and they become 
rough and ugly. But though they are not pretty, 
there is charm in their spirit, their laughter and 
their hospitality. Step into their tents and drink 
tea and chung and yak’s milk with them. 

On the other hand, if you are fortunate enough 
to be introduced to the high ladies of the cities 
(Lhasa, Gyantse or Shigatse) you will be struck by 
their good looks, their dainty manners, their smiling 
faces, their soft silken clothes, their long parti- 
coloured woollen boots, their madonna-parted hair 
fluffed out to fall in masses over their shoulders and 
reach below the waist. In the province of Tsang, 
they lace a turquoise and coral-studded aureole 
into the hair; while at Lhasa they wear a crimson 
fillet, like a crown and ornamented with immense 
balls of coral and stone turquoises. Round their 
necks they carry the same stones, and massive 
turquoise and silver amulet boxes containing precious 
lama charms to ward off misfortune. They wear 
also massive rings and earrings which hang like 
jewelled plates, four inches long, from their ears. 
The men wear the same turquoise jewellery, also 
with a necklace. A Dzongpen, or high official, will 
carry his badge of rank in a single pendant earring 
of turquoise and gold—quite a beautiful thing. 


TIBET—THE FASCINATING 83 


Food in Tibet consists of yaks’ meat, mutton, 
(the people are allowed to kill domesticated animals) 
and barley (tsampa or satu) coarsely ground in stone 
mills and mixed with grit which aids digestion. 
Tibetans have stomachs that rival a chicken’s 
gizzard. They make buttered tea of which they 
partake of thirty cups a day. It is made of Chinese 
brick tea, stewed with butter and salt. A first taste 
of it will sicken a non-Tibetan. Hot, greasy, salty 
slime it is. But the traveller can acquire the taste 
and thrive upon it, ay I did myself in journeys in 
Tibet; it offends the Tibetans if you disdain it. 
There is no escape by gulping it down quickly, for 
a servant stands behind to fill the cup relentlessly. 
A teacup must never be empty, neither must a 
tuk-pa bowl. 

General Bruce thought of a good excuse. He 
said that as a penance—until he had reached the 
end of his pilgrimage to the top of Mount Everest 
—he had sworn to deny himself his life’s delight— 
Tibetan butter. He used to tell the Tibetans also 
that it was the religion of white men—the tribe 
called mountaineers—to climb to the tops of high 
mountains in order to reach near heaven. On 
Chomolungma they would reach nearer to heaven 
than any man on earth. 

Tuk-pa, unlike buttered tea, is a palatable dish 
—a macaroni of imported white Indian flour, stewed 
in mutton broth. It is fine. Again your bowl is 
filled up by an ever-waiting attendant as quickly 


84 THROUGH TIBET TO EVEREST 


ag you empty it. I liked this dish so much that I 
once took fourteen large bowls when entertained 
by a Tibetan governor. Such behaviour, scanda- 
lous in our society, is a compliment to your Tibetan 
host—also to his cook. When you have reached 
something like the tenth bowl—well over a gallon— 
the cook will present himself to receive congratu- 
lations. When you set eyes on him after you have 
eaten of his tuk-pa you will see that he is as black 
as coal and his hands and fingers and hair are matted 
with greasy soot like coal tar. He cooks over a 
yak-dung fire. Never mind, you have done the 
right thing and pleased him. 

One of the most charming traits of the Tibetans 
is the way they give you “‘ Howdo youdo?” They 
do not shake hands. They do not know how to do 
it. They cry ‘ Tashidelhi, Tashidelhi,” put out 
their tongues, and press forward one ear. This is 
a sign of submission. It signifies the offering of 
the tongue and the ear to be cut off. 

It is most important to know the social code of 
the Dzongpens, and lamas’ manners, and how to 
welcome them and how to return the expressions 
of politeness and goodwill they offer. You must 
place the silken scarf of friendship, called the 
“kada,”? on your host’s shoulder, and he will do 
likewise to you. When you part you must give 
him the correct Tibetan ‘“ good-bye,” which is 
“ Remain seated.’”? He will say in answer to you, 
“Go away slowly.” 


TIBET—THE FASCINATING 85 


Once I stayed two days at a great monastery in 
the interior of Tibet, photographing devil dances. 
Having made friends with the chief, I was, on 
departure, escorted by his retinue along my road, 
mounted standard-bearers carrying a picture banner 
of the god of friendship. When we parted they 
raised their arms and cried, ‘‘ Go with you luck.” 

Some travellers to Tibet have described the lamas 
as bigoted, debased, immoral, fanatical and cruel. 
I think the accusation wrong. In some of the 
Tibetan monasteries it is possible to find really 
cultured and genuine religious devotees of great 
intellectual and spiritual attainments. There are 
some black sheep, as in the priesthoods of all 
countries. 

Tibetans have a quaint legend of the origin of 
their race. Before man or animals existed, the 
gods, they say, who lived in the spirit spheres on 
the tops of the mountains of Tibet, caused an incar- 
nation in the form of a monkey to come to earth. 
This monkey met, in a cavern on Mount Bon, a 
demoness, named Drasrinmo, who at first sight 
formed a@ passion for the monkey. The offspring 
of their union, in men, animals, fishes, birds and 
insects, was so prolific that it stocked the world 
with all its living creatures. 

So the Tibetans excuse their faults by saying that 
from the demoness they have inherited unalterably 
their savage passions, but from the monkey they 
have gained their wisdom. Inheritance, fate and 


86 THROUGH TIBET TO EVEREST 


reincarnation provide logical and good enough 
reasons to the Tibetan for all that happens to him 
in life. 

The hero of a little incident that happened during 
the Mission in 1904 led by Sir Francis Younghusband 
to Lhasa must have been suffering from a severe 
manifestation of this Drasrinmo-monkey complex. 

A monk had ventured into the Mission’s military 
camp, and was walking about, when suddenly he 
went mad and cut down an officer with his sword. 
He told the guards, who soon pinned him down, that 
he did it because the officer’s hat was “an ugly 
thing.”’> When he had knocked off the ugly hat, 
he saw the face underneath was uglier still, so he 
took a cut at that too! A lover of beauty, and a 
fierce critic, evidently! It is said that the officer, 
who recovered, grumbled more surlily about the 
explanation than he did about his wounds! 

This was the country and these the peopie among 
whom we wished to penetrate with «a scientific 
Expedition. Our object was one that could never 
be other than incomprehensible to them : to climb, 
for the pleasure of performing the feat, to the 
summit of a mountain considered inaccessible, 4 
mountain moreover which they considered sacred 
to their gods and kept inviolate by their demons. 
The inert East, and the inquisitive impertinent 
West, were there to meet on the “ Roof of the 
World.” 


CHAPTER V 
DR. KELLAS’S PLAN 


I had not been the only person with ideas for the 
penetration of forbidden Tibet in order to reach 
Mount Everest. 

Before the War broke over Europe and claimed 
the energies of all, General Rawling, the celebrated 
Tibetan explorer, had planned to lead an expedition ; 
and his project had the approval of the Royal 
Geographical Society of London and of the Govern- 
ment of India. But Rawling, unfortunately, was 
killed in the early part of the War. 

Much exploration and mountaineering had also 
been accomplished by Dr. Kellas, and I take this 
opportunity of telling something of his quiet, 
methodical, minutely detailed methods. 

Kellas used to go every summer to the Himalaya 
for a vacation from his work at the Middlesex 
Hospital in London. The doctor, a Scotsman, was 
@ pioneer in every sense. He established new 
records in Himalayan travel and climbing and in 
feats of physical endurance. Furthermore, he 
pioneered in ideas and methods. 

He devised the plan of using the natural resources 


of the country—yaks and mountain ponies—for 
87 


88 THROUGH TIBET TO EVEREST 


transport on the lower heights, as the Tibetans do 
themselves, and he employed the Sherpas, one of 
the hardiest mountain tribes of the world, dwellers 
in the highest mountain valleys of the Himalaya, as 
porters. What General Bruce was to the Gurka, 
80 Kellas was to the Sherpa. Kellas discovered the 
use of the Sherpas on high ascents. They are simple 
shepherd people, as hard as steel. They can run 
up mountains with immense loads on their backs, 
and then yodel their songs in pure delight, when the 
plainsman following them, panting and blue of lips, 
will fall exhausted to the ground. Kellas found 
them cheerful under all conditions, willing to 
undertake risks, and faithful. He made friends 
with these rough mountaineers, and with their 
help he conquered virgin peaks one after another 
with an ease and rapidity that astonished the 
world. 

Kellas did not advertise ; few people knew about 
him. He would emerge each year from his chemical 
research work at the hospital. He did not tell the 
newspapers when he set out to climb a mountain 
higher than any climber had ever tackled before. 
He just went unobserved. No peak could defy 
him, He conquered great Kangchejnhau, Chom- 
iomo and Pauhunri. He walked up one side of this 
mountain, walked down the other and then round 
the base back to his camp for the night. It is what 
climbers technically call “traversing,” a feat they 
attempt only after having first climbed each side. 


DR. KELLAS’S PLAN 89 


Kellas would traverse nearly all his virgin mountains 
from one side to the other on his first ascent. 

In the long gap between my own journey of 1913 
and the Everest Expedition in 1921, I talked with 
Kellas whenever I had a chance about Everest, and 
he told me many things that have never been made 
known about his plans and work concerning the 
mountain. He told me how he got his wonderful 
photographs of Everest’s glacier from the Tibetan 
side. He had shown them to geographers, but 
would tell no one how he obtained the pictures. 
He had been among the mountains of Nepal west 
of Kangchenjunga, but not so far west as I had 
reached at Tashirak. He trained a native to photo- 
graph, and sent him to Kharta and the Arun Gorge 
to get the pictures of the valleys and the eastern 
glaciers of Everest. 

I often used to talk with Kellas in his chemical 
laboratory at the hospital and discuss Everest. He 
told me one day of his secret knowledge of Kharta 
and the pass called the Tok Tok La over the same 
mountain barrier that had blocked my way on my 
journey to Tashirak. By the Tok Tok La he could 
reach Kharta, he said, where he knew of a hide-rope 
bridge by which to cross the Arun River and so 
reach the Langma La, used by the shepherds of the 
Kama Valley. He told me how he had worked out 
a plan to lay depots of food in uninhabited high 
valleys west of Kangchenjunga by means of his 
own trained Sherpas, and of his hopes of reaching 


90 THROUGH TIBET TO EVEREST 


Kharta, crossing the river and going up to the eastern 
glaciers of Everest by the Kama Valley, escaping 
the watching Tibetans. It was a most elaborately 
detailed plan ; thought out to the last ounce of food 
and water. He was confident he could reach Everest, 
and after my journey of 1913 he asked me to go 
with him as soon as the War was finished and we 
could both get away. I said, ‘‘ Most certainly I 
will.” But nothing ever came of this, for the author- 
ized Expeditions took the place of furtive private 
raids. 

Everything discovered and mapped by the later 
Expeditions proved that Kellas’s Kama Valley 
project would have worked out and would have 
brought us to the foot of Everest, and that probably 
we would have escaped the watching Tibetans. 

It was a very great loss to me personally when my 
good friend Kellas died of dysentery at Khamba 
Dzong on the way to Everest with the 1921 Expedi- 
tion. 

His encyclopedic knowledge of the subject can 
be gauged from his contribution to the discussions 
when the time came for the first official Expedition, 
when ways and means were being debated. I quote 
some of his own words from the report of his speech 
to members of the Royal Geographical Society. 


“There is a route which could be followed from Siliguri or 
Darjeeling to the north-west. Instead of going due north 
along the Tista, one could proceed north-west by various routes 
into the Tambar Valley. At the top of the Tambar Valley 
there is a good route which was followed by Sir Joseph Hooker 


DR. KELLAS’S PLAN 91 


in 1849, when he reached the Wallanchoon Pass, a few miles 
to the south of Tashirak, which is, so far as I can learn, 45 
miles in a straight line from Mount Everest, the Wallanchoon 
Pass being about 50 miles. 

‘There is another route. One could proceed from Khanwa 
Ghat on the Kosi River due north along the Arun to Hatia. 
The direct distance from Khanwa Ghat to Mount Everest is 
only 110 miles, and the length of this route would be much 
less than that of the others, approximately 160 to 170 miles 
in all. It would also be possible, starting from Khanwa Ghat, 
to attain the south side of Mount Everest ; the Hatia route takes 
one to the north side. About 30 miles north of Khanwa Ghat 
one can turn to the north-west along the Sun-Kosi River, and 
then, about 40 miles further on, proceed northwards up the 
Dudh-Kosi River. Part of the eastern headwaters of the 
latter stream drain the south side of Everest.” 


So he went on, describing other possible routes. 
It is sad to think that Death claimed him on the 
threshold of the first real attempt on the greatest 
mountain. 


PART II 


THE FIRST EXPLORATION 
AND CLIMB 





THE FORTRESS OF KHAMBA DZONG. 


CHAPTER VI 
FINDING THE WAY 


When Peace came, it was my privilege to recall 
the attention of the Royal Geographical Society to 
Everest. At a meeting in London, on March 10, 
1919, I gave an account of my journey in Tibet, and 
Sir Francis Younghusband revived the Everest 
project officially. 

The discussion which ensued on the subject of the 
approaches to the mountain, in the event of the 
Tibetans permitting the visit of an exploring party, 
was a long one and attracted considerable attention. 

The familiar manner with which successive 
speakers juggled with peaks and passes whose very 
names were unfamiliar, incomprehensible and aston- 
ishing, struck Punch as being comical. I make no 
apology for quoting here the apt parody it printed 
of the proceedings. 


HIMALAYANS AT PLAY 
(Suggested by the sequel to a recent Lecture) 


“The Chairman, Sir Norman Everest, after congratulating 
the lecturer on his interesting address and beautiful photo- 
graphs, observed that he remained unconvinced by his argu- 
ments in favour o: approaching Mount Amaranth from the 
North. The climatic difficulties of that route were in his 
opinion insuperable, to say nothing of the hostility of the 
natives of the Ong-Kor Plateau and the Muzbakh Valley. He 

95 


96 THROUGH TIBET TO EVEREST 


still believed that the best mode of approach was from the 
South-West, following the course of the Sissoo river to Todikat, 
where an ample supply of yaks could be obtained, and thence 
proceeding along the Dagyolong ridge to Tumlong. 

“Sir Francis Oldmead said that he had seldom heard a 
more interesting lecture or seen a finer collection of photo- 
graphs. He must be allowed to demur, however, to the 
lecturer’s description of the heavy snowfall in the highlands 
of Sandjakphu. During his visit to that district, as they 
would see from the photographs which he would presently 
show on the screen, he enjoyed uninterrupted sunshine ; nor 
had he met with the slightest difficulty from the Pangolins 
of Phagdub. As for the best approach to Mount Amaranth 
he was convinced that the only feasible route was to work up 
the Yulmag valley to the Chikkim frontier at Lor-lumi, 
crossing the Pildash at Gonglam, and skirting the deep gorge 
of the Spudgyal, ascend the Takpa glacier to Teshi Tsegpa. 

‘* Professor Parbatt expressed his keen appreciation of the 
vivid descriptions of Himalayan scenery given by the lecturer, 
and the admirably-selected photographs which had enlivened 
his address. He wished, however, that he could have furn- 
ished more details as to his camp equipment. Had he, for 
example, used Nummulitic beds for his party ? Then there 
was the question of geoidal deformation, on which he had 
remained unaccountably silent. As for the vital problem of 
approaching Mount Amaranth, he ventured to differ from all 
previous speakers. The Northern, South-western and Eastern 
routes were all equally impracticable, as he would conclusively 
demonstrate from the photographs he had brought with him. 
But there were at least fourteen routes from the West, of 
which he would confine himself to four. (1) Starting from 
Yeh, the party might cross the Tablung-La pass to Gorkpa 
Nor, and thence follow the Yombo to Chilgat, where they 
would be only 25 miles from the foot of tho western face of 
Amaranth. (2) They could follow the old Buriat pack-road 
to Amdo, diverge by the narrow defile of Koko-Pir-Panjal to 
Tumbung, and thence make for Chapchu-Strong and Chyang- 
Chub-Gyultshan. (3) They might start from Pongrot and 
cross the Tok-Tok pass to Pilgatse. (4) They might con- 
struct a tube from Darjiling to Grogma-Nop, and thence 
proceed by aeroplane to the saddle of Makalu, or, better still, 
to the summit of Amaranth itself. The last route was far the 


FINDING THE WAY 97 


shortest and quickest, but it involved a certain amount of 
preliminary expense. 

“The Chairman having expressed his regret that Sir Marcon 
Tinway was not present to describe his experiments with man- 
lifting kites and trained albatrosses, the assembly dispersed 
after singing the Tibetan national anthem.”’ 


However the project of a properly equipped and 
duly authorized Expedition was launched. 

Sir Francis Younghusband was the prime mover 
and the soul of the enterprise. Captain Farrar, 
the President of the Alpine Club, supported him 
actively and promised to find fit, skilled young men. 
He said, ‘‘I have two’’—he referred to Mallory 
and Finch—‘ who will get to the top, I’ll guarantee.” 

Thus the enterprise started, officially sponsored. 
by the Council of the Royal Geographical Society. 
Lord Chelmsford, then Viceroy, received Colonel 
Howard-Bury in India as the Society’s envoy and 
gave his support. Sir Charles Bell, C.I.E., the 
Political Officer for Tibetan Affairs and Political 
Resident in Sikkim, undertook the negotiations 
with the Dalai Lama at Lhasa. 

Sir Charles Bell is one of the many splendid 
administrators in the service of the Indian Govern- 
ment who have spent long years of quiet, unadver- 
tised, constructive work on the frontier of India, and 
have carried on British tradition and upheld British 
prestige. Sir Charles’s work has been with Tibet 
and the fostering of mutual understanding and 
friendship between the Government of India and 
the mysterious god-king, the Dalai Lama of Tibet. 


98 THROUGH TIBET TO EVEREST 


Sir Charles gained the confidence of the Tibetans 
through careful study of their national character 
and through his perfect knowledge of their difficult 
language—a knowledge that culminated in his writ- 
ing a grammar of that amazingly intricate tongue 
after years of study of the wood-bound, hand- 
written religious and historical books in the libraries 
of their monasteries. 

He is one of the few men who have won the con- 
fidence and friendship of the Dalai Lama. He 
received an invitation to visit the Sacred City in 
1920. He stayed there a year; and it was only 
through his personal intercession with the Dalai 
Lama that permission was obtained for the Everest 
Expedition to enter Tibet. Such permission could 
never have been gained by diplomatic correspon- 
dence between the Governments, but only by an 
Envoy welcomed as a favoured friend and guest of 
the god-king in his own palace, as Sir Charles was. 
Sir Charles. broached the subject one day when 
alone with His Holiness in his private chamber in 
the Potala after His Holiness had dismissed all the 
Minister and Staff, and obtained the coveted per- 
mission for the explorers to enter Tibet. 

When Sir Charles bade farewell, the Dalai Lama 
himself watched his departure from the roof of the 
Palace in view of all his subjects, summoned to give 
their guest of a year a ceremonial send-off. Special 
guards of honour escorted htm on the long journey 
through the mountains back to India. 


FINDING THE WAY 99 


It was splendid! The exclusive lama-governed 
people who had hitherto shut themselves up in 
their mountain fastnesses and refused admission to 
foreigners were now to allow us to explore the 
great mountain in the heart of their sacred valleys. 

For such a turn of events there might perhaps be 
found a political reason in addition to the potent 
friendship won by Sir Charles Bell. The Tibetans 
feared the advance of powerful neighbours in 
Mongolia, Russiaand China. They had just emerged 
from a bloody war against the Chinese. They had 
conquered, had beheaded almost every Chinaman 
in Tibet, and their country was now their own; 
but they did not know when the Chinese might 
return to the fight. They felt, however, they had 
nothing to fear from India or the English. Sir 
Francis Younghusband had in 1904 shown the stern 
power of Britain, but also her justice and friend- 
ship, and had given confidence to the Tibetans 
that in India they had a just, strong and friendly 
neighbour. Claude White, the first Political Officer 
on the Sikkim-Tibet frontier, had kept up that 
friendship and developed trade intercourse; and 
Sir Charles Bell had cemented the confidence by his 
intimate personal friendship with the Dalai Lama. 

So friendly had relations become with Tibet, 
that a regular postal service had been established 
between India and Lhasa over the Jelep Pass and 
the Chumbi Valley by Phari and Gyantse. The 
Indian Government maintained a post office at 


100 THROUGH TIBET TO EVEREST 


Phari in Tibet and another at Gyantse, while the 
post office at Lhasa was under Tibetan control and 
they used their own quaint postage stamps. In 
1924 a telegraph line to Lhasa was actually con- 
structed by our engineers for the Dalai Lama, who 
wished to establish this connection with his friendly 
neighbour, India. 

Mention of the telegraph reminds me of a story of 
Sir Francis Younghusband’s little army which made 
its way across the ice-bound mountains and reached 
Lhasa in 1904. They laid a field telegraph line be- 
hind them for military purposes as they progressed ; 
and strangely the Tibetans never interfered with or 
cut the line. There was a quaint reason. They 
had asked what the line was for; and Sir Francis 
told them that he had ventured into their land far 
from his own home. He had come to transact busi- 
ness and make friends, and when he had done 
this at Lhasa, he would return immediately with 
his soldiers, finding his way by the thread he had 
laid behind him. The Tibetans therefore never 
harmed the line. They were only too anxious for 
the Mission to quit Tibet. 

In due course after Sir Charles Bell’s intercession, 
the Tibetan Prime Minister issued a passport giving 
an invitation and safe-conduct for an Everest 
Expedition under the Great Red Seal of the Holy 
Rulers of Tibet, and dated in accordance with the 


Tibetan Calendar. A curious document, abbreviated 
it reads : 


FINDING THE WAY 101 


‘‘ Be it known to Officers and Headmen of Phari- 
jong, Khampa, Tin-ki and Shekar that a party of 
Sahibs will come to the Sacred Mountain Chomo- 
lungma. ... You shall render all help and safe- 
guard them. ... We have requested the Sahibs 
to keep the laws of the country when they visit 
Chomolungma and not to kill Birds and Animals 
as the people will feel very sorry for this. ... His 
Holiness the Dalai Lama is now on great friendly 
terms with the Government of India... . 

‘‘ Despatched on the seventeenth day of the 
eleventh month of the Iron Bird year.” 

It was of course the duty of the Expedition to 
fulfil the conditions, and to respect the wishes of 
the Tibetans to preserve the wild life, especially 
not to kill creatures which to the Tibetans are the 
incarnate spirits of their own people. 

The road to Everest being at last open, in the 
spring of 1921 the exploring Expedition set out. 
Colonel Howard-Bury was the leader. Mr. Raeburn, 
a veteran Alpine climber, Dr. Kellas, Mr. G. Leigh- 
Mallory and Mr. Bullock formed the mountaineer- 
ing party. Major Morshead and Captain Wheeler 
were surveyors, and Dr. Wollaston naturalist and 
medical officer. The Expedition completed its 
personnel—interpreter, porters, and native cooks— 
in India. 

The plan was to make for the Tibetan side of the 
mountain; it was pretty certain that that would 
be the only way to reach it. A wide sweep was to 


102 THROUGH TIBET TO EVEREST 


be made across the plains of Tibet through unknown 
country. Hope ran high and news of discoveries was 
eagerly awaited, but Dr. Longstaff, the expert 
explorer and climber, who to this day holds the 
world’s record, he having conquered the highest 
individual mountain summit yet climbed—Mount 
Trisul—startled everybody by saying, ‘‘ They will 
have a big enough job to find the mountain, let alone 
doing anything else in this first year.” 

People laughed ; but it was true. Longstaff is a 
pretty shrewd fellow; and few men know more 
than he does about travel and exploration among 
mountains. 

It took the Expedition a long time to untangle 
the geography of the plains of Tibet and the be- 
wildering valleys that lead up to Everest’s northern 
glaciers. They had to be guided largely by observa- 
tion of the rivers, comparing their relative volumes 
and guessing which were the parent streams and 
which the tributaries, so that they could follow the 
main streams to reach the principal glaciers. 

At Khamba Dzong a great misfortune befell them. 
Dr. Kellas, who had been ill for many days, died of 
dysentery. He was buried in a simple grave on the 
slopes of the fort, high up, so that his burial-place 
might face the southern mountains—mountains 
among which he had worked so hard and accom- 
plished so much in previous years of pioneering 
exploration. Is not such a grave the best an 
explorer can desire ? 


FINDING THE WAY 103 


After passing the romantic monastery of Shekar, 
the Expedition, guided by the now friendly Tibetans, 
struck south-west on the last stage of the journey. 
Morshead was making a map of 50,000 square miles 
of this hitherto unknown country. 

The journey led on through mountains and 
valleys ever monotonously the same. The wind 
all day and every day blew an incessant piercing 
gale. There were many obstacles to be surmounted, 
transverse mountain ranges, gorges and rivers. 
There are few bridges ovcr the Tibetan rivers. 
The caravans ford the lesser streams as best they 
can ; and the crossing of such fords by three to four 
hundred laden animals was always an arduous-and 
sometimes a dangerous task. 

Finally the party reached the Rongbuk Valley, the 
main approach to Everest from the north side, led 
there by Tibetans who told them about the Sacred 
Monastery, the Valley of the Hermits and the Rong- 
buk Lama, the living reincarnation of a god who 
dwells in the snows of the great mountain and whom 
pilgrims come to worship. The explorers said, 
‘Show us this monastery,” and, holding as they 
did the orders of the Dalai Lama that all were to 
help them, they were led to the foot of Everest. 
It was the first time white men had gazed upon it 
from foot to summit. Mallory described the scene. 

‘“We had mounted a thousand feet when we 
stopped to wait for what we had come to see. As 
the clouds rolled asunder before the heights, gradu- 


104. THROUGH TIBET TO EVEREST 


ally, very gradually we saw the great mountain sides 
and glaciers and ridges, now one fragment, now 
another through the floating rifts, until, far higher 
in the sky than imagination dared to suggest, a 
prodigious white fang—an excrescence from the jaw 
of the world—the summit of Everest, appeared.” 


CHAPTER VII 
THE EXPLORING EXPEDITION (1921) 


They had come; they had seen; the next step 
was 1 

They set to work and established a series of depots 
on the Rongbuk Glacier and members of the Expedi- 
tion detached themselves in separate parties, push- 
ing out as far as Tingri on the north and Kharta 
on the east. Mallory and Bullock—Raeburn falling 
seriously ill—undertook the technical exploration 
of the mountain to discover a possible ascent. 
They pushed far up the main Rongbuk Glacier and 
climbed a pass from which they could get a glimpse 
over the edge of the southern side of the mountain. 
They saw a terrifying prospect—barren glaciers and 
rocky precipices surely uninhabited and untrodden 
since the beginning of the world. They knew at 
once there was no hope for a venture on the south. 
The north side was the only favourable one to 
climbers. 

The first of the hidden secrets of Everest was 
revealed. There had been advocates of an approach 
to the mountain by way of Nepal, but the Expedi- 
tion had been forbidden to come that way. It was 


curious that Tibet the exclusive, Tibet the land 
105 





106 THROUGH TIBET TO EVEREST 


entirely independent of India, threw open the door, 
while Nepal, the ally of Great Britain, refused. 
Nevertheless this refusal mattered not at all, for 
when Mallory peered over the divide of Nepal and 
Tibet and looked down into glacier valleys, far more 
broken and more desolate than the Tibetan ones, 
he definitely determined that the Nepalese side 
offered no access to Everest’s summit. He there- 
fore devoted his entire energies to exploring a way 
on the Tibetan side. 

In this exploration of 1921 Mallory made a very 
unfortunate mistake when he missed the entrance 
of the East Rongbuk Glacier. Later he discovered 
his mistake and found this glacier, but only after 
approaching by a totally different easterly direction 
across an outer range of mountains by a high pass, 
the Hlakpa-La, nearly 23,000 feet high. From the 
top of this pass he looked down to the valley he had 
missed and saw it leading down to the Rongbuk 
Main Glacier and Rongbuk Monastery where he had 
first been. From here, however, he also observed 
the North-East Ridge of Everest, an easy-looking 
ridge leading to the very summit, and the only 
practicable route by which the mountain may be 
climbed. 

This ridge sweeps down at a moderate angle to a 
loop which is named the North Col (23,000 feet). It 
then sweeps up again to the summit of an outlying 
mounhtain—one of the sentinels of Everest—the 
North Peak (25,000 feet). The North Col itself is 


THE EXPLORING EXPEDITION 107 


a terrible-looking sheer wall, 1,000 feet in height, 
rising from the glacier basin below. This ice cliff 
must be first climbed by a party wishing to reach 
the North-East Ridge. 

Mallory and his party reached the top of the Ice 
Cliff under extreme difficulty. 

From the top of the Col he looked up, seeing every 
detail through his telescope, the North-East Ridge 
that leads up to the North-East shoulder, and then 
along the summit ridge to the final pinnacle or 
‘“‘ pyramid’ as we now call it. The way beyond 
was straightforward and not difficult ; but the wind 
was blowing so strongly, the whole party was so 
exhausted, being insufficiently acclimatized to the 
high altitudes, and the snow was so deep and soft, 
making progress ten times harder, that they could 
not go a step beyond the top of the North Col. They 
had reached 23,000 feet. They had made a splendid 
effort, and they had found that there was a way 
up the mountain. That was the great discovery 
Mallory made. 

Encouraged by their achievement, they began 
their descent. Exhausted by the laborious crossing 
and recrossing of the Hlakpa-La, they rejoined the 
rest of the party which had collected under Colonel 
Howard-Bury at Kharta Village at the end of their 
circuit of the Tibetan side of the mountain. 

The 1921 Expedition had accomplished its purpose 
and was a spectacular success. Its news at once 
threw the whole world into enthusiasm for the 


108 THROUGH TIBET TO EVEREST 


coming assault on the last stronghold of Nature— 
the highest mountain. 

While recording and highly praising the success 
of this Expedition, a review of its work in the light 
of later experience may be permitted. 

How Mallory missed discovering the East Rong- 
buk Glacier is explained by his being deceived by 
the small trickle of a stream that issues from the 
valley. He thought the valley itself therefore 
could only be a diminutive one. It bends to the 
south, and one cannot see far up it. But it is a 
special feature of Himalayan glaciers, owing to the 
peculiar climatic conditions of the tropics, that often 
the largest glaciers discharge only small streams. 
Those, like the East Rongbuk, that expose large, 
open surfaces discharge themselves by evaporation 
and radiation in the tropical sunshine, and have less 
water to spare to form glacier streams at their snouts. 
Therefore they cannot be judged by their streams. 
It was a pity that Mallory in this first exploration 
did not have the co-operation of Kellas, who had 
had such a wide experience of the Himalayan 
Mountains, or of Longstaff, whose services were vital 
but who unfortunately was in the Arctic. This was 
Mallory’s first visit. He was one of the foremost 
Alpine men ; and of Alpine conditions his knowledge 
was complete. 

Wheeler, the Canadian Surveyor, who accompanied 
the Expedition and who produced of Everest one 
of the best photographic surveys ever yet made of 


THE EXPLORING EXPEDITION 109 


any mountain, found and mapped the whole of the 
Bast Rongbuk Valley, because the ordinary course 
of his work necessitated his walking up every valley 
he came to. Unfortunately he was working inde- 
pendently of the climbers Mallory and Bullock. 
The whole Expedition in pursuit of varied objects 
had divided themselves into separate parts. 

It would have been a help if an aeroplane had been 
used for the first exploration of Everest. In 1921 
there were many aviators available just after the 
War, and military and civil aviation authorities 
would surely have consented to co-operate in such an 
important work. It would have been quite easy— 
involving a flight of not more than five hours’ 
duration—to fly ‘‘ round’ Everest from a landing 
ground on the plains of Bengal. This would have 
enabled aerial photographs of all the valleys and 
glaciers and approaches to be made so as to guide 
and shorten the work of those who would follow 
afterwards to climb and explore the mountain on 
foot. 

Incidentally many people frequently inquire: 
‘““ Why did you not go to Mount Everest by air?” 
Well, it must be explained that in the first place it 
would be quite impossible at the present day for 
any flying machine to land and take off again on 
the top of Everest, although I, myself, am perfectly 
confident in predicting that some day a man will 
fly to the top and walk down it aided by breathing 
apparatus. 

H 


110 THROUGH TIBET TO EVEREST 


In the second place, flying was not the object of 
the Mount Everest Expeditions. They were under- 
taken purely for the sport of mountain climbing, 
were composed of mountain climbers and were sent 
out by a club sponsoring the sport and art of moun- 
tain climbing. To climb Everest, the greatest prize 
of the sport, is their object. 

It is necessary, I think, to record that the mistake 
of missing the East Rongbuk Glacier seriously 
affected the work of the subsequent Expedition in 
1922. The valley, although mapped by Wheeler, 
had not been explored by the mountaineers who 
should have done this on the first Expedition and then 
determined the exact locations for the glacier depots 
which the climbing Expedition would have to con- 
struct, following what is known as the “ Polar 
method ” of gradual approach by depot laying— 
the only method, as it is recognized now, by which 
the Himalayan giants may be conquered. The 
second Expedition on arrival had to do this explora- 
tion work and thus lost valuable time and exhausted 
the native porters and themselves. A reconnais- 
sance party had to go ahead before adequate camps 
and depots were laid. In the early spring season 
there is so little time before the monsoon breaks, 
that every moment is needed for the actual business 
of climbing. There is no time to spare for exploring. 

Again, because the 1921 Expedition met an 
unfavourable autumn, it became the established 
custom for Expeditions always to select the early 


THE EXPLORING EXPEDITION 111 


spring season. This is against the experience of all 
previous Himalayan mountaineers for the last fifty 
years. Kellas, profiting by his years of experience, 
had definitely established the season at the end of 
the monsoon to be better than the early spring. I 
think it was a pity the mountaineering section of 
the Expedition did not have Longstaff with them, 
and it was a real misfortune to the Everest Expedi- 
tions when poor Kellas died at Khamba Dzong. 
I, who knew Kellas so well, believe that if he had 
not died, Everest would have been conquered now, 
and by nothing other than this—the combination 
of Kellas’s Himalayan knowledge and Mallory’s 
dash. 

Mallory’s spirit and boldness and pluck and cour- 
age needed tempering by Kellas’s knowledge and 
nicuntain wisdom. Kellas was hardly less powerful 
physically, except that ne W2% Older—and age tells 
on Everest—but Kellas and Mallory were the perfect 
pair to forge a way to the top. 

Mallory was no ordinary man. Raeburn, the 
veteran climber before he fell a victim to the illness 
which unfortunately finished his climbing days, said 
that for sheer dash there was no one to touch this 
young climber. He applied himself to the task, 
which might have appalled most men by its danger 
and magnitude, with indomitable energy and will. 
When he found his mistake over the missing of the 
East Rongbuk approach to Everest, he got his 
caravan of exhausted porters and his companions 


112 THROUGH TIBET TO EVEREST 


over the Hlakpa-La in soft snow, nearly tearing 
their hearts out, and then encouraged them on still 
further even to surmount the greater obstacle of the 
terrible Ice Cliff. 

With his physical strength he had a vivid imagin- 
ation and a great heart. He seemed to live in a 
realm remote from everyday life. It could be seen 
that he had great imagination and ideals. He was 
stubborn to a degree; and his ideas were perhaps 
lacking in flexibility, but yet in another sense this 
same rigidity contributed to the strength of that 
determination which caused him to push through 
with dauntless energy any enterprise he might take 
up. In camp on the later Expeditions we often 
used to tease him for fun for his “‘ advanced views.” 
Some of these views on political and social questions 
were indeed advanced. (You see, even in the camps 
on Everest, as in every remote corner of the world, 
men are wont to talk on politics for ever. ...) He 
was lofty as the peaks he loved. 

He was always young at heart, and fond of a 
game. In America, after his sensational climbs in 
1922, a photographer caught him climbing a fire 
escape at a New York skyscraper hotel, but not in 
the manner the builders intended. He was going 
up underneath the steps hand over hand, sometimes 
upside down ! 

But yet he always preserved a certain aloofness. 
If he had lived, after conquering the heights which 
were his ambitions, no doubt he would with his 


THE EXPLORING EXPEDITION 113 


intellect and energy have accomplished fine things. 
Above all, he was a mountaineer. By that I do not 
mean so much a climber of crags, but a man who 
lives among mountains and loves them. On Everest 
he seemed to have centred all his ambition and 
energy. The mountain gripped him. Describing 
one of his climbs he said : 

‘The camp was made under the moraine about 
17,000 feet up. It was a night of early moons. We 
went out into the keen air, mounting a little rise of 
stones and faintly crunching under our feet the 
granular atoms of fresh fallen snow. We were 
already aware of some unusual loveliness in the 
moment and the scenes. We were not kept waiting 
for the supreme effect. The curtain was withdrawn. 

‘““ Rising from the bright mists Everest above was 
imminent, vast, forceful—no fleeting apparition of 
elusive dream form ; nothing could have been more 
set and permanent—more terrific—more uncon- 
querable.”’ . 

How this mountain obsessed him! He threw his 
whole body and soul into the fight against her. He 
seemed always as if he were measuring and calcu- 
lating. Yet, in my own acquaintance with him, I 
always felt that some strange fatalism overshadowed 
his ambition. He was always trying to convince 
himself that he could beat the mountain, but at the 
same time he seemed to be conscious that the 
mountain held the mastery. 

‘‘The chances of a given party to reach the 


114 THROUGH TIBET TO EVEREST 


summit in a given time are fifty to one against.” 
That was the expression, now become historic in 
the story of Everest, which he used on the occasion 
of the first public lecture he gave in London after 
his return in 1921. 

How the ‘“ personality,” I might say, of this 
mountain had impressed itself upon Mallory can 
be traced in things he said from time to time. For 
instance, in 1924, when he started up the Rongbuk 
Glacier for the last time to make his biggest effort— 
the effort from which he never returned—he said, 
‘We expect no mercy from Everest.... But 
yet it will be well for her that she deign to take 
notice of the little group that approaches stealthily 
over her glaciers again, and that she shall observe 
among the scattered remnants she has thrice put to 
flight still a power to string her very nose-tip.” 


CHAPTER VIII 
THE FIRST CLIMBING EXPEDITION (1922) 


The summer of 1921 was the summer of ‘‘ Fading 
Hopes,”’ so the newspapers at home described the 
project of ascending Everest. The despatches de- 
scribing the exploration of the northern, or Tibetan, 
and the Nepalese sides of the mountain, had given 
the impression to the world that Everest was unscal- 
able. But hope was galvanized into life again when 
Mallory discovered the way up the North-East Ridge 
in the autumn at the very close of the Expedition’s 
work. Despatches arrived describing the forcing 
of the Hlakpa-La under enormous difficulties and 
the ascent to the foot of the North-East Ridge by 
the North Col. 

During the ensuing winter the clouds of gloom 
still hung over the project after Mallory’s historic 
phrase “ Fifty to one against.” But war with the 
mountain was declared. A way up had been shown. 
There was justification for the sending of another 
Expedition. This was to be purely a climbing 
affair. Geography, map-making and preliminary 
exploration had been finished, although the moun- 
taineering exploration of the East Rongbuk Glacier 


remained incomplete. The whole of the new effort 
115 


116 THROUGH TIBET TO EVEREST 


was to be concentrated on an assault of the mountain. 
Accordingly the Mount Everest Committee of the 
Royal Geographical Society and the Alpine Club set 
to work energetically to organize and equip a climb- 
ing expedition along the most thorough lines, with- 
out stint in equipment and including in its personnel 
the best climbers the Club could provide. The 
intricate details of organization and equipment 
were executed under the skilful direction of Mr. 
A. R. Hinks, the able and celebrated Secretary of 
the Geographical Society. The Expeditions indeed 
owe a large measure of their success to the organizing 
genius of Mr. Hinks. Mr. Spencer and Mr. Unna of 
the Alpine Club gave a tremendous amount of work 
to the technical climbing equipment and appliances. 

Many riddles, however, still demanded answers. 
Though a way up had been indicated, could a human 
being reach the summit? Was it in the power of 
the human being to do so? Five and a half miles 
above the level of the sea with the temperature at 
zero, could life be sustained under the physical strain 
of climbing? Men had been as high in balloons, 
but that entailed no exertion and they could wear 
all the cold-resisting clothes they wished. 

Many experienced explorers, mountaineers and 
scientists recalled the classic Abruzzi Expedition— 
an expedition provided with the perfection of equip- 
ment and of personnel which had been defeated, by 
sheer lack of air to breathe, on an easy snow slope 
at 24,600 feet, with the goal, the summit of the Bride 


THE FIRST CLIMBING EXPEDITION 117 


Peak in Kashmir, only 400 feet above them. The 
consensus of opinion was that Everest could not be 
climbed by reason of its height. Yet there was a 
ray of hope in the prediction of one celebrated 
mountain expert, Clinton Dent, the writer of 
Mountaineering in the Badminton Series, who said : 
“‘T believe firmly it is humanly possible to ascend 
Everest. I feel sure that even in our time, perhaps, 
the truth of these views will receive material cor- 
roboration.”’ 

The problem of Everest was and remains princi- 
pally one of weather and of breathing. 

One effect of lack of oxygen is to tire the mind and 
produce mental debility even to the degree of loss of 
intelligence. Against this there is no remedy except 
oxygen gas. Should men unaided try to struggle 
against these drawbacks, or should they load them- 
selves with the necessarily heavy apparatus and 
depend for their lives upon artificial breathing ? 
Here was a question causing endless discussion and 
controversy. Immediately people became divided 
into two schools—the Oxygen and the Non-Oxygen. 
Finally it was decided that both oxygen and non- 
oxygen attempts would be made. The best appara- 
tus must forthwith be designed to combine lightness 
and portability with simplicity, reliability and 
ample gas capacity—no easy problem. 

At what altitudes and at what sites should the 
depots be laid? Here others interrupted, saying: 
“* Not how high should but how high could depots be 


118 THROUGH TIBET TO EVEREST 


carried, even by the powerful Sherpa porters?” 
They quoted the example of the Duke of Abruzzi, 
and his guides who broke down at 24,600 feet. How 
then could the Everest Expedition get laden porters 
beyond or even as far as that height, since the Duke’s 
party carried no loads at all? There would remain 
over 4,000 feet to climb—Impossible! Nobody 
could do it! 

Should men ever succeed in carrying up the camps, 
would the tents stand against the blizzards that 
Sweep across the face of the mountain and tear the 
snow off the upper ridges, throwing iv 2 thousand 
feet into the air, a8 Mallory had observed ? 

Would the ultra-violet light rays of the sun, 80 
intense at those altitudes in the tropics, strike the 
men down with mountain lassitude and sickness ? 

Could an expedition risk the dangers of the 
treacherous Ice Cliff while the North Col, up which 
the way led, threatened death from avalanches in 
bad weather or when soft snow fell ? 

Would the short season of the spring, no longer 
than seven weeks, give sufficient time to complete 
the work of laying depots and climbing before the 
obliterating breath of the monsoon sweeps Up 
in the first week of June, to cover the mountain 
with an impenetrable blanket and stop all work 
dead ? 

Lastly, and above all, could men tune their 
minds to convince themselves that puny human 
beings might dare to match their strength against 





A SHERPA ROY WITH THE EXPEDITION. 





TIBETAN METHOD OF SALUTATION, 


THE FIRST CLIMBING EXPEDITION 119 


the strength and the defences of this mighty and 
last stronghold of Nature, and dare to win? 

The answer to this last query was: Yes. Men 
could steel themselves to the stupendous task. Sir 
Francis Younghusband said : 

“The doom of Everest is sealed, for the simple 
and obvious reason that Man grows in wisdom and 
stature, but the span of mountains is fixed. Everest 
fights stoutly with her many terrible weapons. She 
is surrounded with unscalable rocks, which are her 
armour, but she fights blindly beneath her armour. 
She cannot learn from experience. She cannot rise 
to occasions ; whereas she is beset by an adversary 
who has all these advantages over her, for man’s full 
cunning will find means to outwit the mountain’s 
allies. Each fresh check he receives will only 
heighten his spirits and he will return undaunted 
to the battle. This doom can be seen relentlessly 
closing in upon Everest. Man is remorselessly 
overtaking her. Forty years ago he was very 
humble, and did not presume to think of anything 
higher than 21,000 feet. Twenty years ago he had 
reached 23,000 feet. Ten years ago he had attained 
nearly 25,000 feet. Arithmetic alone shows that 
29,000 feet must follow and Everest be vanquished.” 

Scientific reasons for the Expedition there were 
in plenty, but these were never the chief motive. 
The chief motive, for instance, in Mallory’s mind 
was just that it was the highest spot on earth—a 
last defence held by Nature against the advance of 


120 THROUGH TibLT TO EVEREST 


human beings—a perpetual challenge to men to 
thwart their determination. When he went to 
America after the 1921 Expedition to tell the story 


and to lecture, he was asked wuy he wanted to reach 
the top of the highest mountain. 

‘** Because it is there,”’ he said. 

The New York Times, which typifies the spirit of 
modern progress, remarked : 

‘* It is the necessity of human nature that practi- 
cal records should be broken; and to affect the 
inability to understand why men are irresistibly 
attracted by the chance of doing something first or 
going somewhere first, is a waste of time. They are 
built that way, and to the very impulse that rules 
them the world is enormously indebted.” 

The personnel of the Expedition was selected 
with great care. 

General the Hon. C. G. Bruce, C.B., the world- 
renowned Himalayan explorer, was to command. 
‘* The Very Best Man ”’ is all that it is necessary to 
say to describe him. But for the benefit of those of 
my readers who are not normally interested in 
Himalayan exploration or in mountain climbing, 
and for whom this popular account of the story of 
Everest is principally intended, I would like to give 
a few more details of the personality of General 
Bruce and his mountain work as well as of that of 
the other members of the Expedition. 

General Bruce’s reputation had spread over India 
through his extraordinary feats of ‘ Khud,” hill- 


THE FIRST CLIMBING EXPEDITION 121 


climbing, which is a Himalayan Gurka sport of 
racing up and down steep mountains, generally 
before breakfast. The jolly Gurka soldier boys 
delight in this. Bruce loves his Gurkas, and they 
love him. He speaks their language and knows 
their customs. He can talk to them and tell them 
funny stories and can show them even the steps of 
their own national dances. He has a great mountain 
sense and a love of mountains; they raised his 
spirits and his desire to be up and at them. The 
little toy train that brings you from the plains to 
Darjeeling used to be too slow for him, and he would 
jump out and race up the hillside to make a short 
cut, while the train continued its curves of eight 
round the spurs. His excuse was to get fit and 
reduce his weight. It was really that his delight 
in the mountains was too much, and the train was 
too slow for him. There are many after-mess 
stories about him, some of which can be written 
down and some which cannot. He was immensely 
powerful. His favourite joke was to lie flat with 
head and feet bridging two tables, and a thirteen- 
stone man could not bend his spine. 

For great altitudes such as would be reached on 
Everest, General Bruce’s climbing days were over, 
unhappily ; but an ascent to 16,000 feet or so the 
doctor said he could do. So he was to make his 
headquarters at the Base Camp where he could 
organize the line of communications on the glacier, 
and his personality would provide the dynamite 


122 THROUGH TIBET TO EVEREST 


behind the Expedition to shoot it up the moun- 
tain. 

His books Twenty Years in the Himalayas and 
Kulu and Lahoul, are the fruits of his knowledge of 
Himalayan travel during thirty-three years of life 
in India. There is no valley in the Hindu Kush 
eastward from Chitral and Gilgit through Garhwal, 
Kulu, and Lahoul, to Simla, Nanga-Parbat, and the 
Karakorams, that he does not know. He has 
climbed alone, and with Sir Francis Younghusband, 
Sir Martin Conway, Mumm, Norman Colle, Longstaff 
and Mummery, besides winning many campaign 
medals on frontier wars in India, Burmah and 
Waziristan. 

He was the first man to propose a definite 
Expedition to Everest—that was in 1893—and the 
idea never left him, although his requests through 
Government sources for permission to go were never 
granted, and the Tibetans themselves would never 
permit an Expedition. In the War he commanded 
the 6th Gurkas, and was terribly wounded at the 
Dardanelles. He then went back to India to teach 
mountain warfare, scouting and hill fighting and 
Gurka training. 

General Bruce’s leadership of the Expedition 
brought the whole caravan of 400 animals and 100 
men safe and sound over 350 miles of difficult 
country from India, to the foot of Mount Everest. 

Second in command of the Expedition was Frank 
Strutt, who had done a great deal of climbing in the 


THE FIRST CLIMBING EXPEDITION 123 


Alps, the mainstay of the climbing party being 
Mallory, Norton, Somervell, Finch, Dr. Wakefield, 
Morshead and Geoffrey Bruce. Longstaff joined as 
doctor, Morris and Crawford as transportation 
officers, and I acted as official photographer. 
Norton was destined to emerge as leader of the 
next 1924 Expedition after General Bruce fell ill. 
Somervell was always one of the outstanding 
characters of the Expedition. While Mallory was a 
lithe, cat-like, speedy man on a mountain, Somervell 
represented the more solid type with tremendous 
staying and recuperative power. In fact, he gained 
for himself the reputation of being the quickest of 
all.to recover from exhaustion after a climb ; Somer- 
vell was one of the most experienced members of 
the Fell and Rock Club and the Alpine Club. He 
had climbed every big mountain in the Alps, al- 
ways without guides—with his climbing companion 
Beetham. As a man he was versatile, satirical, 
brilliantly witty and a great lover of books. He 
is an accomplished musician, and in Tibet he made 
a fascinating collection of Tibetan folk tunes, for 
use as illustrative music to the films I made. He 
owed much of his amazing recuperative and physical 
power as a mountaineer to his optimism, his exuber- 
ant energy and cheery temperament. He comes of 
a Kendal family of strong missionary tradition, his 
grandfather being the Home Director of the great 
China Inland Mission; and he himself has now 
become a missionary in India. At Rugby he dis- 


124 THROUGH TIBET TO EVEREST 


tinguished himself in science, secured a scholarship 
at Caius College, Cambridge, where he took a 
double first, and completed his medical and surgical 
training at University College, London. He was 
considered to be one of the rising men among 
London’s young surgeons. He had a lightning 
decision and a sure, swift and never-faltering 
touch of the hand. After this 1922 Expedition to 
Everest he was travelling leisurely on his way home 
and he chanced to stay at the London Mission 
Hospital at Travancore in Southern India. It was 
there he determined to become a missionary. The 
Hospital, providing for an immense district, had 
only one surgeon and no modern appliances. ‘‘ The 
sight of the appalling needs of these people in 
Southern India,” he confessed, ‘‘ changed the whole 
course of my life and I could not possibly do any- 
thing else but go to them.’”’ So he gave up his 
ambition to be a leading surgeon in London and 
joined the Mission Hospital, where he has now 
installed himself with modern X-ray and other 
appliances. A short while ago he was married, and 
his wife works with him at the Mission, making 
climbing expeditions in the Himalaya on such 
holidays as they can spare. 

Another strikingly successful climber was Geoffrey 
Bruce, a cousin of the General. A distinguished 
young athlete, his original duty was first trans- 
portation and the handling of the Sherpas, but he 
became one of the men to go highest on the mountain. 


THE FIRST CLIMBING EXPEDITION 125 


Another distinguished member was G. I. Finch. 
Finch was an Australian. When a student at the 
University of Zurich, he was one of the big men at 
the Academic Alpine Club of Switzerland—a Club 
renowned for feats of endurance and for guideless 
climbing. As a guideless climber he mastered every 
important climb of the Alps, making the first ascent 
of some peaks. He was a man of strong character 
with a mechanical and scientific turn of mind, and, 
like many people of strongly positive natures, he 
had the quality of making strong friendships and, 
as a corollary, acute enmities. As a mountaineer 
he was one of the type who could concentrate on a 
tremendous nervous effort, and force a brilliant 
conclusion by sheer enthusiasm of purpose. On 
the entire journey across Tibet he carefully hus- 
banded his strength, riding his pony practically the 
whole way, conserving his energies, as was his 
method, for one big effort. He made one big effort 
and created a record, although using oxygen gas, 
and exhausted himself utterly. 

With this little army of fine men under a brilliant 
leader, the Expedition set out from Darjeeling with 
the good wishes of all for the accomplishment of the 
stupendous task ahead. 

For me, as I rode forward, the enterprise presented 
a singular blend of remembrance and emotion, for I 
could look back upon an adventure started ten years 
before to which the experience came as a climax and 
completion. 


CHAPTER IX 
ON THE ROAD TO EVEREST AGAIN 


I was on the road to Tibet again ! 

Darjeeling was always the starting-point of the 
Expeditions, which took the trade route of the Jelep 
Pass, 14,600 feet, the Chumbi Valley, and Phari, 
to Tibet. The road to Phari, frequented by the 
wool caravans, presents no difficulty at all. The 
scenery is pleasant, although incomparable to the 
Tista Valley. 

Chumbi is a charming place of pine forests and 
verdant pasture lands. We were in Tibetan terri- 
tory as soon as we crossed the boundary at the Jelep 
Pass, although still in the southern watershed of the 
Himalaya. Higher and higher we climbed through 
the rocky gorges of Gautsa. 

There the new mint of the Tibetan Government 
has been built, where forest wood, the only fuel of 
the country, can be used to smelt the copper scrap 
brought from India. The discs to make Tibetan 
coins are punched by an enormous hand-operated 
lever stamp. The second highest official of Tibet 
resides here—or he does not. He takes long holi- 
days, for this is a lonely spot, far from Lhasa, the 


only place where the high-born Tibetan will consent 
126 


ON THE ROAD TO EVEREST 127 


to live. The official’s duty is to watch the pressing 
out of the discs from the copper sheets. Though 
he may be the second highest official after the Prime 
Minister himself, he is not trusted to make the discs 
into coins. They must be carried to Lhasa and 
there stamped into Tankas under the eyes of the 
Dalai Lama himself. 

There are whole mountain ranges of copper ore 
in Tibet, but there is not a wheel to transport it, 
nor fuel to smelt it except the forest wood carried 
from Chumbi or India. What other valuable 
minerals might be found in Tibet besides the gold 
we already know of, we can hardly tell. For years. 
the Chinese took the alluvial gold from Rudok. It 
was the chief supply of gold to the Chinese Empire ; 
Tibetan prisoners dug and washed it for them. 

Beyond Gautsa the trees are left behind. The 
valley broadens out and the river dwindles to a 
Stream. The mountains become higher, although 
the valley broadens. Grassy swards and marshes 
appear. We have left behind the deep valleys, the 
pine woods and the terraced ch4let villages. 

The basin valley of Phari amazes by the change 
in the surroundings. To look ahead is to look into 
a deserted world. Peerless mountains raise white 
crests to the scintillating sky, blue as the waters 
of the Mediterranean. The land seems empty of 
people, but a paradise for birds and animals. It 
is the home of the slow-moving, grunting yak, the 
ox of Central Asia that lives up to 20,000 feet and dies 


128 THROUGH TIBET TO EVEREST 


if brought down too quickly, even to 8,000 feet above 
the sea! The yak’s appearance and manner seem 
to spell content, and the Tibetan uses “ yak’’ as a 
superlative to signify all that is good and excellent. 
These animals remain always semi-wild, docile 
perhaps with their Tibetan drivers, but capricious 
and even dangerous with strangers. 

Most yaks are pure black. Others may be brown, 
others silvery grey, and a few are pure white. Their 
long hair trails to the ground below their bodies. 
Nature gave them this apron against the wind. 
When they graze over the exposed plateau they 
stand with their backs to the wind and their heads, 
carried low, are screened by their immense tails. 
Never tied together, they roam free and move along 
leisurely a slow 2 miles an hour when travelling 
laden in trading caravans. The drivers spin wool, 
sling stones and whistle. The yaks understand. 
This shrill musical whistle urges them forward. 

The yak carries the Tibetans’ burdens over the 
roadless country; it provides material for the 
tents in which the shepherds live; also for the 
clothes they wear. It gives them meat and milk 
and butter. It ploughs their barley fields. Tibetans 
could not live without yaks. No wonder they use 
the name to express all that is good and excellent. 

In Tibet the Expedition used yaks for transport, 
collecting an army of four hundred or so. The 
animals all carried large bells round their necks, and 
small bells tied in their tails. As the caravan went 


ON THE ROAD TO EVEREST 129 


forward a gay march music was provided by the 
jingle of a thousand deep-toned cowbells over- 
ridden by the tinkle of the smaller bells and the 
whistling and singing of the Tibetan drivers. Soon 
after starting each morning the caravan tailed out, 
perhaps 5 miles in length, and scattered itself over 
the plain. 

Although as we entered the Phari Valley it seemed 
so bare, we knew that it concealed an extraordinary 
town. Said to be the highest town in the world, it 
is said also to be the dirtiest. Breathless from the 
altitude so suddenly reached; tired, because it is 
a long way up from Chumbi ; we did not care whether 
it deserved its unsavoury reputation or not. We 
looked forward to getting there. 

We had had our first encounter with the Tibetan 
wind. It is more than a wind. It is a thousand 
knife-points that pierce all and any clothes you 
may wear. 

Suddenly, the low, solid fortress lines of Phari 
Jong shaped themselves out of the bare plain as we 
turned a spur to the left. Behind rises an over- 
hanging parapet of cliffs, 10,000 feet in height. It 
is the mountain Chomolhari, the Lily-white Mother 
of Snow, a sacred Tibetan muuntain venerated by 
lamas and pilgrims and in whose cliffs there are said 
to be hermit dwellers—people who were once of the 
world but who now live communing with the gods. 

Along a dusty open track following the telegraph 
poles, we rode into the little walled post over which 


130 THROUGH TIBET TO EVEREST 


flies the Union Jack. The post with true British 
insularity lies by itself out on the plain and well 
away from the Tibetan town. This is the last post 
and telegraph office on the route. The line continues 
north to Gyantse and Lhasa, but the Expedition 
from here branched off to the West. From here it 
was that the despatches of the Expedition brought 
in by postal riders from Mount Everest were sent 
down to India. | 

Whenever on the Expeditions we visited this 
fascinatingly interesting highest of towns, no 
member of our party would venture in, except to 
visit the castle; never the town. It deserves its 
reputation, for it is dirty—indescribably dirty—but 
it is amazingly interesting. I wandered for many 
hours through Phari myself in 1922 and also in 
1924. I visited the Jong and went into the highest 
Tibetan society, as guest of the Governor; I was a 
guest also in the hovel of a Ragyaba, the verminous 
scavenger butchers who break up the dead and who 
live in the filthiest part of the town. In the course 
of my wanderings here, under the handicap of my 
imperfect knowledge of the language, I collected 
many of the notes on the Tibetans and their quaint 
customs given in this book. I walked over the 
whole town on the mud roofs of the hovels, 
jumping across the stinking drains which are the 
streets themselves. 

Climbing to the battlements of the Jong, the 
huge fortress that crowns the hill, one may look down 


ON THE ROAD TO EVEREST 131 


on the clustering hovels that make up the town 
below. The walls of the Jong protect the huddled 
people of this highest town in the world from the 
icy blasts of the northern winter wind. There are 
lots of dogs, always howling, on the roofs among the 
many prayer poles and flags. From holes in the flat 
roofs the curling wisps of blue smoke rise from the 
yak-dung fires in the morning and in the evening. 
The people eat only twice a day. Ten thousand 
people live beneath that panorama of flat-terraced 
roofs, thirty and forty people in each house with their 
cattle and mangy dogs, begrimed in dirt and yak- 
dung soot. 

The houses, built of ‘‘ Tibetan reinforced concrete” 
—mud—strengthened with the horns, hairs and skins 
of dead cattle—seem to be buried half-underground 
because of the offal and dung heaped outside the 
walls ; you go down a flight of steps into the house 
from the raised level of the refuse outside. Every- 
thing is coated with greasy soot from yak-dung 
fires. It hangs in cobwebs and festoons, brushing 
your face and interlacing in your hair unless you 
stoop very low. The little children play in the 
stinking pools of the street and pick the bones and 
horns of dead cattle that are thrown out to rot away. 
The ravens watch—hundreds of them—and the 
mangy dogs slink round the corners waiting to 
finish what the children leave. These are not the 
fine black mastiffs of the shepherd people, but cur 
dogs of the slums. The children are dressed in rags 


132 THROUGH TIBET TO EVEREST 


and are matted in filth, but now and then when they 
look up and laugh you will see that they are the 
same jolly-spirited little beings that all Tibetan 
children are, only they are grimier than any others 
you have ever seen before. 

Why Phari is so dirty nobody can quite explain. 
Other towns—Khamba, Shekar and Gyantse—are 
quite different. 

In the castle live two twin Governors. They wear 
gorgeous, flowing robes of Chinese silk, embellished 
with splendid embroideries in green and mauve. 
One wears a headdress that is nothing other than an 
enormous purple lampshade. They hold the rank 
of the Backward-sloping Peacock Feather and the 
Order of the Crystal Button. They wear their 
sleeves long, reaching almost to the ground and 
hiding their long, carefully manicured nails. Such 
are marks of their dignity. They sit in their castle 
and extract taxes, for which there is no fixed scale 
or rule, from the traders who collect here from India, 
Bhutan, Nepal and Tibet. 

The taxes are a matter of bargain. Lhasa fixes 
with the local governors of districts the amount of 
revenue they must send each year to the Central 
Government. The Governor has a free hand to 
collect this, and, receiving no pay himself, he lives 
on the difference between what he can extract from 
the people and what he is obliged to remit to Lhasa. 
A good governor is a man of moderate personal 
demands. A bad governor is one bent on getting 


ON THE ROAD TO EVEREST 133 


rich quick and retiring soon to reside at ease at 
Lhasa. 

Formal visits are first exchanged between a 
traveller arriving and the Governor, and it is 
impolite to discuss business on these first visits; 
compliments only must be exchanged, together 
with ceremonial scarves and presents. 

Phari was an important junction point for Everest 
Expeditions, because here the transport animals 
from India and the Chumbi Valley, usually mules, 
were exchanged for the transport animals of the 
plateau, yaks and donkeys. 

After Phari, for day after day the onward- 
travelling caravan passed over the desolate ele- 
vated plateau, nowhere less than 14,000 feet above 
the sea and in some places 19,000 feet in height. 
Always we were plagued by the incessant wind. 
Day after day brought the same open landscape, 
plateau bounded by piled ranges of snow moun- 
tains stretching on endlessly. 

At least five or six hours’ marching in a straight 
line towards some landmark seemed to bring that 
landmark no nearer. Camps were laid by valley, 
lake or river. Here and there a Dok or shepherd’s 
encampment was found, by the banks of glacier 
Streams, where in spring and summer fresh green 
grass will sprout, good for yaks and sheep. The 
Dok-pa in the yak-hair tents lead a nomadic life, 
moving on from camping ground to camping ground 
with their beasts. The men spend the day on the 


134. THROUGH TIBET TO EVEREST 


hillsides with the yaks and sheep while the women 
remain in the tents spinning wool and cooking over 
the gogra, yak-dung fires. These Dok-pa collect 
yaks’ butter and cheese and exchange it in the towns 
for tsampa, barley, and tea. 

Villages were few and far between. The people 
are collected for the most part in settlements 
under the protection of some castle or fortress 
monastery, built fantastically on pinnacles of rock 
or cliff faces rising vertically from the plain. Very 
wonderful buildings they are, these Dzongs and 
Gompas, built with all the skill of the Tibetans, 
who are some of the best architects of Asia. 

Constructed of nothing more than mud and 
stones, yet what an aspect of solidity they present ! 
They seem to have grown from the very rocks upon 
which they stand, so harmoniously do the lines of 
rock and building merge. The Tibetan is in this 
way a genuine artist. Look not only at his marvel- 
lous sense of line, but notice the lofty flights of his 
imagination, inspired by the majesty of his sur- 
roundings of immense spaces and heights and 
influenced by the superstition and fantastic ghost 
fears of his mind. He materializes these feelings 
into the shapes of the dream-castles he builds. 
Such is the castle of Khamba Dzong, that has stood 
upon its rock, 15,000 feet above the sea, even beyond 
the records of Tibetan history, and Shekar-Dzong, 
the ‘‘ Monastery of the Shining Crystal,” which no 
explorer before the Everest Expedition had ever 





Tre ‘*SHINING CRYSTAL” MONASTERY, SHEKAR. 





THE RONGBUK MONASTERY AND EVEREST. 


ON THE ROAD TO EVEREST 135 


seen. Watch its lines and follow them upwards 
as they lead the eye to the needle crest of the moun- 
tain 17,000 feet above the sea! 

In my photographic impressions of these two 
marvellous structures I have tried to convey their 
astounding character. They are Dream Towers of 
the air, and at times, caught in the light of dawn 
or of sunset, are unbelievably beautiful. 

Shekar Dzong has a place in my memory too for 
quite another reason. We were entertained here 
on one of the Expeditions by the Governor, who 
received our party royally. He held games and 
dances and gave a banquet of twelve courses. As 
a mark of special honour—believe it or not, but 
it is true—we were allowed to partake of some old 
smoked vintage mutton, killed forty years before! 

The Tibetans have their own peculiar system of 
cold storage ! 


CHAPTER X 
THE RONGBUK MONASTERY 


For weeks we had toiled through desolation of 
mountain and plateau. At last we sighted our goal 
and gazed spell-bound at the sheer cliffs of rock 
draped with ice which seemed to form part of the 
very heavens above us. 

We stood at 16,000 feet above the sea. The 
valley, a mile wide, ran straight ahead for nearly 
twenty miles. At its farther end, stretching across, 
closing the valley, rearing its imposing head of 
granite and ice, was Everest. Some colossal 
architect, who built with peaks and valleys, seemed 
here to have wrought a dramatic prodigy—a hall 
of grandeur that led to the mountain. 

A spectacle of astounding beauty and strange- 
ness, for me it evoked singular remembrances and 
emotions; I could look back ten years upon an 
adventure to which this experience came as 4 
climax and completion. 

Many stories had been heard, yet few believed, 
of this region of the Rongbuk, called Chamalung, 
‘“‘The Sanctuary of the Birds,’’ where indeed all 
wild creatures, because they are considered to be 


the reincarnated spirits of former human lives, may 
136 


THE RONGBUK MONASTERY 137 


live unharmed and untouched. Who would there 
be to hurt them? There are no inhabitants save 
the hermit monks who dwell in solitude and medita- 
tion in the rock-hewn cells we saw dotted over the 
hill-sides. 

In the heart of this sacred valley these hermits 
live their entire lives, gaining merit so that when they 
die their souls may escape from the affrighting cycle 
of reincarnation which they believe to be the inevit- 
able and eternal sequel to the lives of ordinary men. 
One can be oppressed with a sense of mystery in 
this lifted hidden world, in the solitude and in the 
impressive majesty of the surroundings. 

There is one tremendous reputed saint, who has 
been sealed upin a rock cell beneath Mount Everest, 
dwelling in darkness for fifteen years, meditating, 
sitting motionless years after year. Once a day 
brother monks bring a cup of water and a handful 
of barley meal to this self-isolated priest. I myself 
watched, and saw, through a hole in the wall of the 
hermit’s cell, a hand steal out and take in the water 
and the bread. Even the hand was muffled, because 
not only must no one see him, but the very light 
of day may not touch his skin. 

On the left at the entrance of the valley lay the 
Monastery. Certainly no architectural pains had 
been expended on it. That, indeed, would have 
been futile labour, with Everest straight down the 
gigantic corridor. It was a collection of low flat 
buildings, and in front stood an immense chorten, 


138 THROUGH TIBET TO EVEREST 


a cupola-like monument built in terraces and crowned 
by emblems of the sun and moon, symbolizing the 
light of Buddha’s teaching illuminating the world. 

This is the highest monastery in the world—the 
Rongbuk Lamasery, where the venerable Rongbuk 
Lama, one of the holiest hermit monks of Tibet and 
the incarnation of the god Chongraysay, lives and 
contemplates. The monastery is the shrine dedi- 
cated to Everest ; and the lama is the High Priest 
of the Mountain, who communes with the Goddess 
Mother of the World. Here was the reality of that 
which had been merely vague legend from the time 
of the Pundit Explorers. 

Our party, a handful of white men and a band of 
Tibetan and Nepalese carriers, advanced into this 
secret place with feelings of awe, the white men 
scarcely less than the natives. 

According to Tibetan historical legend, the monas- 
tery was built or possibly rebuilt over 2,000 years 
ago. In a later time, a Chinese Princess of the 
Tsang dynasty that ruled China, then in one of the 
most exalted ages of her culture and civilization, 
had married the King of Tibet, Srong-Tsan-Gampo ; 
and she had persuaded her King to invite the Indian 
Buddhist saint, Padma Samblava, to teach the 
religion of Buddha to the people of Tibet, then 
possessed only of the Devil worship of Bom. Padma 
Samblava came miraculously across the Himalaya 
by the sky, and rested awhile at the monastery 
beneath Mount Everest to subjugate those evil 


THE RONGBUK MONASTERY 139 


spirits—the Zhidag—that had opposed his saintly 
advent, conjuring up the anger of the storms and 
the poisons of the air against him, but without 
avail. 

The chief of the Devil-worshipping Lamas, who 
dwelt in this monastery, challenged the Buddhist 
to prove which was the most powerful—the teach- 
ings of Buddha, or the ancient faith of the people. 
To decide the matter they would hold a race to the 
top of Mount Everest, each calling on his gods or 
devils. During the night the Bombo Lama, deter- 
mined to steal a march on his adversary, started off 
in the dark, riding on his magical drum. 

The disciples of the Buddhist came to wake him, 
crying anxiously that the Bombo Lama was already 
half-way up the mountain. But Padma Samblava 
said : 

‘‘ Fear not, because just as soon as the sun’s rays 
come, so shall I start.”’ 

When the sun appeared, he was conveyed, by a 
beam sitting in his chair, to the very top of the 
mountain. There he sat awhile, enthroned on 
the steeple of the world. When he descended he 
left the chair behind. The wicked Bombo Lama 
perished ; and the spirits of the mountain kept his 
drum. So now, when the rumble of rock avalanches 
is heard, the Tibetans say the spirits are beating the 
drum. 

Tibetans always had difficulty in understanding 
why we had come, and why we wanted to climb the 


140 THROUGH TIBET TO EVEREST 


mountain. They had no conception of the idea of 
sport, and were certain that the reasons we gave 
were lies. They decided that what we were really 
seeking was the magical chair which the Buddhist 
apostle had left on the mountain. They were 
convinced that the spirits of Everest would see to 
it that we did not get to the top. Probably they 
would even punish us severely for our impiety— 
beliefs which, I admit, after events seemed to bear 
out. 

From the outer world we had found our way to 
this rallying-place of demons and deities along the 
pilgrim paths marked with chortens and Mani walls, 
structures that must be passed right-handed, and 
with religious lifting of the hat to the flying prayer 
flags that wing to heaven with every flutter of the 
wind the Mantra: 

‘‘Om mani padme hum ’’—“ Hail! jewel of the 
lotus flower!” 

For many pilgrims seek for merit here in this 
valley of the Rongbuk. These devout and simple 
people travel sometimes 2,000 miles, from China and 
Mongolia, and cover every inch of the way by 
measuring their length on the ground. They pros- 
trate themselves on their faces, marking the soil 
with their fingers a little beyond their heads, arise 
and bring their toes to the mark they have made 
and fall again stretched full length on the ground, 
their arms extended, muttering an already million- 
times-repeated prayer. 


THE RONGBUK MONASTERY 141 


Thus they spend their lives. They live upon the 
hospitality of villagers and shepherds, who themselves 
merit spiritual reward by giving hospitality to them. 
There are other places of pilgrimage: the Holy Lake 
of Manasarowar of South Central Tibet, where the 
great Indus and the Brahmaputra rivers both rise 
together, to flow, in exactly opposite directions, to 
the gorges by which they break through the Hima- 
laya to the Indian Ocean; the shrine of Chorten 
Nyim; and others: but the pilgrimage to the 
Rongbuk and Mount Everest is one of the most 
sacred in Southern Tibet. 

We Western men who had entered this strange 
land were pilgrims, but, unlike the pilgrims who 
came measuring their length on the ground, we 
were pilgrims only of adventure. We had our 
camp with our horses and our tents and our servants 
and our machines. Our business was to fight the 
mountain, not to worship it. 

We visited the lamasery. In dramatic contrast 
to all expectation, our visit was an intrusion into a 
place of joy. I can describe it best as a mixture 
of pious religion and uproarious laughter—and a 
little dirt. Mystical peace and contemplation is 
not entirely a solemnity. Divine service was 
brightened by the music of drums with plentiful 
food and buttered tea served by attendants. We 
heard laughter on all sides from the boys, dozens 
and dozens of them, little fellows with shaven heads 
and slanting yellow eyes and long .claws, clad in 


142 THROUGH TIBET TO EVEREST 


robes of yellow and maroon. They played much ag 
children in any land. One of them will by spells 
and incantations perhaps be found to be the rein- 
carnation of a saint or god. There was laughter 
from the grown-up monks, too, who swarmed about. 
Laughter is universal in Tibet, especially when a 
white man comes round. The white man is a 
strange object to Tibetans. They kill themselves 
laughing at him. You can please yourself whether 
you feel humbled or not about it. Personally I 
think that it is the laughter of pleasure and wonder 
at meeting, a happy polite laugh that conceals no 
derision. They are indeed most cheerful and happy 
people, although they lead as hard a life as any of 
the human race. 

Our way being opened by the passports and letters 
of friendship given our Expedition by the Dalai 
Lama of Lhasa, we were accepted as honoured guests, 
although the lamas were all a little appalled at our 
hardihood in proposing to brave the mysterious 
dangers of Everest. 

One thing about the lamas that catches your 
immediate sympathy is their gentleness. On the 
whole they and the Tibetans at large are extremely 
kind. They are almost fantastically humane 
towards animals, especially wild creatures, although 
there is the inconsistency of their being harsh with 
their beasts of burden. This, however, is to be 
observed among all people throughout the world who 
depend upon pack-trains for their transportation. 


THE RONGBUK MONASTERY 143 


They are cruel at times towards human beings, 
although much less so than the Chinese. 

You might imagine that they would be theologi- 
cally argumentative and inclined to proselytize, even 
to the point of trying to convert us. But they could 
seldom be persuaded to say anything about either 
their gods or their devils. A lama once, however, 
condescended to make a few confidences. It was 
not matter of idle disputation, but quite practical. 

The hairy men, he explained, were most malig- 
nant. They lived high up on Everest, and at times 
came down and wrought havoc in the villages. 
They carried off women and yaks, and killed all 
men. I was a trifle annoyed at the solemn fantasy. 

‘“‘ But,” I replied, “I want to meet the hairy 
men,” 

He could not understand that, but then he thought 
we were quite mad anyway. 

The Tibetan monk believes in a most incredible 
collection of devils and takes his beliefs with the 
most matter-of-fact seriousness. Everywhere you 
go you see endless chortens erected to keep the 
evil spirits in the ground. If a Tibetan encounters 
a mishap, falls or breaks his leg, the explanation 
is that the goblin—they are called Yi-dag or Preta 
—has risen from the lower world within the earth 
at that point and has caused the trouble, whether 
it be the work of Srin-Po, who devours the limbs of 
men; or Srul-Po, a female demon who causes all the 
illnesses of children; or Brjed-Byed, who causes 


144 THROUGH TIBET TO EVEREST 


forgetfulness; or Snyo-Byed, who causes people to 
go mad. Thereupon a chorten is erected to keep 
that spirit down; and the stonemasons carve 
phrases on the slabs. Passers-by add stones to the 
pile and mutter ‘Om mani padme hum ”’ as they 
pass on by the left. 

There is a fascinating legend of the monastery, 
which all good Tibetans believe in, that tells of the 
Nitikanji, or Snow Men. That is the name the 
lamas give them because they are dread beings who 
inhabit the snows. One must speak of them with 
great respect, otherwise they will bring bad luck and 
perhaps even come down and raid and kill, because 
they are known to kill men, carry off women, and to 
bite the necks of yaks and drink their blood. The 
ordinary Tibetan peasant calls these beings Sukpa, 
and tells of their strange rovings in the snow, of 
the long hair which falls over their eyes, so that if 
you are chased by the Sukpa you must run down- 
hill, then the long hair will get into his eyes and you 
can escape from him. 

What are they ? Man, ape, bear? Nobody can 
tell. But there must be some reason for this legend, 
because it is an accepted fact in these valleys of 
Tibet. An ape perhaps, that once strayed from the 
forests of India and found a home in the snow. 
The King of the Sukpas is supposed to live on the 
very top of Everest, whence he can look down on 
the world below, and choose upon which herd of 
grazing yaks he will descend. Yak-herds say that 


THE RONGBUK MONASTERY 145 


the Sukpa can jump by huge bounds at a time, that 
he is much taller than the tallest man, and that he 
has a hard tail upon which he can sit. The men he 
kills he will not eat. He just bites off the tips of 
their fingers, toes and noses, and leaves them. 

Before taking our departure from the monastery 
we were allowed to visit the Chief Lama of the 
Rongbuk, the great god-Lama, who is the god 
Chongraysay reincarnate. He consented to give us 
an audience. 

We found ourselves trudging up a narrow dark 
stairway to a shrine in the upper part of the monas- 
tery buildings. A long deep trumpet note began 
and continued on and on without a break, and the 
sound of cymbals came clashing with a regular 
rhythm. When any ceremony was under way @ 
party of trumpeters and cymbal-beaters on the roof 
sounded a proclamation. The trumpeters held the 
note sustained while the ritual proceeded, blowing 
in relays so that the blare of the instruments over- 
lapped unceasingly. We came into a small, simple 
furnished room. <A few holy pictures and inscrip- 
tions in Chinese fashion were on the wall. Before 
us we saw two lamas holding a screen of cloth. Our 
Tibetan bearers, who had come with us, prostrated 
themselves, with their faces pressed to the floor. 
Behind that screen we understood was the saint. 

We waited silently for a moment. The white 
men were allowed to remain standing. Then the 
two lamas slowly lowered their screen. A figure 


146 THROUGH TIBET TO EVEREST 


sat with crossed knees in the Buddha posture. There 
were draperies of costly Chinese silks. The figure 
sat absolutely motionless and silent. Not a soul 
spoke a word, or even whispered in theroom. Some- 
how we did not dare to interrupt the weird suspense. 
We stood with our hats in our hands. Outside on 
the roof the trumpets persisted in a monotonous 
unceasing blare as if announcing the occasion to 
remote Powers. Within the room there was an 
intoxicating smell from the juniper burning by the 
peacock’s feathers in the urn before the figure. 

Looking closely we saw the face of an elderly 
man of extraordinary personality. The Mongolian 
features had a singular cast of thought and beauty. 
It is said that each year he, himself, also retires for 
three months to the darkness of a hermit’s cell. 

He looked at us, but did not speak or move. 
Rather he seemed to look over us, through us. 
There was something vastly observant and yet 
impersonal in his gaze. The screen of cloth was 
raised and our audience was at an end and we filed 
out. Not a word had been spoken. I felt abso- 
lutely hypnotized myself. Then out in the sunlight 
and fresh air again on the way back to our tents we 
recovered ourselves, and somebody, I forget who it 
was now, said : 

“‘ Gee! that chap is either the holiest saint or the 
greatest actor on earth.” 

It had been a meeting between the East and 
the West. We were pilgrims, but we had come to 


THE RONGBUK MONASTERY 147 


wrestle, not with bogeys and demons, but against 
not less real and powerful opponents, against bliz- 
zards and tempests holding revel amid chasms and 
rocks, for a prize for which we perhaps would—as 
we actually did—have to pay a price of human lives. 

Can I give you a better contrast between our- 
selves and the strange people we found living here, 
or give you a better proof that no physical obstacle 
of Nature, nor any immaterial obstacle of super- 
stition, can ever beat the spirit of modern man, or 
prevent him winning any victory he may set him- 
self to win—than by reminding you of a little 
incident that happened in 1922, when Captain 
Geoffrey Bruce, of the 6th Gurka Rifles, standing 
at the world’s record altitude of 27,235 feet, forced 
to give up the struggle against the icy blasts blowing 
at a hundred miles an hour across the Himalaya, 
looked up to Everest above, and said : 

‘Just you wait, old thing, we will get you yet.” 

By that little incident alone the ultimate fate 
of Everest was sealed. 


CHAPTER XI 
TACKLING THE MOUNTAIN IN EARNEST 


Five miles beyond the Rongbuk Monastery we 
came by good fortune to a patch of grass and a 
clear, fresh spring, at the tongue of the main Rong- 
buk Glacier, 16,400 feet up. Here, although we were 
still 15 miles away from the mountain, we built our 
Base Camp, for this was the farthest limit to which 
the yak-drivers could be induced to go. 

We urged them forward. The junction of the 
East Rongbuk Glacier, 3 miles or so higher up the 
valley, would have been preferable for us, but the 
superstitious Tibetans refused absolutely to advance. 
Quite an ugly scene occurred when our men tried to 
prevent their throwing the baggage down at the 
foot of the glacier. Nothing would induce them 
to go beyond. They cried out that their yaks would 
die and devils wouldharmthem. After along parley, 
cut short by those who had already unloaded, and 
were taking their yaks away, we had to accept the 
situation. Eventually we made a comfortable place 
of it, pitching our tents on the grass. Then we 
started on the work of sorting stores and equipment 
and repacking that which was to go up the glacier. 
Nearly 20 miles up the turning, twisting valley, 

148 


A LAMA WITH PRAYER WHEEL ANI) ROSARY. 








THE Base CAMP. 


TACKLING THE MOUNTAIN IN EARNEST 149 


General Bruce planned to make the Advanced 
Climbing Base. 

In order that the reader may understand the 
system of Himalayan climbers in tackling giant 
mountains, I must explain the plan originally 
elaborated and named by Longstaff “‘ The Polar 
method,” by which the attack on Everest was to 
be made. We were to advance by stages, laying 
and stocking depots each one day’s march apart. 
Along the glacier we measured a day’s progress for 
laden porters at about 5 miles, involving an ascent 
of 1,000 to 1,500 feet. On the mountain we 
were to build depots at about 2,000 feet vertical 
intervals and continue these camps to the utmost 
limit which our porters could possibly reach. Each 
camp would have to be stocked with supplies and 
provided with a permanent party of porters, with one 
of General Bruce’s Gurka soldiers as Camp Master. 
They were the connecting links. One party of 
porters receiving the stores brought up from below 
would shift them one stage up the glacier to the 
next depot, handing over to the men stationed 
there, until the equipment was all so moved up 
to the Advanced Climbing Base. No one, unless 
he had taken part in this work, could realize what 
labour these preparations entailed. It was all vital 
work too. No attempt to climb the mountain can 
be started until this chain of depots is established 
and working smoothly. The depots being com- 
pleted and the highest carried to within 2,000 feet 


160 THROUGH TIBET TO EVEREST 


of the summit. at least—because it was estimated 
that 2,000 feet would be the absolute maximum the 
climbers could do in the last stage of the climb— 
then the climbing parties were to move up from the 
Base and acclimatize themselves by resting at the 
depots for a period of some days at each as far as 
the Advanced Base. Then they would go up the 
step ladder of depots on the mountain, making their 
desperate spring from the last depot to the summit. 
Whether the summit could be reached or not, there- 
fore, depended very largely upon the height to 
which the porters could carry the highest depot. 
We could not, before actually trying, determine 
where this depot would be. It meant carrying 
loads far beyond the previous world’s record height. 
There was no experience to guide us. Nobody 
knew. Everyone must make their utmost effort. 
That was all. 

The problem of climbing Everest, besides being 
one of the adaptation of the human body to altitude, 
accomplished through gradual progress by this 
Polar method, is also a problem of weather. In 
the early season, which had always been selected 
by the Expeditions up to now, there are only eight 
weeks at the most of stable weather after the thaw 
at the end of winter before the advent of the monsoon 
in the first week of June. There is another period 
of fine weather, but in uncertain spells, in the 
autumn, from the middle of August, until the middle 
of September when the monsoon clears up and the 


TACKLING THE MOUNTAIN IN EARNEST 151 


weather becomes brilliantly fine. This period, 
which has been accepted as the best in the last fifty 
years of Himalayan travel, has never been used by 
the Everest Expeditions, although it was the idea 
of Sir Francis Younghusband that this 1922 Expedi- 
tion would try both periods. If we failed in the 
spring, we were to stay on till the autumn. The 
accidental death of seven men which put an end to 
this Expedition prevented the carrying out of Sir 
Francis Younghusband’s plan. 

To climb Everest in the spring is to race against 
the monsoon. The period is short; the entife 
preparation as well as the climbing must be com- 
pleted before the first week of June. In this there 
is the danger of the party exhausting itself faster 
than it acclimatizes, also the danger of confusion 
should any hitch occur in the preliminaries. Every- 
thing has to work to a carefully scheduled plan, 
and any accident, stores failing to arrive, porters 
falling sick, or unexpected bad weather, will upset 
the whole scheme. The men must be divided into 
groups, taking turns in the exhausting preparation 
work, pioneering the way by the Ice Cliff up which 
steps must be cut and ropes fixed, establishing the 
high depots on the top of the cliff and beyond up 
the North-East Ridge—forging a way for those 
who will make the last triumphant ascent. It is 
a matter of team work to a leader’s scheduled plan. 
Against this mountain a party of two or three setting 
out on their own would make no headway. Final 


152 THROUGH TIBET TO EVEREST 


advance is only possible when the ladder has been 
lifted and held in position by collaborators below. 
In this Polar method of advance there is an 
essential psychological principle to be maintained. 
Each advance, each depot built, must be considered 
as ground won from the mountain. It must be 
consolidated and held, and no man must ever 
abandon an inch of ground won, or turn his back 
to the mountain once he has started the attack. A 
retreat has a disastrous moral effect. If the band 
of men are checked by unforeseen emergencies or 
bad weather, they must hold their ground and 
advance again a8 soon as opportunity permits. 
The battle ’s half lost once an assaulting party turns 
its back to the mountain. They must keep going 
forward until they win through. Also the health 
and morale of the native porters becomes tremend- 
ously important. These men are to be called upon 
to make a greater effort in weight-carrying than has 
ever been accomplished before in the world. It is 
upon their work in establishing the last depot within 
climbers’ reach of the summit that the success or 
failure of the entire enterprise depends. Their 
strength and physical efficiency must be nursed, 
and they must be encouraged to make the enormous 
effort. When the highest possible depot is estab- 
lished, then the climbers form a party of the fittest 
among them to make the last dash to the top. The 
others must support them closely and be ready to 
go out in aid at once if they are late or missing. 


TACKLING THE MOUNTAIN IN EARNEST 153 


Such is the ideal plan, but it was all new on 
Everest ; and we could not tell how it would work 
out. We had to buy our experience. 

Soon after we arrived at the site of the Main Base 
Camp, General Bruce organized and despatched a 
reconnaissance party consisting of four experienced 
senior members of the Expedition; this party had 
the advantage of having Longstaff with them, with 
all his valuable Himalayan knowledge. Their task 
was to explore the East Rongbuk Glacier as far as 
the snowfield at the foot of Everest, and to find sites 
for the depots. It will be remembered how Mallory 
reached the head of the glacier by crossing the Hlak- 
pa La Pass from the Kharta Valley on the far 
eastern side, and how he had left the lower part of the 
valley unexplored. The reconnaissance party had 
therefore now to spend nearly ten days of precious 
time exploring this lower valley approach. They 
had a hard time, travelling light and sleeping out 
in the open in the intense cold of early April in 
temperatures falling to 20° below zero at nights; 
they accomplished fine work although they exhausted 
themselves and their porters. They chose a way up 
the left bank of the glacier, fixing sites for three 
depots. The first was to be at the snout of the East 
Rongbuk Glacier at 17,500 feet ; the second, Frozen 
Lake Camp, at 19,500 feet, is a protected hollow by 
the banks of a little glacial lake at the mouth of a 
lateral valley to the west; the third, Snowfield 
Camp, at 21,000 feet, at the margin of the open 


154 THROUGH TIBET TO EVEREST 


glacier basin at the head of the valley below the 
eastern ridge and face of Everest. 

While the reconnaissance party was away, General 
Bruce completed the organization of a corps of 
fifty Tibetans, whom he persuaded to come for a 
short time from the last villages below the Rongbuk 
Monastery to help our men to move baggage, tents, 
equipment, oxygen cylinders and various apparatus 
up the glacier. These Tibetans consented to go as 
far as Camp 2, ‘“‘ Frozen Lake Camp,” but they 
would not go any farther because of their fear of 
devils living in the snow and ice. They would 
not walk over snow orice. Camp 2 could be reached 
by the moraine, avoiding the snow, so they were 
willing to go as far as that. 

There was much busy work to be done in those 
days of preparation, sorting out stores and equip- 
ment to go up the glacier. High up only light 
Whymper and Meade tents would be used, but at 
the base we were lucky in having big comfortable 
tents to live in. Even so, after a few days of the 
awful wind that springs up with the regularity of a 
clock at ten o’clock in the morning and blows 
always from the west, we were obliged to shift our 
comfortable tents to face away. 

This westerly wind has chilled itself thoroughly 
in its course down the whole range of the Himalaya 
over the tops of snowy peaks. When it reaches 
Mount Everest in its solitary position at the eastern 
end of the range, the current seems to stop to circle 


TACKLING THE MOUNTAIN IN EARNEST 155 


round the mountain, held to the immense precipices 
as if by some magnetic force. 

Inseparable from Everest is her ‘‘ streamer.” 
Mists evaporating from the Kangshung Glacier and 
snowy recesses rise up the southern precipice, are 
caught by the west wind and carried off horizon- 
tally, forming the great ever-changing, never- 
ceasing ‘‘ steamer ”’ drifting in heaving clouds from 
Everest’s ridges twisted and torn from the west- 
ward—for some unknown reason ever from the 
westward. Personally I admired the streamer. 
It added to the pictorial photographic effects of the 
mountain. The climbers had different notions 
about it. It was an evil omen for them. 

As an example, almost unbelievable, of the effect 
of Everest’s wind, our scientists definitely deter- 
mined that certain furrows and grooves and pitted 
surfaces we observed on the granite rocks were 
the direct effects of wind erosion. The same rocks 
on sheltered sides were smooth. It was no glacial 
action, but the very action of the wind. 

During the days of waiting, the Base Camp grew 
into quite a comfortable village. The Tibetans made 
stone huts for themselves among the rocks, our 
cooks built a kitchen and tables and fireplaces of 
stone. They foraged for the scanty brushwood that 
grows in the springtime in the valley. The climbers 
trained themselves on rock climbs and excursions. 

I busied myself with photography and the develop- 
ing of the motion-picture film I had exposed to date. 


156 THROUGH TIBET TO EVEREST 


I pitched a dark-room tent on the banks of the 
glacier river, and there got ready for the work of 
developing films at 16,000 feet above the sea, higher 
than the top of any mountain in Europe and miles 
higher than films had ever been worked before. If 
it be asked why the work should have been done up 
there, the answer is that I wanted to be able to check 
results as I went: along, and to repeat any scene if 
necessary. A photographer has a terrible difficulty 
to overcome in the static electricity caused by the 
extremely dry atmosphere. This trouble may spoil 
any part of a film reel, and the testing of ends of 
reels is no indication of any trouble that may have 
happened to the middle parts. 

I had four cameras, to ensure against the ever- 
present possibility of having one or more of them 
fall and break. With them went tripods, sup- 
plies of film and plates and developing tanks, a 
developing tent and other paraphernalia. All 
this was carried in specially made steel cases. 
It made quite a load to carry up the most difficult 
mountain trails in the world and finally to the 
dizzy heights—craggy slopes and glacial ice where 
the air was so thin that even simple walking caused 
me to pant and grow faint, and the heart pumped 
as though it were an internal trip-hammer! Event- 
ually with the help of my own Sherpas—valiant 
fellows—we got the cameras up to 23,000 feet. That 
is the altitude record for any motion-picture machine. 

This phase of the Expedition was my own par- 


TACKLING THE MOUNTAIN IN EARNEST 157 


ticular ordeal. I had been through some experi- 
ence in photographic journeys in the Himalaya, 
but photographing the Mount Everest climb certainly 
lives in my memory as the most difficult task I have 
ever encountered. Its difficulty and labour became 
anightmare. The plans for the Expedition embraced 
a day-to-day motion-picture record from the time we 
left India until we returned. During the first half 
of the journey to the approaches of Everest, mules 
carried the photographic baggage. After that we 
employed the yak. Now the yak is a quaint animal, 
a strange mixture of patient docility varied by 
lightning freaks of fancy. He carries great burdens 
very surefootedly at the rate of about a mile an hour, 
grazing a bit as he goes on. But he is capable of 
the most capricious wanderings if he is not treated 
exactly right. In riding him the yak driver covers 
the animal’s eyes while the rider mounts from behind. 
This isimportant. If the yak sees the act of mounting 
he remembers it, and after an hour or 80, perhaps, 
decides to reach back with his long horns, raise the 
happy rider from the saddle and send him flying a 
dozen feet or so. I tried the yak as a mount, but 
found the mule a better steed. 

For photographic service the yak was out of the 
question. I had to be ready as we went along 
to get into action at a moment’s notice. Events 
occurred quickly—there might be a curious group 
of natives to be photographed, or a mishap to our 
party, or a particular view which an oncoming mist 


158 THROUGH TIBET TO EVEREST 


was obscuring. I had eight natives for assistants. 
In an emergency one unpacked a camera, another a 
tripod, a third made the connection with the batteries 
for the electrical operation of the machine. In two 
minutes the picture was under way. These things 
were much too complex for the yak’s simple yet 
fantastic soul. 

Up near the topmost heights discharges of static 
electricity became phenomenal. In that high, dry 
atmosphere everything is highly electrified. The 
ordinary motion-picture camera will not work there. 
Even the friction of the celluloid film against the 
complex guides sets up great discharges. The higher 
the altitude the more extraordinary this sparking 
becomes, and obviously if occurring inside the film 
box it is disastrous ; the film when developed shows 
lightning-like flashes on the picture. 

In order that my pictures should not merely record 
a long series of these flashes, I, guided by past 
experience, had a camera made which in operation 
minimized friction. My films even then still showed 
flashes, but not enough to ruin them. 

This constant fight with static electricity was 
continued while developing the negatives in the 
dark-room tent. Every contact of the fingers with 
the celluloid brought a spark. Holding the film 
flat between the fingers brought a disastrous dis- 
play. I had to take the strips gingerly by the edges. 
That lessened the damage. 

Washing and drying negatives was another ticklish 


TACKLING THE.MOUNTAIN IN EARNEST 159 


problem. The temperature was always below freez- 
ing at night. When the sun came up the condition 
was one of slight thaw. I developed at night and 
left the films to wash until morning. In order that 
the water in which they soaked might not freeze. 
an oil lamp was kept burning in the tent. It was 
impossible to dry film at night because of the freez- 
ing, and during the day the wind blew with unceasing 
violence, and carried quantities of dust and grit, 
which speckled a film in a disastrous way. But for 
two hours after the sun was up the air was quiet, 
and I used that daily tranquil time for drying. It 
was always a scramble to get the advantage of this 
temporary condition. 

Thus I worked, not unhappily, against odds in 
my dark-room tent by the banks of the glacier 
river. Altogether there I developed during the 
progress of the Expedition 10,000 feet of film. 

So the days passed until the reconnaissance party 
returned. The whole energy of the Expedition 
was then thrown into the work of building the glacier 
depots and moving up a stream of stores, equipment, 
tents, ropes, climbing gear, oxygen-breathing 
apparatus and steel cylinders of compressed oxy- 
gen gas. The camp was always astir. All were 
pressing forward. Everybody wanted to be in the 
_vanguard ; to reach Snowfield Camp, and get a 
peep at the mountain from close quarters. I went 
up and down the line and had many opportunities of 
Seeing the busy work of the climbers and porters. 


CHAPTER XII 


HOW CLIMBERS LIVE AT GREAT 
ALTITUDES 


The daily task of the Sherpa porters was to go 
from camp to camp carrying forward the supplies, 
apparatus and provisions brought up by other parties 
of porters from below. Thus there was a human 
track-conveyer system established up the glacier, 
feeding the advanced climbing base and the high 
bivouacs from the Main Base Camp. Themen lived on 
the glacier week after week doing this arduous work. 
They never complained, but remained as cheerful as 
young boys the whole time. We could hear them 
singing mountain songs, their voices echoing through 
the valley. Catching sight of one of the members 
of the party approaching they would shout their 
delight and run out and conduct him to the camp, 
where he would find a hot meal of a sort prepared 
within a few minutes’ notice by the cooks. 

The path followed from camp to camp, sometimes 
over the moraine, sometimes over the ice, becoming 
at length well defined by the many footsteps that 
passed. Between Frozen Lake and Snowfield Camps 
the glacier was twisted and broken into a belt some 


two miles wide of broken, splintered bergs of ice, 
160 


LIFE AT GREAT ALTITUDES 161 


some towering to a hundred feet in height. Here 
the men would strap steel spikes to the soles of their 
boots and set out along one of the strangest paths 
imaginable. They would find their way, turning 
and twisting in every possible direction, past the 
towers and pinnacles of ice, avoiding fissures fifty 
feet deep, descending walls of ice a hundred feet in 
depth, following old widened crevasses, climbing 
ladders that we cut in the ice, guided by a line of 
little flags we fixed to wooden pegs hammered to 
the tops of ice-hillocks. These showed the way 
when storms and mists concealed the more distant 
landmarks and snow covered the foot-tracks. We 
named this region ‘‘ The Fairyland of Ice.”” Actu- 
ally it had been a work of many days to discover 
a path by which to penetrate the maze. Bergs and 
cliffs and crevasses blocked the way a dozen times 
to the first exploring party, and were circumvented 
only by retracing steps and starting afresh from 
some new direction. 

It was truly a fairyland. The beauty lay in the 
fantastic shapes of the ice formations, carved by 
evaporation in the dry air of 20,000 feet and hol- 
lowed by wind erosion. In the sunlight all was 
dazzling whiteness ; but in the shaded hollows one 
saw delicate transparent blue-green hues. And what 
sunlight! The brightest summer sunshine we know 
at home would be mellow compared with this light 
resembling the radiance of white-hot metal. The 
air was sharp, freezing, rarefied, but the tropical 


162 THROUGH TIBET TO EVEREST 


sun, almost vertical above, scorched the eyes into 
snow-blindness, and its ultra-violet rays, intensified 
by reflection from all directions, could strike men 
down helpless in the agony of mountain lassitude 
and mountain sickness if they were not properly 
protected. We usually tried to make the passage 
of this beautiful but deadly region in the early 
morning or late evening to escape the menace of 
the ultra-violet rays. 

It was a marvel to see our Sherpas work. Prob- 
ably nobody but the Sherpa could have done what 
they did. All their lives these men have lived in 
the highest mountains, accustomed from childhood 
to altitude and to the carrying of heavy loads. 
They inherit the cheerful spirit of the Nepalese plus 
the acclimatization to a rarefied atmosphere of the 
Tibetans, since the Sherpa race is an intermixture 
of Nepalese and Tibetan blood. Their villages lie 
in Nepal on the borders of Tibet on the south side 
of the Himalaya. 

Sherpas are fighting people; and no little trouble 
arose from their “ scraps ” with the Tibetans, whom 
they look down on and treat rather roughly. They 
fight among themselves, too. I remember one 
awful fight between two of ourmen. They battered 
each other unmercifully with fists and stones and 
bars of wood. Both were in hospital under our 
doctor; but next morning we actually saw them 
doing up each other’s bandages with the greatest 
care and mutual pity. They had exhausted their 


LIFE AT GREAT ALTITUDES 163 


steam ; the fight was over, and their happy natures 
were restored. 

At 16,000 feet they could carry loads of 50 to 
60 lb. in weight. They carried 20 to 25 lb. weight 
to a height of 25,000 feet, where white men could 
hardly progress even when unburdened. These 
supermen of our porters were nicknamed ‘The 
Tigers.” There is almost no limit to the powers of 
these men in weight-carrying on mountains; and 
should they ever become animated by a sporting 
desire to reach the top of the mountain, they could 
undoubtedly do it more easily than any white man. 
When they first saw our unsightly and awkward 
oxygen tanks, they laughed heartily and said, 
‘“* The air in our country, sir, is quite good. Why 
do you bring bottled air from England?” But 
later, when, at grips with the mountain, all were at: 
the end of their tether, we used to give the men the 
gas to revive them. When they tasted it they 
realized how wonderful it was and how it stilled the 
heaving of the heart. Then often they would come 
to us and say: ‘“ Sir, I—little sick to-day—please, 
sir—I want a little ‘ English air’.” 

The men who succeeded best on the mountain, it 
was interesting to note, were of the small, supple, 
trim type. These did better than the big men. 

One must remember that they were not in a true 
sense picked men. They were recruited from men 
seeking work in Darjeeling, and the life of the bazaar 
and the town must inevitably have a deteriorating 


164 THROUGH TIBET TO EVEREST 


influence on the spirit and physique of mountain- 
dwellers. As a general principle, it would be better 
to recruit the porters on any future occasion from 
the heart of their own country. This could be done 
with the good help of the ruler of Nepal by permitting 
some one to go to Solakumbu, or else by sending a 
native representative to inform the people of the 
objects of the Expedition and tell them that men 
were wanted. They could then come to Darjeeling 
specially to join the Expedition. 

We noticed on the whole, exceptions apart, that 
the veterans of the former Expedition were not so 
successful as the fresh men. Their morale was not 
so good. They had become “old soldiers”’ and, 
knowing the ropes, some of them shifted their work 
on to the new men. Our common human nature! 
Always the stumbling-block that stands in the way 
of achievement! But on the whole the entire corps 
worked splendidly ; and one cannot praise their 
spirit too much, particularly when one realizes what 
losses and hardships they suffered and how at the 
end of this 1922 Expedition seven of them met a 
terrible death in the great disaster on the Ice Cliff. 
A proof of their spirit is that survivors, who even 
had relatives among the killed, volunteered again 
for the 1924 Expedition. 

Bruce introduced a spirit of competition among 
the men. He promoted the “ stars’? into troop- 
leaders with promise of honours and extra pay. So 
the corps became a trained team, which is the goal 


LIFE AT GREAT ALTITUDES 165 


to be aimed at. They followed with the keenest 
interest the progress of the various climbs, and 
competed to be included in the parties to go highest. 
All, with the exception of the few “ old soldiers,” 
vied with each other to carry the heaviest loads. It 
was never necessary to tell any man, “‘ To-day you 
will carry this”? ; and to another, ‘ You will carry 
that.? Each man selected the heaviest he could 
bear. They felt that the eyes of the world were 
upon them; and they knew that they would win 
glory when they returned to their homes in Dar- 
jeeling. They would all get good chits—mementos 
from the leader of the Expedition and perhaps 
medals which they could cherish all their lives. 
It was gratifying that when they did return to 
Darjeeling the residents received them with pride 
and hospitality, and made them feel that they had 
done great work. Who could say that these men 
were not real sportsmen ? | 

The Base Camp stood at the gateway of “ The 
Dead World.’”? Below was the region of life. Above 
was the region of rock and ice and snow. The 
kingdom of King Cold. To a real mountaineer— 
that is, to a lover of mountains—mountains are 
always living and friendly things. They always 
have a message to convey to him. He can never 
feel unhappy or lonely among them. People have 
often said to me concerning my journeys in the 
Himalaya: ‘‘ What hardships and what horrors 
you have suffered!’? They never understand my 


166 THROUGH TIBET TO EVEREST 


answer: ‘I never feel happier or fitter in my life 
than when up on the high glaciers!’’ The seven 
weeks I spent on Everest’s glaciers were seven of 
the best weeks of my travels that I shall ever 
remember. 

Unless a man can feel at home and happy among 
the mountains, he has no right to call himself a 
mountaineer. Certainly he should never go on an 
expedition to the Himalaya. He should remain 
where there are railways and hotels, for there will 
be no railway to take him to Snowfield Camp at 
the head of the East Rongbuk beneath the walls of. 
Everest, the highest camp in the world which men 
have ever built and lived in permanently. It was 
the snow-home of the Everest climbers for two solid 
months. 

Scientific people, before the Expedition, predicted 
that human beings would not be able to live for 
long at such a height as 21,000 feet unless they 
came down frequently to lower elevations to rest. 
But we broke up this theory. When we first arrived 
at great altitudes our bodies were convulsed by 
violent panting, our hearts beat like hammers and 
our lungs heaved and rasped for breath, even when 
we 80 much as raised our arms to manipulate the 
ice axe to cut a step, to lift a rucksack to our backs, 
or to take one or two steps forward on aslope. Yet 
when we sat down and rested or slept at night 
motionless in our sleeping-bags, when there was no 
exertion, the panting would cease. We found after 


LIFE AT GREAT ALTITUDES 167 


acclimatization that we could sleep at any height. 
Actually in the Expedition of 1924 Norton and 
Somervell slept at a height of 27 000 feet. 

This power of acclimatization was one of the 
important discoveries of the Expedition. It proved, 
what nobody previously imagined, that the human 
body is such a highly adaptable piece of mechanism, 
that it would even be perfectly feasible for a fit man 
to acclimatize himself by living two or three years 
on Everest and then walk to the summit. 

One of the chief problems, then, in climbing 
Everest is to effect this necessary acclimatization as 
rapidly as possible. A party could of course be 
brought to Tibet to acclimatize during the winter, 
but most members would object to the tedium and 
discomfort. 

Thus our task in the depot camps was to make 
ourselves comfortable and happy, so that we might 
acclimatize as quickly as possible. It was vital that 
we should enjoy ourselves and keep up our spirits, 
and the spirits of our native porters. Depression 
is one of the subtle ways by which the mountain 
fights us. It is one of her defences, that she makes 
us sick, tired, listless, quarrelsome with our com- 
panions and disinclined mentally to continue the 
fight. She exhausts our minds quite as much as 
she exhausts our bodies. At great altitudes mental 
capacity becomes dulled and memory hazy. This 
leads easily to nervous physical tremors upsetting 
heart, lungs and stomach, and over the mind falls 

M 


168 THROUGH TIBET TO EVEREST 


a worse cloud of mental confusion. We hardly 
know what is the matter at the time, although we 
realize it fully afterwards. Our very intelligence 
has been affected! We have been suffocated as if 
by some subtle, invisible, odourless poison gas. We 
find ourselves returning to a primitive, elemental 
state. The only things that interest us are food 
and sleep and bodily comfort. The too frequent 
sight of our companions’ faces annoys us. We 
quarrel with them over the most trivial details. 
Our appetites become capricious and demand a 
change of diet at every meal, and the sight of what 
is ordinarily a favourite dish here served three or 
four times in succession raises our temper to a storm. 
Here is a sad instance. We were all very fond of 
a certain type of sausage, and our cook had been 
feeding us a good deal on them. One day, I 
remember, when these were again served, one of our 
party (no names!!!) lost control of himself, shov- 
elled the whole pan of frizzling Hamburgers into the 
cook’s face, and pocketing a lump of cheese, went 
off to his tent repeating odd phrases in English, 
Hindustani and Tibetan. The blame was on the 
old mountain and her poisons. We each had to 
excuse one another’s temper ! 

I used to take careful note of the climbers after 
their big climbs and watch the psychological effects 
of extreme altitude. In all cases they complained 
that their mental impressions when high up were 
vague. They all suffered from mental depression 


LIFE AT GREAT ALTITUDES 169 


and inertia. Finch was, for instance, the most 
ardent Kodak snapshotter I have ever met. He 
always had a Kodak slung on his shoulder, and 
photographed enthusiastically to right and left. 
He took something like 2,000 snapshots on the 
Expedition. When he made his great climb to the 
world’s record of 27,250 feet with Bruce, he suffered 
s0 much, in spite of the fact that he was using 
oxygen, from this ‘‘ mental stagnation” as he 
described it, that he did not even take his camera 
out of its case from the moment he left the Ice Cliff 
Camp to the time when, after reaching his highest, he 
returned again to camp. Now an ambition, which 
ranked with him equally to making a climbing 
record, was to get pictures of the upper parts of the 
mountain; and the fact that he failed to get a 
single picture because, as he said, ‘ he could not be 
bothered,”’ was a striking example of the paralysing 
power of this mental lassitude. Even at the 
relatively low height to which I climbed on the 
mountain, 23,000 feet (a height which only a few 
men reached before, but which on Everest counted 
as nothing at all), I felt myself overpowered. This 
disinclination to do anything was of course the 
greatest enemy to my work. I had to fight hard 
to overcome it, because my motion-picture cameras 
were complicated and when making a film there are 
lots of things to think about—to say nothing of the 
terrible enemy—“ static.”’ 

Doctors and scientists who have studied the 


170 THROUGH TIBET TO EVEREST 


symptoms recorded by the Expedition during the 
ascent of Everest have formed a theory that they 
indicate a state of hyperthyroidism, caused by the 
abnormal interruption of the functions of the thyroid 
gland. Dr. Gale of Glasgow, the noted authority, 
said ‘‘the troubles were in many respects similar 
to the first signs of Thachardia.” A symptom of 
disorder of the thyroid gland is a distaste for meat. 
That is what we felt to a large degree. We disliked 
our sausages and tinned meats in the high camps, 
although these were our favourite dishes in the 
journey across the plateau. We preferred cereals, 
Swiss milk, jam, biscuits and tea. I remember that 
when I stayed four days and four nights at Ice Cliff 
Camp at 23,000 feet, I ate no meat at all, and enjoyed 
a diet of Swiss milk mixed-with strawberry jam. 
This may sound terrible, but it makes good food for 
such conditions. I considered it ‘tasty ” (although 
it wouldn’t be so to everyone), it has powerful 
nourishing and heat-sustaining properties, it re- 
quired no cooking and caused no labour. In that 
alone it has a supreme merit. The torture and 
horror of “work” at high altitudes cannot be 
understood by those who have not suffered the 
conditions. If anything has to be done a man 
immediately cogitates: ‘‘ Does it mean work? If 
80, I’ll leave it—I cannot do it—let me remain still 
—while still I am all right. Moving will start that 
killing hammering and heaving of the heart and 
lungs again.’ 


LIFE AT GREAT ALTITUDES 171 


Of course, under the strain of altitude it is not 
only functions of gland, heart or lungs that are upset. 
Another disturbing influence is the effect of the 
ultra-violet rays. These are known to be beneficial 
to human beings at normal altitudes and are now 
used by doctors for curative purposes, but in these 
lofty regions we meet ultra-violet rays of short 
wave-length which are said, like X-rays, to have a 
baneful effect on the tissues of the body. French 
scientists have stated recently that the air on the 
top of Mont Blanc and Monte Rosa contains minute 
quantities of nitrogen which has undergone, through 
the action of light rays, certain minute atomic 
modification which causes it to become poisonous 
to the blood. 

As regards the thyroid gland and its relation to 
altitude, Dr. Gale said that he would expect to find 
the best air pilots and members of future Everest 
Expeditions would be men of slow pulse, stolid 
countenance and quiet speech, whose thyroid gland 
condition shows a slight hyperthyroidism. Odell, 
Irvine and Somervell (particularly Odell), who 
proved themselves so marvellously successful on 
Everest, would seem to substantiate Dr. Gale’s 
theory. 

We disproved many established popular ideas. 
We found that whisky and particularly rum in 
moderate quantities were beneficial. A ration of 
rum should be issued every night in the glacier 
camps, to be taken as men turn into their sleeping- 


172 THROUGH TIBET TO EVEREST 


bags for the night. This induces comfort and sleep. 
Future expeditions should carry the rum in high 
overproof concentration for transportation purposes 
in small wooden casks. 

Finch told me that cigarette-smoking added 
greatly to his comfort, so it did also to the Sherpa 
porters. I had brought with me 20,000 cigarettes 
for my own photographic porters, knowing how 
these men enjoy smoking. They smoked them all. 
I got further supplies for them from an enterprising 
Chinese trader who opened a little shop at the Base 
Camp, selling out his stock in two days. He sold 
us Chinese ‘‘ Favourite Horse’’ cigarettes at two 
Tupees a thousand! He was pleased with his 
business and regretted it would take him too long 
to go and replenish his stock as he had come 1,000 
miles from China with his twelve donkeys. How 
he made his profit I don’t know. He was a remark- 
ably enterprising man. 

When Finch was climbing at 26,000 feet he noticed 
that unless he could distract his mind from worry 
about his breathing of oxygen and let this become 
an entirely subconscious process, he suffered. He 
had thirty cigarettes with him. After smoking and 
inhaling he discovered that it took his mind off the 
question of breathing and made the act altogether 
an involuntary process. Probably tobacco acts 
indirectly as a counter-irritant of some kind or other 
on the system under abnormal conditions. Cigar- 
ettes were absolutely indispensable to the Sherpas. 


LIFE AT GREAT ALTITUDES 173 


Many people ask what a mountaineer’s wardrobe 
is like. The great idea is to get something light and 
windproof. On Everest the wind is worse than the 
actual temperature, which does not go lower than 
about 30° below zero, no greater cold than the winter 
temperatures in parts of America. Climbing, you 
cannot bear the weight of furs. The freest and 
warmest anti-wind dress is camel-hair underclothing 
with plenty of air space next to the skin, topped with 
loose sweaters and woollen knitted jackets. Over 
the lot you wear a windproof blouse and trousers 
in the Arctic fashion. Headgear must provide pro- 
tection from the ultra-violet sun-rays. The under- 
clothes of camel hair serve also as pyjamas in 
your sleeping-bag, so that on rising in the morning 
the warm air next the body is not disturbed. You 
do not “tub” on the glacier! This sleeping-suit 
is all you need inside your sleeping-bag at night. 
In the morning you have only to slip into your outer 
skins, after breaking away the little icicles that have 
collected round your beard. Then you get into 
your loose boots made with thick leather soles nailed 
on the rim and only stumpy nails on the sole because 
their iron has the property of conducting heat and 
cold between foot and ground. Your boots must. 
be big enough to allow at least three thick woollen 
socks, and you will keep away frostbite if you carry 
spare dry socks to change in your back-sack. If 
the gale is raging outside the tent, you can slip on 
your windproof blouse and pull it down over the 


174. THROUGH TIBET TO EVEREST 


windproof trousers which themselves are bound to 
your ankles by puttees leaving the knees loose and 
free, so there is no chink by which the wind can enter. 
Then with a wide-brimmed sunproof hat, with ear- 
flaps ready to pull down, snow spectacles, woollen 
gloves with outer leather covers hanging by a tape 
round your neck, and the skin of your face and 
beard covered with a thick layer of white grease to 
deflect ultra-violet rays, you will be equipped for 
the day. 

Finch, who had a scientific brain, invented a 
wonderful green quilted eiderdown suit of aeroplane 
fabric, doped. Not a particle of wind could get 
through. Underneath he used to wear a suit of 
silk underclothes, then one of wool, then another, 
then a fourth of thicker wool, then a fifth of the 
thickest substance he could find—then he really 
began to dress in earnest, when he was to go up to 
the highest camp with the wind reaching a velocity 
of 100 miles an hour. For myself I always found 
two woollen jackets with the layer of camel hair 
beneath sufficient, but I did not go beyond 23,000 
feet. 

I cannot conclude this description of our life high 
up without trying to describe to you something of 
the romantic beauty of our surroundings at these 
glacier camps. This beauty was what always 
mastered me; and I strove to interpret it in my 
moving pictures. Many times I used to go out with 
my men carrying my cameras in the evening time 





oo 


19,5 


CAMP. 


LAKE 


FROZEN 


LIFE AT GREAT ALTITUDES 175 


to photograph the amazing majestic, towering 
mountains, the fantastic ice pinnacles and forma- 
tions, the ice funnels, the glacial lakelets, the rock 
mushrooms, where boulders balance themselves on 
stems of ice, and the enchanting effects of light and 
shade and cloud shadow on the ice worlds around 
our camps. 

In the evening these solitudes wear their most 
entrancing aspect. The evening light beams play 
like quicksilver on the ice-bound slopes; the 
shadows of the night gather in the ice caverns and 
recesses of the glacier below. But the delicate soft 
mists that form themselves out of nothing, float 
awhile, then evaporate, or are torn apart by the 
winds and scattered over the ridges, are more 
beautiful still. On the mountain ridges the cork- 
screws and whirls of fine powdered snow lift and 
sweep along the skyline, swamped sometimes by 
some bombshell of dense cloud which sweeps up and 
violently obliterates all. 

Once at Frozen Lake Camp we were startled at 
night by the roar of a great rock avalanche—“ the 
artillery of the mountains ’’ we called it. The hill- 
men have a superstition that a rock falling near a 
camp and hurting nobody is a lucky omen. They 
Say it is the spirits of the mountains, the Zhidag, 
who throw the rocks, and if they fail—well ! 

From Frozen Lake and Snowfield Camps Everest 
could be seen commanding the sky, filling the val- 
ley and dominating everything. What frightening 


176 THROUGH TIBET TO EVEREST 


aspects the great mountain can display. Generally 
her precipices are concealed by mists, but when they 
clear she shows the never-ceasing anger of the awful 
wind, blowing always from the west, veiling and 
unveiling the topmost ridges with the smoke of 
driven snow. We often used to look up at those 
ridges and watch the snow being literally torn up 
and flung a thousand feet into the air. ‘‘ The worst 
mountain in the world for wind,’ we would say to 
each other. It was a grim thought for the climbers. 
They knew they would be up against it in earnest 
when the time came for the big assault, for there is 
no escape from that hurricane of the west. It 
never ceases, night or day, to rage round the summit. 

I spent many long hours on the glaciers in the 
evenings, trying to record in my motion picture 
these amazing scenes. I tried so to compose my 
pictures as to interpret, if possible, the soul-meaning 
of these mountains. For me they really lived. I 
was in love with their beauty just a3 much as I was 
awed by their might and majesty and power. 
Everest assumed an extraordinary living character, 
a living thing of fascinating beauty, of fearful power. 
Ever frowning down on us, she was angered, so it 
seemed, that we should come to violate her sanc- 
tuaries that never before had suffered the foot of 
man. 

The tropical sun has lowered itself behind the 
mountains. There is no twilight. Evening jumps 
to night. The mercury runs down as if you had 


LIFE AT GREAT ALTITUDES 177 


made a hole in the bulb. You must get back 
quickly to the camp, where everybody else has long 
since turned in to his sleeping-bag. Another day 
has passed and brought nearer the day of the great 
struggle for which we have been working and 
preparing. 


CHAPTER XIII 
COMBAT! ACHIEVEMENT! REPULSE! 


Everything was ready for decisive conflict with 
the mountain. Snowfield Camp had become a well- 
established base for the start. It was decided that 
the first attempt would be made without oxygen, 
and Mallory, Norton, Somervell and Morshead, four 
of the hardiest and best men that the Alpine Club 
could send, were to make up the party. 

The first task, which we really did not consider 
as part of the climbing but as one of the depot stages, 
was to climb the Ice Cliff. This, however, is one of 
the most dangerous parts of the whole ascent of the 
mountain. To anyone standing below, the Ice Cliff 
looms so terrifying, so sheer with its walls of ice a 
thousand feet high, so threatening with its yawning 
crevasses, that it looks too terrible a thing ever to 
propitiate. But it has to be done. It is the only 
way to the summit. The depot-laying parties had 
already climbed the cliff and made a permanent 
camp at the top with four light tents on the shelf of 
ice some 25 yards long and 10 yards wide. The 
men had to cut about two thousand footsteps in 
the ice, and fix over 300 feet of hand ropes, attached 


to wooden pegs driven into the ice, following a zig- 
178 


COMBAT! ACHIEVEMENT! REPULSE! 179 


zag course to avoid the dangers of avalanches. We 
had to take the risk of these avalanches which we 
knew might crush us any moment. Steps were cut 
2 feet deep through the snow into the hard ice 
beneath. The danger lay in the snow coating 
slipping away or ‘ peeling.” This was most likely 
to happen when the snow was new and soft, before 
the sun had played on it and bound it tight to the 
ice beneath. 

Half-way up, at 22,000 feet, there was a nasty 
gaping ice crack 15 feet wide and abont 70 feet deep, 
whose green jaws rimmed absolute blackness. It 
was crossed by a natural snow bridge which the 
climbers reinforced by shoveHing on more snow and 
ramming it down. Ropes were hung across for the 
porters to cling to. 

The climbers were to rest a night at Ice Cliff 
Depot, and thence to try and gain the top of the 
mountain in two days, building an intermediate 
camp about 25,000 or 26,000 feet. But nobody had 
experience of such heights. They were beyond the 
previous world’s record and therefore plans were no 
more than hopes. 

That evening Mallory and Somervell, roped to- 
gether on account of the blasts of icy wind sweeping 
the top of the ridge, went out beyond the ledge 
where the camp was pitched to explore. They were 
breaking new ground now. The year before Mallory 
had not gone beyond the top of the Ice Cliff. They 
found the way barred by an enormous crevasse 


180 THROUGH TIBET TO EVEREST 


impossible to cross without a ladder, and they had 
none. Turning back they found another opening, 
walking away from the mountain and then zigzagging 
back along the top of the crest of the Ice Cliff and 
so reaching the North-East Ridge. At the Crest 
which overlooks both glaciers, the Main Rongbuk 
and the East Rongbuk, they were nearly blown off 
their legs by the wind. But the evening was rosy 
and clear and promised fairly well for the morrow. 

They returned to camp and found everything 
satisfactory—every man fit, and food had been 
prepared. Everybody ate heartily. Cooking was 
most difficult at this camp because water boiled at 
a very reduced temperature in the rarefied air. At 
this height the hand may be dipped quickly into 
boiling water without being scalded. Food will 
therefore not cook properly and it is difficult even 
to make tea leaves draw. One lives mainly upon 
‘“‘ sloppy ” foods, foods with plenty of sugar to cause 
heat. Dried figs and plums are good, but they tend 
to create thirst. Lemon drops, peppermint lollies, 
chocolate and dried fruits were some of the principal 
articles of diet of the party on the last stage of the 
climb. In fact, Mallory used a ration mostly of 
sugar, calling it ‘‘ quick fuel.” 

Ice Cliff Camp was a not uncomfortable and even 
@ cosy spot, protected as it was from the blasts of 
the west wind by huge ice blocks that stood in- 
securely towering some 70 feet above the tents, 
serving as a windbreak. 


COMBAT! ACHIEVEMENT! REPULSE! 181 


Next day, the 20th, the camp was astir at five 
o’clock. This was the day that was to bring the 
breaking of the Abruzzi world’s height record of 
24,600 feet made on the Bride Peak of Kashmir. 

Four of the porters, suffering from mountain 
sickness, had to be left behind ; but with five other 
sturdy and fit men the party got away at seven 
o’clock along the new zigzag track up into the gale 
that was tearing over the top of the pass and sweep- 
ing the ridge. Here step-cutting had to be done in 
places. Mallory cut 300 feet of steps. Up and up 
they went; going well. They passed the record 
height. They reached 25,000 feet. 

They then bore off the ridge to escape the wind 
and to find a platform large enough to allow two 
tents to be erected on the precipitous mountain side. 
As they were doing this building work, Morshead’s 
rucksack, laid aside, slipped from the rock and 
started down the slope. They saw it go bounding 
down the precipice to land on the glacier 4,000 feet 
below. Failing to find any flat place, they built 
two platforms with slabs of rock for the tents. The 
world’s record height broken, they were now actually 
to spend a night higher than men had ever reached 
before. They were in anything but tiptop con- 
dition. Morshead was in a really serious state 
from frostbite and exhaustion. Norton was frost- 
bitten, and Mallory’s fingers also suffere@ a slight 
frost-bite. 

Let Mallory describe the night : 


182 THROUGH TIBET TO EVEREST 


“Tt was bitterly cold and snowing hard. We 
crawled into our sleeping-bags after securing the 
tent guy ropes, lashing the tents down, and huddled 
together, tired out, to obtain as much rest as we 
could before tackling that terrific climb above us. 
A storm arose and we had to fight for our lives, 
realizing that once the wind got our little shelters 
into its ruthless grip they must inevitably be hurled 
with us inside them down to the glacier thousands 
of feet below. By one o’clock in the morning the 
gale had reached its maximum. The wild flapping 
of the canvas made a noise like machine-gun fire, 
so deafening was it that we could hardly hear our- 
selves speak. During the lulls we took it in turn to 
go outside to tighten up the slackened guy ropes. 
It was impossible to work in the open for more than 
three or four minutes at a stretch, so profound was 
the exhaustion induced by this brief exposure to the 
awful wind.” 

At eight o’clock, the earliest time that any start 
could be made, no one was feeling well. They all 
suffered from lethargy and headache owing to the 
rough, wakeful night. Morshead was done. He 
said: ““I think I won’t come with you, boys—I 
shall only keep you back, you go ahead and leave 
me—TI’ll be quite all right.” So tucking him up in 
his sleeping-bag and leaving food and water by him, 
Mallory, Somervell and Norton got away up the 
ridge. The air was so rarefied that only a step-by- 
step progress could be made. They were roped. 


COMBAT! ACHIEVEMENT! REPULSE! 183 


The men took it in turns to lead, because the greatest 
strain falls on the leader who makes the steps and 
sets the pace for the others. Mallory did a good 
deal of the leading. He had a marvellous process, 
said to be a secret of his own, worked out in Alpine 
climbs, of deep breathing in conjunction with his 
gait and upward swing while climbing. It is said 
that he could pass the air deeper through his lungs, 
and get more oxygen out of it, than others know 
how to. But he would never tell us his method of 
breathing. It was his secret. 

Step by step they climbed, higher and higher. 
They were working along the line of the ridge leading 
up to the North-East Shoulder, 27,000 feet. From 
there the ridge turns to the right and leads on by a 
gentle slope and then by a series of steps to the final 
pyramid and the summit. The way ahead was 
visible almost all the time. 

At about 2.15 p.m. they reached the head of the 
rocks a little way beneath the North-East Shoulder, 
a height of 26,800 feet. They saw the top of the 
shoulder clearly above them. Although capable of 
continuing they decided to stop here and return, 
because the summit was absolutely out of the 
question. It was a day’s journey ahead at the 
speed—the utmost possible—they were going at. 
They were cutting only a step at a time. At every 
step they had to lean forward, doubled over their 
ice axes—and take five or six gasping breaths. 

To reach the summit it would clearly be necessary 


184. THROUGH TIBET TO EVEREST 


to establish one higher camp somewhere near the 
position they were in now. This was impossible, 
as they had not the equipment. They had food 
only for the day. Furthermore they were gravely 
anxious about Morshead, left at the 25,000-feet 
camp. They turned back. 

They found Morshead’s sondition%4o serious that 
it was considered necessary to get him down that 
night to the lower camp on the Ice Cliff. It was 
already late and it would mean finishing the descent 
in the dark; but they thought it was necessary, so 
the whole party, with Morshead supported by each 
in turn, went down under tremendous difficulties. 
Some of Morshead’s fingers were entirely frost-bitten ; 
Norton was frost-bitten in his ear—he eventually 
lost a bit of it. 

Bad weather overtook them. Sinister grey clouds, 
flickering with lightning, surrounded them, the 
lightning illuminating the glistening ice slopes. 
Night was overtaking them, and all the men became 
reduced to absolute exhaustion. It was touch-and- 
go whether they would reach the Ice Cliff Camp in 
the dark. They had aconsiderable amount of step- 
cutting to do, and Morshead had to be supported at 
every step. 

Nearing the Ice Cliff they came to an enormous 
crevasse, and by their lanterns had to find a way 
down. The first man had to leap 15 feet into snow, 
not knowing if it would hold as he landed. Then 
the last candle in the lantern burnt out; and they 


COMBAT! ACHIEVEMENT! REPULSE! 185 


continued the descent, falling and slipping. Even- 
tually they reached the camp at eleven o’clock at 
night. They found the sick porters had left and 
taken the cooking pots with them, so they fell into 
their tents to sleep with no more than the cold stores 
they found in the camp. 

Next day the battered party descended the Ice 
Cliff safely. They were surprised to meet Finch 
and Geoffrey Bruce coming up with oxygen cylinders. 
I myself was with Finch and Bruce. I went with 
them to the top of the Ice Cliff and stayed there 
recording their climb by telephotography. I re- 
mained in the camp four days and nights. 

Finch and Bruce were working on an entirely 
independent plan of Finch’s. Finch had his own 
porters and planned to make his camp higher on the 
ridge and follow a line across the northern precipice 
cutting off the North-East Shoulder which Mallory’s 
party had steered for. Finch and Bruce used 
oxygen to ascend the Ice Cliff. This gave them 
an opportunity to test the apparatus thoroughly. 
Oxygen had a most marvellous effect: it reduced a 
climber to the equivalent of an elevation of 15,000 
feet above the sea. Each of our cylinders lasted 
about one and a half hours. When empty the 
cylinder, which weighed about 5 Ib., was thrown 
away to save the weight. Of course a large num- 
ber of spare cylinders had to be carried, and this, 
together with the weight of the apparatus, was its 
drawback. Still,on the whole, it was found that the 


186 THROUGH TIBET TO EVEREST 


ability to breathe which the gas gave outweighed 
the disadvantages of weight. But there was another 
factor to consider—the dependability of the appar- 
atus. Its failure, if relying wholly upon it, might 
mean death. The 1922 apparatus was in quite an 
experimental stage. 

Finch and Bruce and I spent the night at Ice 
Cliff Camp. It was my first night at this height ; 
and I did not sleep at all. Finch and Bruce had a 
very poor night too. The next morning they were 
very much exhausted, and we all sat about in the 
snow for nearly two hours in a sort of dazed con- 
dition, incapable of action. My camera was in my 
tent. To get it out of its box and take a phuto- 
graph of the men or the camp was a thing that filled 
me with horror. I felt overcome by a sort of mental 
coma. TI inch felt the same, and so did Bruce. They 
sat about for a long time doing nothing. Eventually 
we made some breakfast, but performing every action 
at a ridiculously slow speed. I felt so done up that 
I went to my oxygen apparatus, opened the tap 
wide and took a quarter of an hour’s heavy breathing 
of oxygen. This had a most marvellous effect. I 
became another being. I woke up and took notice. 
regained full strength and felt quite myself again. 
Finch also took oxygen and finally we finished 
breakfast and aroused the porters who, lying in 
their tents, were in a very lethargic condition. 

The weather was fine. Finch and Bruce got off 
at « very late hour with their porters. I watched 


COMBAT! ACHIEVEMENT! REPULSE! 187 


them with my telescope and managed to take some 
long-distance photographs of them, an enormous 
exertion only made possible by breathing oxygen 
all the time I was doing it. I saw them going, very, 
very slowly, up the North-East Ridge. When they 
passed over the snow, I observed them distinctly 
at a distance of about one mile. The long-distance 
motion pictures I took showed them quite clearly. 
After this I felt so done that I went to my tent and 
stayed there without eating anything beyond some 
tinned milk and jam during the rest of the day and 
the whole of the following night. 

Next morning I got up with difficulty, and spent 
most of the day attending to Songlu, my faithful 
Sherpa servant, who had been always with me, and 
had been Kellas’s faithful servant too. Songlu was 
an elderly man, and he reached this high point under 
enormous strain. He collapsed at the top. His 
condition was so serious that I thought he was going 
to die. I could not get him to take any food at all. 
His lips were deep blue and his face the cvlour of 
death. His heart seemed not to beat at all. Event- 
ually he took a little food and afterwards vomited 
it over his blankets. Two other of my photographic 
porters were also suffering from mountain sickness, 
but I had two fit men. 

Finch and Bruce had meanwhile gone up the 
Ridge. They reached 25,000 feet, where they built 
their high camp, and that evening they sent down 
the porters. These men told me that the weather 


188 THROUGH TIBET TO EVEREST 


was very bad up there, but that the sahibs were 
well. 

Next day I felt much better (acclimatization 
again !), and, without the aid of oxygen, I was able 
to get busy with my apparatus, do complicated 
manipulations of the electric batteries, and focus 
the camera on the upper ridge where I hoped to 
photograph Finch and Bruce climbing, but I saw 
nothing. Clouds covered the upper part of the 
mountain; the weather was bad and snow was 
falling. I covered the camera with a waterproof 
sheet, tied down, because it was such a difficult 
operation to get the camera and its supporting 
tripods firmly into position that, once fixed, I 
wanted to keep it so. I expected that Finch and 
Bruce would make their climb and be back in our 
camp that night, but they did not come. 

Next day I became anxious about them, and sent 
up a party of native porters to their camp with 
supplies of food and hot soups which I cooked and 
put into thermos bottles. These splendid porters 
found Finch and Bruce in the tents, where they had 
remained all day because of the bad weather. They 
were glad to receive the supplies and again sent the 
porters back to Ice Cliff Camp. 

The next day Finch and Bruce set out with Tejbir, 
one of the Gurkas who carried the spare oxygen 
cylinders. Tejbir did not use oxygen. They struck 
across the Northern Precipice, going along the 
sloping ledges of rock which form a frail and tricky 


COMBAT! ACHIEVEMENT! REPULSE! 189 


foothold, and steered straight towards the summit 
of the mountain. They passed the record of 
Mallory’s non-oxygen party first by 100 feet, then 
200 feet, and then 300 feet. Tejbir, however, broke 
down completely, and Finch and Bruce took over 
some of the oxygen cylinders that he was carrying 
and sent him back to the camp to wait for them. 
They were going steadily and reached a ledge when 
suddenly Finch, who was leading, heard Bruce give 
a frightened cry : ‘‘ Finch, I am getting no oxygen ! ” 

Finch immediately went to his companion, who 
had sunk to his knees on the rocks. It took Finch 
a few moments to descend the precipitous rock ledge 
to reach his companion, and he arrived only just in 
time to grasp him by the shoulder as he was falling. 
Collapsing he might have slipped over the precipice. 
Finch pushed his back against a rock, and, opening 
the tap of his own oxygen apparatus to allow a 
greater flow of gas to strengthen him, he unloosened 
Bruce’s apparatus. Bruce was rapidly sinking and 
breathed only in gasps. Finch shared his own 
oxygen delivery tube alternately with him while he 
made a quick survey of the apparatus to see what 
was wrong. He was well trained in the use of his 
machine, and knew exactly every part of it and how 
to test it. Running his fingers over the cylinders 
down the pipes to the pressure and flow meters, he 
found them all working. Some time went by, and 
still he could not find out what was the matter. 
Deprived of a large amount of his own oxygen by 


199 THROUGH TIBET TO EVEREST 


giving it to his companion, and under the strain and 
excitement of the moment, he himself started to 
give out and became dizzy. But fortunately he 
suddenly located the trouble in the tube of the flow 
meter, and a happy idea struck him. He had in his 
pocket a little spare T-shaped glass tube and some 
spare rubber pipe. He spliced this joint into his 
own oxygen tube and thus enabled both men to 
draw continuously from the same apparatus. It 
meant turning on the apparatus to the maximum- 
flow rate of delivery and using also the by-pass 
valve, fitted to the machine for use in emergency. 
This enabled both men to revive; and Finch was 
able to replace the damaged part in Bruce’s appar- 
atus. 

Again they persistently set out in a bold attempt 
to continue the climb. After a very short distance 
Bruce’s condition became serious, and he collapsed. 
Yet so great was his spirit that when Finch, realizing 
that it was impossible for them to go on, decided 
to return, Bruce expressed his utter disappointment 
at the abandonment of their hopes. Fearing 
another accident to the oxygen apparatus, they 
made their way down as quickly as they could. 

At the lower camp I had been experiencing grave 
anxiety for the two men. They were a day and 
night beyond their schedule time, and in the evening 
I burned at intervals out in the open all my spare 
unexposed motion-picture film. This made brilliant 
illumination, and I hoped by it to signal to the men 


COMBAT! ACHIEVEMENT! REPULSE! 191 


on the mountain that we were hanging on to this 
camp. 

Happily they rejoined me in safety and we all 
descended to Snowfield Camp below. Finch was 
exhausted and went soon after to the Base Camp, 
where his condition grew worse, and he became 
really ill. At this time Morshead was suffering 
terribly from his frost-bite, and Longstaff con- 
sidered his condition so serious that he decided to 
take him back to India immediately. So it was 
planned for Longstaff and Morshead to leave. 

There was still a short period left before the 
monsoon, and it was decided after a considerable 
amount of discussion that another attempt should 
be made in which Mallory, Somervell and Crawford 
would participate. Finch at first was also to join 
this party, but he broke down completely, and 
then it was he decided to go back with Dr. Long- 
staff and Morshead to India, Strutt also joining the 
party. 

I went up the glacier again from the Base Camp 
with Mallory, Somervell and Crawford, who were to 
make this renewed attempt, but with a very forlorn 
hope. It was on this attempt that a terrible accident 
occurred, a calamity of which I was an eye-witness. 

At Snowfield Camp, collecting every available fit 
porter (there were not many of them), they set out 
to climb the Ice Cliff and camp that night at the 
top. The porters were carrying oxygen apparatus, 
but the climbers were not using it. They intended 


192 THROUGH TIBET TO EVEREST 


it only as a reserve for the greater heights. I 
planned to go to the top of the cliff again, but when 
we reached its foot the snow was so soft and thick 
that my exhausted porters were unable to get the 
photographic apparatus up. After we had climbed 
about 150 feet they broke down, and I decided there- 
fore to return and try to obtain my picture by long- 
distance photography. I had a number of camera 
stations on the glacier below from which I could 
observe ; and lenses to keep the men in view at 
anything up to 24 miles. 

I had made my way back to Snowfield Camp and 
was there having a meal with Dr. Wakefield. We 
could see the figures of the others very, very slowly 
crawling up the face of the Ice Cliff. 

Every five minutes or so we would look up and 
watch their progress, step by step. It was now well 
on in the afternoon, and they were only a third of 
the way up the Ice Cliff. They were evidently 
having a terrible time in the soft snow. The next 
time Wakefield and I looked up to see how they 
were getting on, we saw they had vanished. There 
were no black figures on the face of the cliff. In- 
stead we saw the white, glistening surface broken 
into a broad ribbon widening out as it descended. 
I looked at Wakefield, and he looked at me and said, 
‘““Good God, they are gone!” ‘ What does it 
mean, man?” I cried. ‘ Avalanche,” he replied. 

We were so stunned that for a moment we could 
not think of doing anything. Then I got out my 


COMBAT! ACHIEVEMENT! REPULSE! 193 


telescope and saw the whole surface of the cliff torn 
away, and huge blocks of ice and snow lying confused 
on the surface. There was no trace of any human 
being. We called to the porters, pointed to the cliff, 
and told them what had happened. They became 
terribly excited and started to talk among each 
other and to cry. But we got them going and I 
ordered Songlu and one of the cooks in the camp 
immediately to heat liquid foods and put them in 
bottles. Then we got blankets and clothes and 
warm things from the camp reserve, expecting that 
we might haveto spend the night in the open before 
we could get back. Evening was already coming 
on. We did not know whether we would find any- 
body alive. 

With every available porter carrying the utmost 
he could in food and blankets, we struggled forward 
to reach the scene of the disaster. Wakefield and 
I took oxygen apparatus to help us get there as 
quickly as possible. Going to the utmost of our 
strength and speed, panting and blowing and slipping, 
we floundered in the soft snow. I remember, every 
time I slipped, I stopped for breath with my heart 
hammering. The thought of the men we were trying 
to reach, the realization that every moment we 
stopped to rest was a vital moment lost in saving 
their lives, made the torture worse. Perhaps they 
were buried in the snow, dying. At the foot of the 
abrupt ascent of the Ice Cliff we were forced from 
sheer exhaustion to sit awhile to gather strength. 


194 THROUGH TIBET TO EVEREST 


Round us were gigantic snowballs some 10 feet in 
diametcr that the avalanche had rolled to the bottom 
of the slope. Above we could see its tracks, the 
broken, rasped surface of the slope. But there was 
no trace of the men. Were they all engulfed ? 
We started to climb and after we got some way up 
we caught sight of some huddled, motionless figures. 
They were squatting at the very edge of a sheer ice 
wall about 80 feet high. Theavalanche had carried 
them to the edge, and they dared not move lest they 
should slip over. Where were the others? There 
had been fifteen porters altogether in the party with 
Mallory, Somervell and Crawford. Where were 
they ? 

Then we heard voices. We climbed higher up 
the slope, and found Mallory digging with his ice 
axe down in the jaws of the great crevasse at the 
foot of the ice wall. It had been an enormous 
crevasse, but now it was almost filled by the avalanche 
of snow. 

Mallory told us all he knew himself. As they 
were going up roped in three separate parties, 
Mallory, Somervell and Crawford ahead, leading 
and step-cutting for the porters who followed, they 
suddenly heard a rending, tearing split. Their feet 
went from underneath them ; and they were carried 
head over heels down the slope for about 150 feet 
and buried. Although severely shaken, they were 
able to dig themselves out, and looking below them 
they saw that some of the porters had been carried 


COMBAT! ACHIEVEMENT! REPULSE! 195 


to the edge of the abrupt fall. The others had dis- 
appeared and they could only surmise that they had 
gone over the edge. The porters had been lower 
down the slope, and so had been overwhelmed by 
the greater volume and force of the avalanche. 
They had been swept down with such force that 
some of the ropes between them had been snapped 
like threads of cotton. The men lowest on the 
slope had been carried over the edge into the 
crevasse. Some had fallen into the jaw of the 
crevasse and were buried deep in the soft snow. 
Others had shot over the gaping jaw and had hit 
the hard lips of ice. They, we found afterwards, 
had been instantly killed, their heads and bones and 
bodies smashed. 

We called upon the men we had brought out 
from the camp to aid us to find these fellows. These 
men were mostly blood relations, brothers and 
cousins of those who had vanished. But here, at 
the scene of the disaster, demoralization seized them 
and they would not stir. ‘‘ What was the use?” 
they said. They must all be dead. The spirits had 
struck at them. Survivors would only be braving 
the spirits’ wrath by going to help them. 

These Sherpas were not reared in the Tibetan 
superstitions, and had only just come into contact 
with them. But Tibetan ideas had permeated 
them. 

We Europeans went to the place where the men 
had fallen, and tien occurred the saddest episode 


196 THROUGH TIBET TO EVEREST 


of this tragedy. Five we found dead, shattered on 
the hard ice. But near by was the crevasse filled 
with soft snow. Two ropes, such as joined the men 
together, led to this crevasse and disappeared in the 
snow. We pulled, but could not budge the ropes. 
We dug into the fluffy stuff. Five feet down 
Mallory struck a boot, and, digging further, pulled 
a man out. He was unconscious, but, although 
buried for over two hours, he regained consciousness 
and later completely recovered. Eventually this 
man took part in the next Expedition in 1924! 

Another man was reached by digging along the 
strand of rope and the ice axestruck his boots. He 
had dived head-first into the snow. When dug out 
he was found to be stone dead. The rope round 
him went deeper into the snow. Mallory tugged at 
it. The other missing man was on that rope some- 
where dceper down, but we could dig no more. In 
the thin air we were prostrate. We had to leave 
the man in the crevasse. He must have plunged 
head-first down, we do not know how deep. 

I remember, when we decided to leave him, I 
looked back at that taut rope going on down into 
the jammed snow. Somewhere at its end the man 
lay buried. It was heartrending to leave, but we 
knew further effort was hopeless. 

Our task of getting the survivors down from their 
precarious position on the edge of the wall, though 
seemingly impossible, was eventually accomplished 
successfully. The men had completely lost their 


COMBAT! ACHIEVEMENT! REPULSE! 197 


nerve and were crying and shaking like babies. 
Mallory and Somervell got them across and round 
the ice wall one by one, and then Crawford and 
Wakefield and I revived them with the hot food 
and drinks we had in our flasks. It was pitiable to 
see their condition and their grief. They asked us 
where the others were, because some of the survivors 
had lost their brothers. They went to the crushed 
bodies and took their amulets and other religious 
family tokens from their necks. We asked the men 
if they wanted us to bring the bodies back. But 
they did not wish it, and so we covered them with 
snow, and left them. 

Their fatalistic attitude did not astonish us. The 
same thing affects even Europeans in those parts. 
In wild countries the cast of the native mind seems 
not obviously but in subtle ways to mould your 
own. You begin to feel subconsciously the fears 
that they feel, and to you also, in the deep recesses 
of your mind, the mountain becomes possessed of 
a fearsome spirit. At high altitudes these things 
come even more strongly upon you. With lethargy 
of body comes that which is worse, lethargy of 
mind. Strongly held confidence goes and doubt and 
pessimism emerge from dark recesses of the soul. 
The spirit of the mountain, the adversary, bears 
down with dull relentlessantagonism. That is what 
has to be contended with, and is what our men 
struggled against when they were near the last 
summit of Everest. 


198 THROUGH TIBET TO EVEREST 


The disaster put an abrupt end to our work. The 
men had fought mighty hard and won a brilliant 
victory by their record achievements, but the 
mountain still remained supreme—unconquered. 
She had battered us and smashed us. Morshead, 
who eventually lost the end joints of his frost- 
bitten fingers; Strutt, unfit; Finch, exhausted— 
had already left for home. With our porters shaken 
by their own losses and with the surviving climbers 
all exhausted, General Bruce felt it impossible to 
remain in Tibet during the monsoon and renew the 
struggle in the autumn. We had shot our bolt. 

The First Climbing Expedition turned its steps 
away from the mountain—homewards. 

Back at the Rongbuk Monastery, before finally 
quitting the valley, we paid another visit to the 
Great Lama. He blessed the surviving men, and 
prayed for them. The lamas, who before had said, 
“The mountain will destroy you,” then told of 
other powers the mountain possesses; how she 
opens fissures in her side at will, and against such 
powers men have no strength. 

Veterans of the Geographical Society and Alpine 
Club are, of course, not troubled by such beliefs ; 
the same superstition has been met before on Mount 
Ararat and the Mountains of the Moon in Africa ; 
but the lamas painted a new fresco, half historic, 
half prophetic, as is their manner in such things, on 
the portal walls of this Monastery. This extra- 
ordinury picture shows the angered Deity of the 


COMBAT! ACHIEVEMENT! REPULSE! 199 


Mountain surrounded by weird, wildly dancing 
Demons, White Lions, Barking Dogs and Hairy 
Men, and at the foot, speared through and through, 
lies the naked body of the white man who dared to 
violate the ice-bound tempest-guarded sanctuary of 
Chomolungma—Goddess Mother of the World. 


* 


BOOK III 


THE SECOND CLIMBING 
EXPEDITION 





‘*% 


A FAIRY-LAND OF ICE 


CHAPTER XIV 
THE SECOND CLIMBING EXPEDITION (1924) 


Notwithstanding the tragedy of 1922, it was the 
unanimous and urgent wish of the Geographical 
Society and Alpine Club, and of all members of the 
Expeditions, to renew the attack. After the 1921 
Exploring Expedition doubts and fears had prevailed. 
Now prospects were brighter. A brilliant record had 
been made. Our knowledge of human capacities 
had been advanced. We had gained experience 
of what acclimatization can do, although its utmost 
limits still remained in doubt. Profiting by this 
experience we would try again. There remained 
unconquered barely two thousand feet. Would not 
a great effort take us to the summit ? 

The year 1923 went by, every moment of it. busily 
spent in planning and equipping the new Expedition. 
The motion-picture record of 1922 was circenlated 
throughout the country and the Continent to enlist 
public interest. Funds were plentiful. The best 
equipment was to be collected ; and a new, highly 
expensive oxygen apparatus was to be tried. Again 
Mr. Hinks and Mr. Spencer applied their executive 
genius to carrying into effect the plans of the 
Organizing Committee. 

203 


204 THROUGH TIBET TO EVEREST 


Although the main object of the Expedition was 
mountaineering, geographical work was also to be 
done. It was intended to extend the exploration 
of the gorges beyond the snowfields and glaciers of 
the Rongbuk that curve away to the west and 
which possibly make this glacier the longest in the 
world. No one has ever reached the upper end. 

Geology was forbidden. The Tibetans earnestly 
begged us not to break the soil, nor loosen rocks. 
This, they said, the geologists of the former Expedi- 
tions had done and so had let the devils out of the 
ground. If this happened again the barley crops 
would be ruined and disease and misfortune would 
ravage the land. 

It takes about twelve months to make prepara- 
tions for an elaborate Expedition such as this was 
to be. Everything must be thought out to the 
smallest detail. Owing to the weather problem, 
times, distances and dates of arrival had to be worked 
out accurately. Better tents, and better packing 
of provisions in cases of correct porter weight, 
clearly labelled to the depot camp for which they 
were destined, had to be provided. Norton devised 
a splendid mess tent, which gave us much comfort 
in the plateau journey and at the Base Camp. 
Solid spirit fuel ‘‘ meta ’? was imported from Switzer- 
land with special cookers. It is undoubtedly the 
best fuel for high altitudes. 

Another new item of equipment was a portable 
sectional ladder for crossing crevasses. In 1922 


THE SECOND CLIMBING EXPEDITION 205 


climbers leaving Ice Cliff Camp had to follow that 
devious route which first took them away from the 
mountain and then zigzagged back to the North- 
East Ridge, because the direct road was blocked 
by a gaping crevasse. The new plan was to cross 
this crevasse by means of a bridge ladder and thus 
shorten the way. The bridge was made of hollow 
wood spars 18 feet long and the total weight was 
only 80lb. It was strong enough to support a weight 
of 300 lb. A derrick was provided for lowering 
this ladder across a gap. This hollow light timber 
construction is of immense strength and is used for 
yacht masts and in aircraft. Almost any form of 
curve or taper can be made. The wood is a Pacific 
Coast spruce of even growth and the ply is made 
with thin sheets bent breadth-wise, glued and pinned. 
This splendid wood was also used to form hollow 
spar pitons, tipped with metal, to be hammered into 
ice and make fastenings for ropes in difficult positions 
in the ascent of the Ice Cliff. 

The party was to be self-contained, able to deal 
with any casualties and act with complete inde- 
pendence. This meant the provisioning of one 
hundred and twenty men who would move over 
the plains of Tibet, when Tibetan supernumeraries 
were added, as a small army of five hundred men, yaks 
and mules, carrying stores for six months, Less fodder 
is required for yaks than might be imagined. They 
are accustomed to scarcity and can thrive on what 
thin grass is found by the banks of rivers in Tibet. 


206 THROUGH TIBET TO EVEREST 


The good health of such a party is of course the 
essential care of the leader and the doctor. The 
whole personnel has to be treated like a group of 
athletes in training. We have come to look upon 
the journey of 400 miles or so through the forests 
of the Himalaya and across the plains of Tibet as a 
form of training by which climbers, porters, Tibetan 
servants and animals get into perfect physical 
condition and each learns his job, his part in the 
Expedition’s work, so as to form a team to carry 
out the highly organized cut-and-dried plan to 
schedule time. 

We were to have with us again the leading war- 
riors of the previous onslaught, except Finch ; but 
Mallory was the only one who had been on all the 
previous Expeditions. He was now thirty-six years 
old, married, with two little children. He had been 
a master at Charterhouse and had only recently 
been appointed a lecturer at Cambridge University 
when the call came to join the new Expedition. At 
first he said he could not spare the time, and refused, 
but he was all enthusiasm and determination to 
realize this ambition of his life. His wife shared 
his ambition and eventually he decided to come. 
General Bruce described his work in 1922—-when he 
led his party without oxygen to the world’s r cord 
height of 26,800 feet, and, in the task of saving 
Morshead, descended the mountain by the light of a 
candle in a lantern—as “ one of the greatest feats 
of human endurance in any field of activity.” 


THE SECOND CLIMBING EXPEDITION 207 


The climbing party was reinforced by the in- 
troduction of fresh young blood. We had the 
celebrated climber, Bentley Beetham, Somervell’s 
companion of the Alps; Odell, Hazard and young 
Irvine. 

Somebody said, after the 1922 Expedition, that a 
soldering iron in expert hands would have beaten 
Everest. The constant breakdown of the fragile 
oxygen parts had left only two machines reliable 
when Finch made the final climb. Now we had lots 
of mechanics with us, Irvine, Odell and Hazard all 
being skilled. 

Notable among the new men was Andrew Irvine, 
a magnificent specimen of a young athlete who had 
rowed as No. 3 in the winning ’Varsity crew. He 
sacrificed his place in the Oxford boat that year to 
goto Everest. The authorities of his College granted 
him leave and sent him, confident that he would do 
big things. Physically he was immensely powerful. 
He was of a cheerful and modest disposition. General 
Bruce described him as ‘“‘ The Experiment ” because 
of his youth—he was only twenty-two years old—- 
and because he had but little mountaineering 
experience. He was selected because he had done 
such fine work on two Oxford University Arctic 
Expeditions, and everybody said, ‘Send him to 
Everest.”” The Selection Committee knew it was 
a risk because of his extreme youth and small 
knowledge of mountains, but his other qualifi- 
cations were good. He was ready to face anything 


208 THROUGH TIBET TO EVEREST 


to reach the 29,002-feet mark, and ‘“‘ to expect no 
mercy from Everest.”’ 

Hingston joined us as doctor. He was a dis- 
tinguished traveller-naturalist with much Asiatic 
experience. Shebbeare, chief of the Bengal Forest 
Service, was transport officer, one of the best men 
possible to find for this work, a linguist and experi- 
enced in animal and porter transport. My privilege 
was to act again as photographic historian. 

It is easy to accept cheerfully such a task as the 
Geographical Society gave me; many others would 
gladly have jumped at the opportunity. Yet, apart 
from the magnitude of the work on its technical 
side, when it is realized that woven into the picture 
must be not only the spirit of romance and adven- 
ture, but also a feeling of the power and majesty of 
mountains, of the intangible atmosphere of mysti- 
cism of Tibet, and above all, a ‘“‘ something ”? which 
would make the spectator feel the immensity of this 
struggle of man against Nature, I began to doubt 
whether my physical strength—to say nothing of 
such imagination and artistic ability as I could call 
upon—would not fall short. The esthetic standard 
the theme imperiously demanded called for effects 
both subtle and stupendous. To dabble fatuously 
in trivialities in face of Everest’s grandeur would 
be sacrilege, 

How should I treat the subject? Film experts 
in a business-like manner said cheerfully : ‘‘ Without 
a love interest the picture will be a certain failure.” 


THE SECOND CLIMBING EXPEDITION 209 


They asked: Could we not bring out actors and 
actresses and make a romance in the snow ? 

Must one vulgarize a subject like this to make it 
popular? Everybody, seemed to think so, but I 
could not believe it myself. The picture would have 
to be far more than a day-to-day pictorial chronicle. 
Such chronicles, in themselves unimpeachably truth- 
ful, do not always convey true impressions. 

My pictures of the 1922 Expedition had been 
intended to amuse, and did amuse, people for a couple 
of hours, showing truthfully one aspect and depict- 
ing a jolly rollicking sporting adventure. 

But they did not reveal all—how could they ? 
Bernard Shaw came to see them at the Philharmonic 
Hall, London, and said afterwards: ‘‘ The Everest 
Expedition was a picnic in Connemara surprised 
by a snow storm.” Never mind. When I fly to 
Mount Everest in an airship, I am going to invite 
Bernard Shaw to come with me for a little aerial 
picnic. 

In this new picture the first task was to convey the 
fascination of those secluded, lofty, divinely beauti- 
ful mountains of Tibet. Then the supreme moun- 
tain herself must tell of the impressive, strange, 
implacable, majestic character she possesses; @ 
character which causes the pagan priests of the 
Rongbuk to worship her as a sacred living creature 
and to name her beautifully ‘‘ Goddess Mother of 
the World.” Not to add those impressions to the 
chronicle of events would be to leave the story half 


210 THROUGH TIBET TO EVEREST 


untold. It was my desire to convey a series of 
impressions leading to the one dominant impression 
—that climax of sensation that we ourselves experi- 
enced among Everest’s virgin snowfields, fighting 
to the last ounce of our strength against her power, 
snatching victories, creating records; being hurled 
back ; an unforgettable impression of power, beauty, 
grandeur and the insignificance of man. If I could 
convey this feeling to others and enable them to 
share what we ourselves had felt, then I would 
succeed in my task. 

Did I succeed? It is not for me to say, but it has 
been a gratification to me that many who have seen 
my film, “The Epic of Everest,’ have felt this 
atmosphere which I strove to convey. 

Experience gained on the previous Expedition 
was applied to overcome difficulties encountered 
both in the field and in the laboratory side of the work. 
I had the most up-to-date photographic outfit with 
@ specially constructed frictionless, electrically- 
driven camera. In the field my aim was to make 
myself independent and mobile, so that I could be 
well ahead, or, if I remained behind to get a “ shot,” 
could catch up again. The cameras were carried in 
watertight steel boxes painted white to reflect the 
sun. The boxes were packed to open sideways, 80 
that at a moment’s notice a camera could be taken 
out and placed on its tripod with everything ready 
in position. I had two sturdy Tibetan ponies. My 
interpreter, Cheddup, had another. I had two mule 


THE SECOND CLIMBING EXPEDITION 211 


men—Tashi, an adventurous Chinese muleteer who 
had trekked the mountain passes many times and 
had lived among the Kam-pa, the brigands of the 
Tibetan Chinese border, and Lobsang, a sturdy 
Sherpa with a great love of a horse. Both men 
became such expert assistants that I had only to 
blow my whistle when I wanted to “shoot” a 
scene and they would have the camera out of its 
box and levelled on its tripod within thirty seconds. 

Thus as we marched across Tibet we obtained 
spectacular pictures of the army of men and animals 
crossing stupendous passes and bleak plateaux, 
recorded little scenes of interest in the fording of 
rivers, the meeting of Tibetan shepherds and cara- 
vans, and incidents of camp life. I planned so that 
when Everest was reached the mules would remain 
at the last village and be put out to graze, while 
eight specially selected porters would take on the 
work, transferring the cameras into specially made 
shoulder-boxes and following as far as laden men 
could in the footsteps of the climbers. When the 
men could not carry the cameras any higher, I would 
fall back on telephotography. 

The lens equipment had been improved and 
provided with additional steadying supports, and 
now it was possible to get a clear picture of the 
moving figures of the climbers against a white back- 
ground, even at a great distance. The picture I 
wanted, and which I could get if the weather were 
good, was that of the men breasting the summit of 


212 THROUGH TIBET TO EVEREST 


the mountain. In 1922 I had found a view-point 
from which it was possible to focus clearly on the 
final pyramid. The summit is capped with snow, 
and I anticipated photographing the men as they 
reached the top by the eastern face of the Ridge. 
The distance was three miles. Nothing could be 
seen under the focussing glass, but the picture would 
be accurately ‘‘ found ”’ by the directing telescope. 
An electric drive operated the camera without 
vibration. The longest distance picture I actually 
got was that of Mallory and Irvine at 26,000 feet at 
2 miles range. Above that point I never saw them, 
the mist concealed them. 

In actuality work such as this, as compared to 
studio set production, there are many difficulties. 
In photographing the high climbing I had to fit my 
plans and wait on the climbers. I could not ask 
them to modify their plans or “act” for me. I 
had to be on the spot whenever I could and photo- 
graph what might come by chance. This meant 
hours of patience, hours on the watch. But such 
scenes are more convincing than any acted episodes 
because they are stark reality. 

Such scenes must be caught immediately because 
they will not be repeated. It is not work that the 
ordinary ‘‘ Pro”? could do. The operator has to 
have the heart for it. There is no money init. He 
must do it for the love of it. I considered it 4 
privilege to undertake this work for the Expedition, 
although some members of the Organizing Com- 


THE SECOND CLIMBING EXPEDITION 213 


mittee and even some members of the Expedition 
itself seemed rather to resent the presence of the 
cinematograph. Still on the whole I got on 
famously with all; and I do not think my camera 
worried anybody. I remember Mallory told me once 
ina laughing way that [had converted him. He told 
me that on the first visit in 1921 he once said to 
Bullock: ‘‘ Thank God, there is no cinematograph 
with us.”? But now he quite liked me and my picture- 
making toys. Whenthe time came for him to make 
that great climb from which he never returned he dis- 
cussed his route minutely with me, and told me where 
to look for him with my telephoto lens on the final 
pyramid. I told him that I would get him, if the 
light were right, even 3 miles away. The night 
before he was killed he wrote me—what was perhaps 
the last note he ever wrote in his life—a little letter, 
reminding me where to look for him the next 
morning at eight o’clock, and he sent the note down 
from his camp at 27,000 feet by one of the returning 
porters. I have kept that little crumpled note ever 
since; and I give a picture of it in this book. I 
wish everybody would realize better the real service 
the motion picture can do for a work of this kind. 
It can do in a sense more than writing can. It was 
my aim to democratize the work of the Expedition 
by disseminating as much information about it to 
the world through my pictures as I could, and to 
make a clean, unexaggerated screen drama to show 
those at home what otherwise they would hardly 


7 P 


214 THROUGH TIBET TO EVEREST 


be able to realize—the heroic struggle of this little 
band of men daring death in Nature’s last hidden 
stronghold. 

The production of the film was made possible by 
the public-spirited support and generosity of Mr. 
Archibald Nettlefold, Mr. Charles Merz, the cele- 
brated engineer, Lord Salveson of the Scottish 
Geographical Society, H.H. the Agha Khan, Colonel 
V. A. Haddick, Professor Chalmers Mitchell, and 
others; while many firms—Messrs. Newman-Sinclair, 
Wellington and Ward, Burroughs Wellcome, and 
others—assisted in the provision of the equipment. 

In the field the film was carried by despatch riders 
travelling 50 miles a day on relays of ponies down to 
Darjeeling, where it was developed, prepared and 
edited, while special news portions showing the 
progress of the Expedition were despatched imme- 
diately to Europe to be distributed in the Pathé 
Pictorial News to motion-picture theatres through- 
out the world, so that the man in the street, who 
perhaps would not chance to see the official reports 
of the Geographical Society, could follow the work 
of the Expedition. 

Colonel Haddick, who is well known in India, 
came out with my photographic party, to travel 
with us and afterwards tour India recounting the 
official story of the Expedition and showing the 
pictures; and his work was much appreciated by 
residents of Indian stations. He lectured also to 
some of the Indian Princes. 


THE SECOND CLIMBING EXPEDITION 215 


The Everest Expedition was an adventure to 
appeal to young people all over the world, so I had 
a special pictorial postage stamp designed and 
printed and invited boys and girls to write to me 
for them. I had over forty thousand applications. 
Replies to all were mailed by the Expedition in 
Tibet, sent to the Indian frontier post office, franked, 
in addition to the Indian Government postage 
stamp, with the Everest Expedition stamp. They 
were sent to all parts of the world, even to Japan, 
Siam, South Africa and Western America. Some 
failed to arrive, as instances occurred where village 
postmen, and others, through whose hands they 
passed, kept the souvenir for themselves. Francis 
Helps designed the stamp, a bold design of the 
mountain in blue, surrounded by a Tibetan key and 
Swastika border with the words Sikkim, Tibet, 
Nepal, the States surrounding Everest. We 
had a special franking post-mark—‘ Rongbuk 
Glacier Main Base Camp, 17,000 feet above the 
sea,” 

On assembly at Darjeeling in early March, 1924, 
we were greeted by all our old Sherpa porters, who 
wanted to join us again despite the catastrophe of 
1922. Many other men also offered their services. 
The General and Dr. Hingston held a careful inspec- 
tion of them, but often as one old favourite after 
another presented himself and saluted, the General 
would slap him on the back and pass him quickly 
by the doctor. ‘ Why, here is old Chemshar again. 


216 THROUGH TIBET TO EVEREST 


Fine! Of course he must come—and there is——”’ 
So all the old men were collected again, not that they 
were not all the best and fittest of fellows. Then 
followed a gathering and entertainment in their 
honour by the Buddhists’ Society and Hillmen’s 
Association, a Gurka dance, and Lord Lytton, 
Governor of Bengal, and Lady Lytton, received the 
whole Expedition at Madan’s Hall. 

We were to start about the 20th of March. Every- 
thing was ready. Again we were to use the early 
period of the springtime. I do not know why, but 
it had become an established custom that the 
Expedition should start in March and try to climb 
the mountain in the seven or eight weeks of the 
spring season, between the thaw at the end of winter 
and the break of the monsoon. 1922 had shown 
that this spring season is not really a long enough 
period to do both the preparation work and the 
climbing. It means that everything must be cut- 
and-dried and organized each day to a schedule. 
Should anything go wrong, the whole machine will 
be thrown out of gear—and this year what a lot of 
throwing out of gear there was to be! We boasted 
to ourselves of our better plans, of how stores 
labelled for various prearranged camps, each box 
a correct porter’s load, had only to be dumped at 
each camp, then tents erected and the camps would 
be complete. But it didn’t all work out so nicely. 
Unforeseen events and the weather upset the depot- 
laying plans. On future Expeditions the main 


THE SECOND CLIMBING EXPEDITION 217 


depot-laying must be done a season ahead and 
independently of the climbing. 

The few days spent at Darjeeling before the start 
were busy days for me. I had to organize my own 
photographic field party, and to send off the artist’s 
party of four to Gangtok in Sikkim, led by my wife, 
who had come out with me to study the folk-lore 
and legend of the mountain peoples of the Himalaya 
and Tibet. With the help of Jetti, her faithful 
and splendid little Tibetan maid, she collected a 
surprising wealth of fascinating stories. Francis 
Helps, the artist and an old friend of ours, was with 
them. He had come to paint portraits of the hill 
people and the Tibetans, the first time a valuable 
collection of portraits of these people had been 
made. He met much difficulty and religious scruple 
and could not get his models to sit more than once or 
twice. But being a rapid painter, he produced forty 
large canvases and a8 many pencil sketches during 
five months. This party crossed the Natu Pass, 
14,600 feet, to Chumbi in Tibet ; and there my wife 
with faithful Jetti explored the monasteries with 
their old musty libraries, and visited the lamas and 
the fascinating story-telling witches who live in the 
Chumbi Mountains. 

At Darjeeling, before leaving, I had also to arrange 
details for the base photographic party under 
Arthur Pereira, F.R.P.S., the well-known photo- 
graphic technician. He was to build a laboratory 
to develop and also print the motion pictures I was 


218 THROUGH TIBET TO EVEREST 


to make on Everest. The only plot of ground 
Pereira could get was a jungle-covered mountain 
slope at a horrible angle. However, he found a 
contractor and coolies, cut into the hill, banked it 
and ran up a house, 60 feet by 40 feet, of cement, 
stone, wood and tin. 

The little railway station was crowded out with 
Pereira’s enormous packing-cases, containing de- 
veloping tanks, drying apparatus and washing 
wheels, a motor generator for developing his own 
steady supply of printing current, chemicals, etc. 
Pereira had everything organized to the last tool 
and screw. 

The porter corps was now completed and equipped 
and the Expedition started for Tibet. For the 
third time men set out to the assault of the bastions 
of the world’s highest mountain. We made an 
imposing array—porters, animals, riding ponies, 
cooks, interpreters, and hundreds of loads of burden. 

We started a happy and jovial party with @ 
great send-off from Darjeeling. General Bruce 
himself wrote: ‘ Everything has gone smoothly, 
we are fully equipped and as keen as mustard to 
be off ; for with all its hardships there is fun in it.” 
That was typical of the man. At Kalimpong at 
the Mission Station he reviewed a large colony of 
Anglo-Indian Boy Scouts and Girl Guides, and read 
them a letter Baden-Powell himself had sent them. 
Everybody was immensely struck by the general 
happiness of our party. 


THE SECOND CLIMBING EXPEDITION 219 


But a set-back soon came; the sudden illness of 
General Bruce. At Phari we had divided, the main 
party crossing the Phari Plain by the Donka-La 
across the wind-swept heights at 19,000 feet ; while 
General Bruce, with Dr. Hingston and Macdonald, 
the son of the British Trade Agent at Chumbi, took 
the longer detour by the Dochen Lake, at a lower 
elevation with consequently less exposure to wind 
and cold. The beautiful silvery mountain, Chomol- 
hari, stands in the background behind the huge 
expanse of water of the Dochen Lake. 

General Bruce had caught a chill on the bleak 
Phari Plain. This sudden arrival at the Phari Plain 
in the blizzard time of April was always a severe 
strain on us. The chill brought on a severe return 
of malaria, which the General unfortunately had 
in his blood through long years in India. He very 
nearly died at Tuna, but Dr. Hingston got him back 
to Phari. He was carried by porters the whole way. 
Hingston had to take him back to India and then 
follow up and join us at the Base Camp later on. 

General Bruce’s illness meant the loss—a severe 
one—of the moral stimulus characteristic of our 
established and accepted leader. Bruce has a 
cheerful, magnetic spirit that he can diffuse into 
men under him and hold them together. We called 
it ‘‘ the Bruce spirit.”> He could make a party of 
men, some strangers to each other meeting for the 
first time, work as a team. He could teach each 
one to subordinate personal interests and ambitions 


220 THROUGH TIBET TO EVEREST 


to the larger interests of the whole. There is 
always a danger that differences and jealousies will 
arise in a party thrown on top of each other in a 
confined camp life, and enduring the hardships of 
travel. We had to learn to put up with each other’s 
peculiarities, and to subordinate jealousies, while 
still keeping up a healthy family rivalry and com- 
petition to become a prizewinner and go highest on 
Everest—I speak of the men of the climbing party. 

Moreover, General Bruce had an extraordinary 
influence over the Sherpas, upon whom we depended 
so vitally. He would talk every day with the men, 
win them, and fire them with high spirit and 
enthusiasm. 

When we had the misfortune to lose General 
Bruce we found in Norton and Geoffrey Bruce two 
successors who understood the natives and could 
also hold and enthuse them. Colonel Norton, a 
distinguished soldier with the D.S.O. and Military 
Cross, with a brilliant staff and fighting record in 
the European War, a mountaineer of tried capacity, 
became our sound and careful leader. 


‘AUOTIVIA HOIV] FDN03*) 





“OV NOAIG 
‘La 000‘LZ AHL LY NUILIVM BLON LISVT FB] 


5 £ 


‘ 


— 

my 
i 

* 


G. L. MALLORY COL. NORTON DZONGPEN 
OF SHEKAR 


A GROUP AT THE DZONGPEN’S, SHEKAR 





CHAPTER XV 
HOW WE MET A DEFEAT 


Once again we stood before Mount Everest at the 
Rongbuk Lamasery. Again we were to witness the 
fantastic ceremonies of the lamas and listen to the 
haunting sound of their long trumpets that echo 
in the evenings from the temple roof through the 
desolation around. The Rongbuk Lama was in 
retirement in a hermit’s cell at the time of our 
arrival; but we met his representative and gave 
him presents, including a load of cement, a thing that 
he had particularly asked us in 1922 to bring him 
should we return. It seemed an absurdly material 
thing to procure for one who claimed such intimate 
dealings with the spirit world! Then came one of 
the things which make this Everest adventure so 
different from an ordinary prosaic mountaineering 
exploit. We witnessed a “devil dance.’ The 
priests were blowing gigantic horns, beautifully 
made in copper and silver. They had other trumpets 
made of human thigh bones, and drums made of 
human skulls with drum-heads of human skin. In 
the centre of the dancing-place, the courtyard of the 
monastery, a human protagonist fought and was 


symbolically slain by grotesque monsters. The dance, 
221 


222 THROUGH TIBET TO EVEREST 


of the Cemetery Ghouls followed. Evil Spirits, 
skeletons wearing hideous masks, danced over the 
effigy of a dead body, fighting Good Spirits for the 
possession of the corpse. Out of the monastery 
windows leaped a troop of demons, fantastically clad, 
flinging themselves into the struggle for possession 
of the poor little white soul about to be reincarnated 
and embark on a new weary life in the world. The 
drums and gongs and cymbals rolled, rumbled and 
clashed, while droning notes from the horns blown 
on thé temple roof resounded incessantly. <A long 
procession of gowned monks preceded by cymbal- 
players and drummers and thigh-bone trumpeters 
paraded round the monastery courtyard carrying 
grotesque idols. With fear and reverence the 
assembled crowd of poor, superstitious, devil-ridden 
peasants howed to the ground and touched their 
foreheads, repeating the prayer ‘‘Om mani padme 
hum.” With sonorous voices the lamas chanted 
and scattered rice grains over the pilgrims who came 
to receive blessings. To us they extended a blessing 
also, although they gave us a not-too-cheerful send- 
off. They said, ‘‘Chomolungma, the awful and 
mighty Goddess Mother, will never allow any white 
man to climb her sacred heights. The demons of 
the snows will destroy you utterly.” 

They told us a curious story. After we had left 
at the end of the last Expedition, Tibetan villagers 
from valleys miles away went to our camps in the 
snow, although they were forbidden to do so by the 


HOW WE MET A DEFEAT 223 


lamas, to see what they could find. They told how 
they met several Sukpas living at the camps we had 
abandoned, and terrified out of their wits, they ran 
back to the monastery, where they prayed at the 
Chief Lama’s feet and promised never to disobey 
him again. 

One of the lamas, an old man with a gnarled face 
and only two teeth in his head, shuffled over the 
courtyard wrapped in his maroon gown, and led 
me to the temple entrance, where on an inner wall, 
so dark that at first I could not distinguish it, he 
showed me a freshly executed painting. Looking 
at it carefully I saw it was a picture of the speared 
white man lying below Mount Everest surrounded 
by guard dogs and Sukpas and horned demons. I 
got my interpreter Cheddup to explain it; and I 
took photographs’ and tracings of it. It was a 
curious picture. 

We arrived two days ahead of schedule time at 
the Base Camp, and started on the depot-laying 
work in all earnestness. Mallory and Beetham took 
charge of the Alpine equipment and the provisions 
for the high camps; Odell and Irvine, the oxygen 
apparatus ; Somervell, the scientific and medical 
stores; Hazard, the mess; and Shebbeare and 
Geoffrey Bruce the large convoy of one hundred 
and fifty Tibetans we had collected from the last 
villages to come and help us on the first stage beyond 
the Base Camp. There were both men and women 
inthe gang. They built little shelters for themselves 


224. THROUGH TIBET TO EVEREST 


out of stones, as we had no tents to give them. 
One-third of them deserted, but the others stayed 
with us and worked splendidly, receiving of course 
rations and pay. 

What powerful people they were! The women 
could carry loads equally with the men. One of 
them carried a 40-lb. load, with her baby on the 
top of it, and she was always one of the first back 
to the camp after completing her daily journey from 
the Base to No.1 Depot. Then she would devote 
the rest of her time to the care of her smiling child. 
These local Tibetans had no equipment such as our 
Sherpas had. They had only their woollen coats 
and skin boots and not even blankets. At night 
time they would untie their girdles and wrap them- 
selves in their loose bokkus. Curled up like balls 
they huddled together to sleep. I have even seen 
them sleep like this blanketed by deep snow! Out- 
wardly they did not seem to mind, but no human 
being could possibly suffer such exposure without 
being affected. It told on them, making them 
apathetic. They became careless whether they 
cooked their food or not, and this, in its turn, natur- 
ally affected their physique. These men, if their 
superstitions were overcome, and if they were 
efficiently organized, properly clothed and equipped, 
would make splendid high-going porters for another 
Everest expedition. My belief is that the wildest 
and roughest men, who have never at any time been 
in contact with whites or lived in civilized parts, but 


HOW WE MET A DEFEAT 225 


who are recruited direct from mountain lands, will 
always make the best material for a porter corps. I 
would never take a Darjeeling man again. I would 
get my men raw from the mountains. I persuaded 
some of these Tibetans to come with me when some 
of my men fell ill. Two of them did as well and 
even better than my Sherpas in getting my cameras 
up to the top of the North Col. 

This year we were soon to learn that our luck with 
the weather was all out. We encountered blizzards 
of a severity unknown for thirty years in the Hima- 
laya. The thermometer fell to 30° below zero. 
The snow drove into and through our meagre tents, 
and the natives suffered particularly, as it piled 
itself in their shelters and put out their fires. Most 
nights they had to turn into their blankets hungry 
or with only such cold food as they might get. 

Bad weather swept over the whole Himalaya 
range during May, 1924, from Kashmir to the east; 
meteorologists ascribed it to a cold current from 
the north-west. Such conditions were abnormal, 
but remembering the experiences in the Himalaya 
of numbers of travellers and explorers, I feel confi- 
dent in saying that the early spring period is always 
uncertain. The after-monsoon period is uncertain 
too; but it is always,the more reliable. These 
storms were quite unconnected with the monsoon, 
although some of our party who were inexperienced 
of the Himalaya thought that they signified its 
early advent, but they were wrong. 


226 THROUGH TIBET TO EVEREST 


On May 6 the mountain, fighting us at her out- 
posts with all her strength, inflicted a severe defeat 
upon us—a defeat that we did not fully realize at 
the time, but a defeat which had a vast influence on 
the final issue. 

The snow beyond Frozen Lake Camp was soft and 
heavy. The struggling porters fell exhausted and 
a certain convoy found difficulty in reaching Snow- 
field Camp. Mallory gave orders that they might 
dump their loads at the head of the trough when 
emerging from the ice pinnacles about 2 miles below 
Snowfield Camp. This was, in the circumstances, 
unavoidable; but it broke the transport system. 
Thereafter the convoy parties started to choose their 
own sites for dumping, and stores became scattered 
all along the line. From that day the whole trans- 
portation system crumpled. Men straggled and 
dribbled back to No. 2 Depot in a dejected and 
exhausted state to seek what refuge they could in 
their meagre tents, battered and torn by the increas- 
ing gale. We tried to build stone walls and patch the 
torn tents with waterproof shects and blankets, but 
it was too late. Stores and fuel failed to arrive 
from the lower base. Stores labelled and sealed 
for higher depots were bruken into. The chain of 
supply was thrown into confusion. The reaction 
upon the strength and the health of the porters 
showed ilself. . They were frost-bitten and lethargic. 
Demoralization set in. 

One day, while we were buried in snow at Frozen 


HOW WE MET A DEFEAT 227 


Lake Camp, Mallory surprised us all. He appeared 
suddenly in the camp before breakfast, having 
walked down the glacier from Snowfield Camp, 
starting at dawn. With his dauntless energy he 
had been struggling to hold the porters together 
and to reorganize the broken transportation system. 
He had a terrible story to tell of Snowfield Camp. 
Everything there was at a standstill. The men were 
done—incapable of any work. The mountain above, 
whenever parting clouds revealed her, was smoking 
angrily with driven mist and snow. The gale was 
tearing over her ridges a hundred miles an hour, 
madly flinging the snow a thousand feet into the air. 
Odell and Hazard had tried the Ice Cliff, but had 
not been able to go far and had dumped the ropes 
and pickets on the cliff and returned. 

On the 12th May there was a council of war at 
No. 2 Depot, with Norton, Mallory, Geoffrey Bruce 
and Shebbeare present, when it was decided to 
abandon the depots and retreat to the Base. One 
of the porters had fallen into a crevasse at the 
entrance to the ice pinnacles and had broken his leg. 

Bruce did great work in putting heart into the 
porters. He had practically to man-handle the 
exhausted, hungry, frost-bitten men out of their 
shelters to strike the tents and lay them down. 
There was a certain joy and relief at the prospect 
of a respite from this hell we had been living in, 
but still we walked away from our mountain crest- 
fallen because of our defeat. My own photographic 


228 THROUGH TIBET TO EVEREST 


porters, concentrated at Frozen Lake Camp, had 
succeeded in bringing up and establishing our own 
heavy double-lined, tunnel-entrance tent with sewn- 
in waterproof floor. It was proof against the storm. 
I left it with my film supply safely till our return. 

Under the conditions, our camps being quite 
incapable of withstanding such continuous bad 
weather, there was no alternative but retreat. 

In a struggle between man and mountain, such 
as this—as in any other battle, for that matter— 
the moral effect of turning away from the enemy, 
after having once challenged and opened the fight, 
is fatal. Turn your back on Everest and it will be 
difficult to summon again that necessary sense of 
mental mastery, without which hope dies. Nobody 
can understand the grim reality of this unless he has 
taken part or witnessed the fight himself. I felt it 
and realized it. There is a hackneyed axiom about 
the ratio of moral to physical forces in war. 

Should we then have stuck to our ground and 
tried to weather the storm in our too meagre tents ? 
No. To have stayed on would have put our whole 
porter corps, and ourselves also, completely out of 
action. Already two natives were dying. Norton 
as leader, was right, of course, in abandoning the 
depots and bringing us all down to the Base. 

But what I wish to convey is that the organization 
of any future Expedition should be more fully on 
the Polar method, and permanent depots must be 
made on ground won during the advance, where 


HOW WE MET A DEFEAT 229 


men can take proper shelter in bad weather without 
losing physical and moral efficiency or giving way 
a single inch to the mountain.? 

I had returned to the Base while the camps were 
being evacuated ; and one evening was making a 
slow-exposure sunset picture of Everest from the 
hill above the Base Camp when I saw a procession 
coming slowly down, carrying some stretcher-like 
object. I expected it was one of the many sick 
men. Not knowing, I shouted to them while still 
at a distance to clear the foreground of my picture, 
but they took no notice. I little realized at the 
moment what the procession was. They were 
carrying the dead body of Naik Shamshar, one of the 
Gurkas, who had died at No. 1 Depot that day of 
hemorrhage of the brain. He was a splendid young 
man in his prime, and one of General Bruce’s favour- 
ites. In losing him Norton said we were losing a 
friend and loyal assistant. Next day his companions 
buried him across the river, performing their own 
Nepalese ceremonies. So we lost two men. The 
second was a victim to frost-bite. His legs went 
dead as far as his hips. Hingston tried hard to 
Save him, but failed. 

At the Base Camp, vegetation was springing up 
and it was very much warmer than up on the glacier. 
Hope revived despite the serious loss of time. 


1 The building of a proper hut to house the Expedition at 
the head of the East Rongbuk Glacier is fully discussed in the 
Appendix, page 285. 


230 THROUGH TIBET TO EVEREST 


I suggested one day in the mess that if we could 
get the Rongbuk lama to bless our men it might have 
a good effect in cheering them and restoring their 
confidence and morale. The Holy Lama consented 
to do this; and we all went down to the monastery 
for the visit and ceremony. The Grand Lama 
received us in state, leaving his hermitage for the 
purpose. It took him and the other monks two 
days to dress themselves and prepare for the cere- 
monies. 

We ranged ourselves on cushioned seats on either 
side, with the Grand Lama seated on a dais, attended 
by other lamas holding peacocks’ feathers and 
incense pots. Our interpreter, a Tibetan who had 
lived in Darjeeling, approached the Grand Lama 
in a reverent manner, putting his hands together, 
and bowing down prayed to him. He paid our 
respects and we exchanged messages and ceremonial 
scarves of friendship. After this we each went 
before the lama and received a blessing by being 
touched upon the head with some saintly relic 
contained in a silver charm-box held in his hand. 
Each of our men followed in turn, presented a scarf, 
bowed down and received the blessing. 

Then followed much feasting, and drinking of 
chung. We—to please the lamas, not ourselves— 
had to drink their buttered tea. Those of us who 
found a difficulty in keeping it down went outside 
and got rid of it, returning paler of face. Buton the 
whole the ceremony was an enormous success. The 


HOW WE MET A DEFEAT 231 


men after this blessing took courage again. The 
interpreter told me later that the lama said while 
blessing us, ‘‘ Great Chomolungma, the Goddess 
Mother, is guarded by the spirits of our ancient 
religion. I will intercede with the gods for you. 
Your turning back brings pleasure to the demons. 
They have forced you back, and will force you back 
again.” 

This lamasery of the Rongbuk held an irresistible 
fascination for me, and finding myself here once more, 
I renewed my explorations in the rooms and libraries 
and temples. 

Books in Tibet are sacred. It is a strange thing 
that in a country where practically none outside the 
lamas and the ruling classes can read, we should 
find some of the most beautiful books in the world ; 
morepver books are plentiful. The principal work, 
the Bkahgyur, the great code of the Scriptures of 
the Tibetan Lamas, is a “‘ book” in 108 volumes, 
each of 1,000 pages, and contains 1,083 distinct 
works, translations from Sanskrit and Chinese texts. 

Our booksellers would stand aghast if called upon 
to handle in the course of trade many copies of this 
work, for each of the volumes weighs about 10 Ib., 
and forms a tome 26 inches long, 8 inches broad, 
and 8 inches deep. The large monasteries possess 
full sets of this code. To transport the volumes a 
dozen yaks are required, and the carved wood blocks 
from which it is printed—movable type being un- 
known—require rows of buildings as a warehouse. 


232 THROUGH TIBET TO EVEREST 


On the authority of Waddell’s work on Lamaism, 
this book is printed at two places only in Tibet, at 
Narthang, in Western Tibet, where a great printing- 
press exists, and a later edition at Derge, in Eastern 
Tibet. Another edition is printed in Bhotan ; there 
is also a Mongolian edition, and a Pekin one. This 
Pekin edition has sold for £600. A copy was once 
exchanged for 7,000 oxen by the Buriats, and the 
same tribe paid 1,200 silver roubles for a complete 
copy with Commentaries. - 

The larger proportion of Tibetan books is in manu- 
script. Tue Bkahgyur was first printed only about 
two hundred years ago. These manuscripts are 
written on paper made from the inner bark of a 
shrub. Small abstracts from the Tibetan Scrip- 
tures used by wealthy devotees are written in letters 
of silver and gold on a board consisting of several 
sheets pasted together and varnished. 

There is a very celebrated library at Sakkya, 
about 150 miles north of Mount Everest, which 
contains unique treasures of Sanskrit and Tibetan 
literature, with enormous pages wonderfully decor- 
ated. Books are regarded as sacred and are 
honoured by the burning of incense, and fragments 
bearing holy words are treasured reverently. 

We spent over a week at the Base Camp waiting 
for a turn of the weather, and I was fortunate in 
having so much time to explore and photograph the 
Monastery and make friends with the lamas. We 
enjoyed and profited by every minute of our rest. 


HOW WE MET A DEFEAT 233 


During these days I extended an invitation to 
Mallory to live in my large comfortable photographic 
tent, as we were short of tents at the Base, so many 
having been sent up the glacier, and I had oppor- 
tunities of observing his restless energy and ambition. 
He seemed to be ill at ease; always scheming and 
planning. It was obvious to me he felt this set-back 
more acutely than any ofus. He was a highly strung 
man. 

One night I said to him, ‘‘ Mallory, tell me your 
secret of breathing. It’s a great story.” ‘‘ No,” 
he said. ‘When I’ve got to the top of the old 
mountain, and there is nothing higher left to climb 
in the world, I'll tell.”” With that he blew out the 
candle and rolled over to sleep in his bed. 

During these comfortable but anxious days of 
waiting, Hingston, our doctor naturalist, was one 
of the busiest of our party. He kept us fascinated 
in the mess by telling us of his studies of animal 
and insect life among Everest’s snows. Hingston 
was an Irishman, studious, brilliant, and witty. 
He had a delightful nature that everyone admired 
and loved. But at times we didn’t love him. He 
had an abominable blood-testing machine and a 
mercury tube which he used to get us to blow. We 
had to blow until we were positively blue in the 
face to try and raise a column of heavy mercury 
several feet up his horrible tube—there was a mark 
to reach, and, if we could not reach it, it meant we 
were no use for Everest. I got out of it because I 


234 THROUGH TIBET TO EVEREST 


was the photographer and not of the climbing party. 

Somervell also had his own scientific device by 
which he tested our breath to see the relative amounts 
of oxygen and carbon dioxide; and he would cork 
up samples of our “ high-altitude breath ’’ to carry 
home. He told us that great scientific knowledge 
would be drawn from this. 

Hingston, who is the author of an authoritative 
work on Indian birds, had made a wonderful collec- 
tion of beetles and butterflies, caught round our 
camp even at this immense elevation. He learned 
that beetles, with their heads tucked under them 
and their legs curled round them, hibernated the 
long winter under the stones in this very valley to 
enjoy the brief summer. For six months they lie 
asleep in the crannies of the rocks. If awakened 
before summer has come, they become paralysed 
and insensible. He told us also that he found 
colonies of ants underground, torpid and asleep 
even in the springtime. They wake up and enjoy 
a short spell of life when the summer comes. He 
found also wasps who inhabit tunnels they cut for 
themselves underground. On sunny summer days 
these insect creatures come out, but they are very 
slow in all things they do and have not the vigour of 
those found at lower altitudes. 

Hingston’s most interesting observations were 
how these animals and insects adapt themselves to 
meet the conditions of life among Everest’s snows. 
For instance, the butterflies found up here have short, 


HOW WE MET A DEFEAT 235 


compact wings and seem specially made so that they 
can fly about and not be hurt by the force of the 
mountain winds. He also found grasshoppers, who 
go in the summer as high as 18,000 feet in this valley. 
They have no colour and are very small and difficult 
to find, looking exactly like the rocks. The very 
highest-living insect that Hingston met was a tiny 
Attid spider. It was one of my porters at my 
22,000-feet photographic station, above Snowfield 
Camp, who first found him. We lost him in the 







Ne 


THE ATTID SPIDER 
much magnified) found on Everest at 22,000 feet. 


descent, he was so small. But I told Hingston 
about him, and we turned out a party of natives to 
search for others, and found several. 

Hingston told us he knew of a grey hunting 
spider who lives here in the ice, and of the Carabid 
Beetle, another insect whose eggs are to be found on 
the banks of glacial lakes. While he made a collec- 
tion in the mountains, his Lepcha collector Romoo 
had been left behind in the Sikkim forests, armed 
with a collector’s gun and skinning knife and pre- 
Servative. When we returned to Chumbi, Romoo 
met us; and Hingston was delighted with the 
beautiful collection of birdskins he had made. 


236 THROUGH TIBET TO EVEREST 


These were brought home and given to the Natural 
History Museum, South Kensington, London. 
Round the Base Camp we found the tracks of many 
burhel. They look more like wild sheep, but are 
really of the goat tribe. Living here in this sanctu- 
ary of the Rongbuk, where they are fed by the lamas, 
they have become quite tame. They would come 
quite close to our tents, and Beetham, while con- 
valescing from an attack of sciatica, went out with 
his reflex camera and took pictures of them within a 
few yards. It was amusing yet inspiring to watch 
him at this work. Despite his painful leg, which 
he had to lift along step by step, he roamed over the 
hillsides to get snapshots of the burhel, the choughs 
and the pigeons. At one time he laid a salt trail, 
and so brought the burhel right down to our camp. 
The burhel ascend to 18,000 feet. You see many 
of them along the shelf of the Main Rongbuk Glacier. 
They feed on the sparse grass and live near the pools 
of water that collect in the spring. In winter they 
are forced to descend to the vicinity of the Rongbuk 
Monastery. It is then, through scarcity of food, that 
they go to the hermits’ cells and take food from the 
lamas’ hands. The choughs inhabiting this valley 
were our persistent friends. They followed us 
eventually to 27,000 feet, where Mallory and Irvine 
built their highest bivouac, and therefore reached 
the highest altitude of any birds yet observed by 
man. They were our liveliest neighbours too. 
Indeed, two choughs actually built a nest in the 


HOW WE MET A DEFEAT 237 


cliffs above Snowfield Camp at 21,500 feet. We 
could not reach the nest because it was high on a 
ledge, but we were certain they had made a nest 
there. I think they laid their eggs too and hatched 
them before we left the glacier at the conclusion of 
the Expedition. When we were abandoning Snow- 
field Camp I remember thinking of these birds. 
They were so tame and friendly and so often came 
near my tent, I broke open one of the abandoned 
store boxes that contained good things for birds to 
eat, and left the contents scattered on the stones 
of the moraine. The food would last them, I hoped, 
until their young birds grew strong enough to fly. 

Why should animals and insects and birds choose 
to come and dwell in such barren wastes Possibly 
they may be attracted by the sanctuary they find 
here. Yet what an intense and uncertain struggle 
mere existence means at those heights! Birds and 
animals seem to realize it and come together in 
sympathy. The wild goats go to the hermits’ caves 
to be fed. They lose entirely their fear of man. 
The goats in their turn are friendly to the birds, who 
have a harder life, buffeted by the storms. The 
choughs fly down and rest on the wild goats’ backs, 
and the goats quite contentedly allow them to eat 
the insects in their hair. The birds build their 
nests in cracks in the cliffs where they can get pro- 
tection from the wind. The tiny little pikos that 
live up here burrow into the ground, where they find 
an even temperature. Under the rocks they make 


238 THROUGH TIBET TO EVEREST 


stores of seeds and other things to eat during the 
winter. The birds have the hardest time of all. 
They are always at grips with the elements. They 
cannot hibernate in the ground like the insects and 
beetles and little mammals. These find in the 
ground a cosy home because, curiously enough, 
a foot underground the temperature remains quite 
even. The blasts of the wind never penetrate their 
shelters. We did observe sometimes that birds 
got into holes in the rocks, and also into ground 
burrows made by hares. Hingston told us that he 
once found a lark’s nest on the Tibetan Plateau 
where the birds had actually built a wall of pebbles 
on the windward side of their nest ! 

The little round plump mouse-hares, no bigger 
than large mice and found in numbers in Tibet, are 
particularly kind to these small birds. The mouse- 
hares store up in their burrows hoards of seeds and 
grains; and seem to allow the smaller birds to share 
their store. They actually leave a proportion, as 
much as they can spare, outside their holes for the 
birds. The birds pay them back by warning them of 
their common enemy, the hawks, who watch above 
and swoop down. Both the little mouse-hares and 
the birds who commune with them have a protective 
colouring that harmonizes exactly with the kind of 
sandy ground where the mouse-hares burrow. 

I make particular mention of these things, and of 
Hingston’s clever observations, because they lead 
to one important theory vital in the study of Mount 


HOW WE MET A DEFEAT 239 


Kverest—the theory of adaptation and acclimatiza- 
tion. If animals, birds, and insects can adapt them- 
selves, so also can human beings. The Tibetans 
build their houses and their monasteries to the 
limit of cultivable soil and grow barley, the highest- 
growing cereal in the world. In summer they go 
even higher, up to 18,000 and 19,000 feet, to graze 
their yaks upon the thin grass that grows among the 
rocks below the mountain snow. They have become 
inured to the conditions and immune to the effects 
of the rarefied air. Does not this give proof of the 
theory of acclimatization ? Again, who would think 
that a bird would build its nest at 21,500 feet above 
sea level? This ability of life to adapt itself to 
circumstances becomes the basic principle in plan- 
ning the conquest of Everest. JI am convinced from 
what I have observed in the Everest Expeditions 
that there is no limit to the acclimatization of 
human beings to altitude, under right conditions. 

I am confident in believing that if ever in future 
years shelter rest-huts are built in stages up the 
mountain, the ascent of Mount Everest will be as 
possible as that of Mont Blanc is at the present 
day. 


CHAPTER XVI 
A SECOND GREAT VICTORY 


Some days after the Lama’s blessing, there was a 
distinct improvement in the weather, and Norton 
called another Climbers’ Council of War. Our time 
had been badly cut into. Most of the month of 
May had gone and now there was not a single 
moment to be lost. Further days would be occupied 
by the renewed ascent of the glacier before we could 
get to work on the mountain. It was then that we 
realized that the Base Camp was too far from the 
mountain, 20 miles away. To have the Base at 
the very foot of the mountain is imperative on 
future Expeditions. 

The word was: Forward! and Quick! As an 
example of determination, reflecting as it did the 
general spirit of the climbers, I will quote Mallory’s 
own words: “ This retreat is only a temporary set- 
back. Action is only suspended. The issue must 
shortly be decided. The next time we walk up the 
Rongbuk Glacier will be the last. We have counted 
our wounded. We know how much to strike off the 
strength of our little army. We will gather our 
resources and advance to the last assault.” 


So the advance was again sounded. We reached 
240 


A SECOND GREAT VICTORY 241 


Snowfield Camp, having practically to rebuild and 
restock it. Then Mallory tackled the Ice Cliff. It 
was his intention to find a new way up it and avoid 
the site of the disaster of 1922. Any new way 
would necessarily be a more difficult way and would 
need more engineering and more step-cutting, even 
if safer from avalanches. From below he looked 
up at the confused mass of broken blocks of glisten- 
ing ice. Here and there were shadows where the 
ice overhung, and, at places, other shadows of 4& 
deeper blue, meaning fissures or caverns, Mallory 
determined to force a way up through the jaws of 
the great central crevasse. He had been in the 
disaster of 1922. He had been blooded to the awful 
avalanche danger. Now he applied his utmost 
cunning and skill to thwarting it. 

I watched him and his companions hacking their 
way up the ice wall, step by step, with all the skill 
of accomplished ice-climbers. I could see them, 
little black dots clinging to the face of the sheer 
wall. It seemed as if they could not see what was 
above them, because they were heading directly for 
the great transverse cavern. They reached it and 
disappeared into its dark recesses. Hours went by 
and I began to feel alarmed. Then suddenly some- 
body pointed out little black figures squatting on 
the slope above the cavern. They had gone in 
through the mouth and come out on the upper lip ! 
It was amazing. Longstaff, talking of this wonder- 
ful feat of mountain-craft and the cutting of steps 


242 THROUGH TIBET TO EVEREST 


up what we afterwards named the “ Chimney,” a 
vertical crack just wide enough to let a man squeeze 
up it, said: ‘ Talk about pulling the whiskers of 
Death, these folk climbed in between the chinks 
of his closed teeth. They accomplished the 
impossible.” 

The Chimney was a crack about 60 feet high. 
With their feet in the precarious steps they cut with 
their axes, and with their hands and fingers clinging 
to ledges, they worked their way up. At the top 
they hammered in a wooden peg and attached a 
long rope which they dropped down for men to hang 
onto. Later Irvine improvised a 60-foot rope ladder, 
by splicing climbing-rope and tent-pegs, which was 
also fixed in the Chimney. By this engineering 
work and the steps also being widened, it was made 
later quite safe for laden porters. By this Chimney 
route, we avoided entirely the dangerous slopes of 
1922, where avalanches always threatened. The 
track continued horizontally along the lip of the 
crevasse and then zigzagged back to the “ Tra- 
verse,” the last steep ascent to the ledge on the 
cliff-top where the camp was set. 

Mallory and Bruce made a preliminary climb on 
the 1st of June with eight porters, including Dorji 
Pasang, one of the men who reached the highest 
camp in 1922. On that Expedition he had been 
one of my photographic men, but had been detached 
from my work to serve the climbers as one of the 
‘“ Tigers.” Now in 1924 he was commandeered for 


A SECOND GREAT VICTORY 243 


the climbers again. Dorji was a magnificent speci- 
men of a Sherpa, but this year he failed to repeat his 
former records. 

Mallory and Bruce reached only to 25,000 feet. 
Their porters failed and dropped out one by one. 
Then renewed storms broke over the mountain. 
They were forced to give up the attempt and return, 
collecting their straggling porters. 

After this setback there swept over us another 
period of truly evil weather. Certainly this year 
we were “up against it.” 

In the rush to get the high camps established 
in the short time left, parties of porters were sent 
up the Ice Cliff on every possible day with stores. 
We were so placed that whenever new snow fell 
on the cliff no one could go up or down, even by 
the Chimney route, for some days until the snow 
had hardened. One night a heavy snowfall thus 
cut off all communication up or down the cliff, and 
worse still, marooned four of the porters who 
happened to be at the top alone; no sahib with 
them. 

The days passed. The cliff was daily recon- 
noitred, but found too dangerous. On the fourth 
day, the snow still being in a treacherous condition, 
it became absolutely a matter of life and death to 
reach the men and get them down ; and the rescue 
that was effected by Norton, Mallory and Somervell 
became one of the most thrilling episodes of this 
drama of 192 this epic of records, of victories, 

R 


? 


244 THROUGH TIBET TO EVEREST 


of defeats, of disasters, of tragedies. These three 
intrepid men started for the cliff to rescue the four 
marooned natives. They knew, and we who 
remained at the camp knew as they started, that 
it was touch-and-go with their lives. For this 
reason Bruce was left behind. He wanted to go 
with them. But—somebody might have to assume 
the duties of the leader of the Expedition and bring 
the remnants of the caravans back to India. It 
was more likely than not that Norton, our leader, 
and his two companions would be killed. Still those 
natives had to be got down. I told all my own 
porters to stand by. I had pretty distinct visions of 
having to take part in an Ice Cliff search party 
similar to the tragic one of 1922. 

Step by step the three men plodded their way over 
the crevasses of the glacier, bridged by snow but 
hollow beneath their feet. They were roped and 
took all precautions. Reaching the actual foot of 
the cliff and starting the ascent, the tremendous 
work began. They slipped back at every pace 
almost as much as they climbed. The danger lay 
in one of these little slips developing into a slide of 
the whole snow surface. Once started, it would, 
with an overwhelming sweep and deafening roar, 
develop into an avalanche of hundreds of tons in 
weight. By their icecraft and careful step-cutting 
and zigzagging, but yet mainly by luck, they avoided 
this happening. With extraordinary pluck and by 
making superhuman efforts they gradually reached 





23,000 FT. 


CAMP, 


THE CLIFF 


NY OL LHOAOUA SVN] 


« 


“ION NIVIA¥S Ad ONVI 





A SECOND GREAT VICTORY 245 


higher and higher until they passed the Chimney and 
reached the foot of the Traverse. We watched 
them the whole time from below. 

One must try to realize their state of mind. 
Wearied and hampered in breathing, the body pro- 
tests and the brain becomes dulled. Yet they 
needed their utmost presence of mind and skill in 
mountain-craft to win through. Those unfortunate 
fellows marooned at the upper ledge could never 
be abandoned. Sahibs and natives were one 
single party. Those natives had worked hard and 
faithfully for us. Norton, Mallory and Somervell 
were risking their lives to save them. 

How hard Everest fights! This trouble seemed 
something more than chance or ill-luck. It was 
more like the fight of the very mountain herself. 

At the Traverse Norton and Mallory took up a 
strong position behind a solid projection of ice, and 
paid out the rope to Somervell, who went ahead. 
Slowly, step by step, Somervell cut through the 
snow with his axe and made holes for his feet in 
the more solid ice beneath. Evening was coming 
on. A slanting ray of light illuminated the final 
slope, and by it I saw the men quite clearly through 
my telescope. I focused the camera on them. 
The distance was 1} miles in a straight line, but the 
high-power lens cut a circle which included clearly 
the whole scene on the topmost ledge of the cliff. 
The traverse was almost sheer. Normally there 
were hand ropes fixed and steps cut across it, but 


246 THROUGH TIBET TO EVEREST 


now these were all obliterated. Somervell had to 
cut the steps anew. 

My telescope showed me the tiny distraught 
native figures moving on the topmost ledge where the 
camp was. They came out one by one and looked 
down towards Somervell below. They ran back- 
wards and forwards in a confused manner; and I 
could not understand what they were doing. Some- 
times they would come out and squat down on the 
edge, and then suddenly get up and run back to the 
tents. I expected them to stay at the edge to hear 
Somervell’s instructions, and perhaps, if they had 
ice axes, to start cutting their way down towards 
him, but no. They were behaving in a very strange 
manner and running about without reason. 

Watching through my telescope, I saw Somervell 
stop. He had reached only half-way across the 
Traverse and was now starting to descend. My 
heart sank. Had he found it too difficult to get 
across and given up? Would the men have to 
be abandoned? I continued alternately to watch 
through the telescope and to operate the camera. 
I could not understand the actions, although I 
continued to photograph them. Later, when they 
all got safely back to us, Somervell narrated what 
had happened. He had reached the end of his rope 
held by Norton and Mallory in their safe position. 
He dared not go beyond his rope end, so he jammed 
his ice axe into the snow, untied himself and tied 
the rope end to the axe, so as to provide a hold for 


A SECOND GREAT VICTORY 247 


the men. He himself went down to lighten the 
weight on the slipping snow. Then by shouting 
instructions he got the men across to his rope one 
by one. I saw all this happening and recorded it 
completely in the motion pictures, although I 
could not understand the action at the time. The 
slanting setting rays of the sun were creeping 
beyond the Traverse ; shadows crept up and obscured 
the scene; I got a dark picture, but clear enough 
to show the figures descending. They all got down, 
although one started a snow slide of some 25 feet, 
which might—but fortunately did not—have started 
a general avalanche and swept the whole lot from 
the face of the cliff. 

The motion pictures of this rescue, photographed 
in the fading light, but yet clearly, at 14 miles range, 
are most interesting to anyone understanding the 
geography of the Ice Cliff and understanding moun- 
taineering. But to the ordinary eye they are not 
80 spectacular, because the figures are so small, lost 
in a maze of ice blocks and glistening snow surfaces. 

It took rescuers and rescued many hours to 
descend to the glacier below, and they were lost to 
view as the night came on. We went out from our 
camp with a supporting party, my own porters 
carrying three gallons of hot soup I had had made, 
together with blankets and dry gloves and other 
things. We carried lanterns and made our way 
laboriously through the snow in the footsteps which 
the men had made that morning. We had toiled 


248 THROUGH TIBET TO EVEREST 


through the darkness for about one and ahalf hours 
when, in reply to our frequent calls, we heard 
answering shouts. They had seen the welcoming 
twinkle of our lanterns. When we met, the whole 
lot of them sank down in the snow. They were 
absolutely done! The porters were like drunken 
men, not knowing what was happening. Norton, 
Somervell and Mallory hardly spoke. We got out 
our hot food to give them. One of the porters 
vomited as quickly as we put the stuff to his mouth 
and the others we had to prop up with our knees. 
They were lying in a state of collapse. Norton was 
strong, leaning on his axe, but Mallory was in a 
very bad state. Somervell was the most cheerful, 
and after a drink he started to make jokes in his 
usual buoyant way—a wonderful fellow, Somervell. 
We continued together down the glacier to the camp, 
where the cooks had prepared a good meal for all. 

Later Somervell described the state he had found 
the men in. They were crying like little children. 
They had completely lost their nerve. Alone for 
four days, they had exhausted their food, and for 
the last twenty-four hours had had nothing to eat. 
They were obsessed with fears of the demons of the 
mountain. They told us they had heard the bark- 
ing of the phantom guard dogs of Chomolungma 
at night, and that they were terrified. They never 
expected to be rescued. The accident of 1922 was 
a haunting memory to all of us who had been on 
the former Expedition, and a particularly haunting 


A SECOND GREAT VICTORY 249 


memory to the porters, because it was seven of their 
kin who had been killed. These men would never 
have dared to attempt the descent alone. Their 
sahibs had to come to save them, otherwise surely 
they would have perished. 

They were completely knocked out by the adven- 
ture. Hingston got them down to the Base; but 
they were not fit for another stroke of work for the 
rest of the Expedition. In fact, during the next days 
there was a general exodus from Snowfield Camp 
of everybody who was not up to the mark. It 
developed into a sort of renewed retreat. Mallory 
remained a great deal in his tent and sleeping-bag. 
He looked ill and in my opinion he was “ an unfit 
man’’ when, some days later, he started for the 
mountain with Irvine to make his last effort and 
to meet Death. Further, it is my own idea 
(although I may be quite wrong, as I am not myself 
@ mountain climber, nor am I an expert in such 
matters), presuming, as is generally accepted, that 
his death was due to exposure in the night before 
he and his companion could regain their 27,000- 
feet camp, that Mallory’s end began from this time. 
His strength was sapped. He made his last climb on 
his nerves. 

Owing to the complete upset of all prearranged 
plans by the repeated storms and bad weather, it 
was now decided to make the first big effort, im- 
mediately the weather permitted, without oxygen. 
The original plan was for the first big climb to be 


250 THROUGH TIBET TO EVEREST 


an oxygen-aided attempt. This, however, would 
mean more porterage work, and, owing to the 
exhaustion of the porters and in order to give time 
for others resting at the Base to recoup, it was 
necessary to reduce transportation as much as 
possible. 

It was decided that Norton and Somervell would 
make the non-oxygen attempt, while Mallory would 
rest and Irvine would tune up the oxygen apparatus, 
which was faulty and giving much trouble. Odell, 
Hazard and Bruce would be in support, while I, 
in this emergency, had the honour of being counted 
in the second line of reserve for support work. I 
had my photographic head-quarters permanently 
established at Snowfield Camp. Beetham was 
unfortunately entirely out of action owing to 
sciatica. He returned from the camp to take care 
of the Base while Hingston moved up to the front 
line to be in readiness to render medical aid. Irvine 
worked all day and every day at adjustments to 
the apparatus. He got three machines ready that 
he could rely upon. He altered them entirely from 
the design the makers provided. 

Norton and Somervell now got away on their 
stupendous, smashing effort that, without oxygen, 
was to break Finch’s oxygen record of 1922. 

My care was to get the picture of the climb. 
Distance was not so great a consideration, because 
with the high-power lens I could be at 2 miles 
distance. Even at 3 miles, against a suitable back- 


A SECOND GREAT VICTORY 251 


ground, I could still photograph the movement of 
the climbers. The view-point was the most import- 
ant consideration. In 1922 I had photographed 
the high climbing from the Cliff Camp; but from 
there I got a foreshortened perspective. Now 
above Snowfield Camp rises a wall of rock, one of 
the buttresses of the eastern ridge of the North 
Peak ; and if I could get high enough up it, I could 
get an uninterrupted view across the head of the 
Kast Rongbuk Glacier on to the Ice Cliff, the North- 
East Ridge and the North Face of Everest. I 
climbed with my men carrying the cameras, spare 
steadying tripods, electric batteries for the motor 
drive and stores of food and blankets to keep us 
warm during long hours we expected of waiting and 
watching. We reached 22,000 feet. There I found 
a splendid promontory ledge of rock. I could see the 
camp on the snow plain a thousand feet below. I 
named this ledge ‘‘ Eagle’s Nest Point,” although 
of course there were no eagles here at all. I could 
look south-east over the Rapui Pass to the Kama 
Valley, out of whose seas of mist the great mountain 
spires of Makalu projected. The topmost point of 
Everest was 3 miles away in a straight line. From 
here with my long lens I got the best picture ever 
yet obtained of the final peak. It made a prodigious 
sight as I looked—a forbidding pyramid of grey 
and white with rugged sides. In the marvellously 
thin and clear air it stood bleak and menacing. It 
became my task to train my camera on that cone, 


252 THROUGH TIBET TO EVEREST 


and for hour after hour to scan it with my finder 
telescope in search of microscopic figures that might 
move over patches of white background—where 
exactly I could not tell. 

My men had made a great effort in carrying the 
machines so high up the loose, fragile rock slabs 
along which we passed from ledge to ledge while 
stones whizzed past us falling from above. Stones 
are always falling on this cliff. One of the men felt 
the strain of the weight-carrying, and bled at the 
nose. He complained of a maddening buzzing of 
the head and a pressure of the temples. It was the 
‘“‘ Poison of the Pass’ again! I let him stay curled 
up in a blanket while I put another man on watch 
with the telescope to scan the North-East Ridge and 
northern face of the mountain for any movement of 
Norton and Somervell. On the camera was a S8ix- 
times finder telescope coinciding for view with the 
optical axis of the camera lens, so that any object 
seen in the finder telescope was known to be also 
in the field of view of the camera. 

For many long hours we watched. As a reward 
I got one single picture, where I caught the move- 
ment of a line of black figures, no bigger than dots, 
against the snow high up on the North-East Ridge 
at 25,000 feet, just near the place where they left 
the ridge to turn round to the sheltered side where 
Windy Ridge Camp is placed. I measured the 
distance later from Wheeler’s accurate photographic 
survey, and found it to be 3,000 yards—1j miles. 


A SECOND GREAT VICTORY 253 


The motion picture when projected shows clearly a 
moving line of figures straggling across the slope. 
I was happy indeed to get that picture. For me 
it was a prize—the longest distance photograph ever 
obtained in the world. This record was to be broken 
later by my second picture of Mallory and Irvine’s 
climb, when I got them at 26,400 feet at 2 miles 
range. 

After this I lost sight of Norton and Somervell. 
Next day they climbed 1,500 feet and built their 
highest bivouac at 26,500 feet, just below the North- 
East Shoulder. Next day brought them their 
victory in the breaking of the height record, although 
they missed the very top. Up and up, higher and 
yet higher to 28,000 feet they went. Then heart 
and lungs found their limit. Slower and slower 
they went—only step by step now. The cone looked 
so close—a thousand feet above—only 300 yards, 
but 300 miles to men at the last stage of human 
power and effort, as they were. Somervell’s words 
describing his own state were, “‘ Tired and breathless 
and the very epitome of human limitations.” 

Norton’s pulse, normally slow and regular, was 
beating rapidly and irregularly. Suddenly Somer- 
vell, who had been weakening and going very slow, 
only one step forward to six to seven gasping 
breaths, stopped. He leaned over his axe, then 
dropped to the rock and cried, “ I cannot go any 
farther. You go on!’ His pulse was beating at 
the rate of 120 to the minute. Norton himself was 


254 THROUGH TIBET TO EVEREST 


feeling a nervous trembling, which seemed like a 
violent fever. He went on slowly, but he too was 
so exhausted that in one whole hour of struggling 
forward he ascended only 80 feet above the spot 
where Somervell remained. Although only 900 
feet above him, he saw that the task of reaching the 
summit was impossible for him. He gave up and 
made his way back to his companion. 
Somervell’s exhaustion was caused through his 
throat drying and by the violent coughing thus set 
up, which he was powerless to prevent. The dry 
atmosphere and consequent thirst is one of the most 
serious problems on Everest. The air is bone dry, 
and the rapid, convulsive breathing still further 
dries up the throat. Of course it is impossible to 
carry more than the minimum of drinking water. 
The porters lost a great deal of energy and strength 
by their never-ceasing coughing. It was the one 
contingency for which we were entirely unprepared 
with remedies. Any future Expedition should pay 
the most careful attention to this and provide for 
every member of the party a daily ration of some 
suitable medicine for the throat. Somervell at one 
moment very nearly died in a paroxysm of coughing. 
He said that his throat closed. He could not 
breathe. He started to lose his senses and every- 
thing became black before him. Then, lying down, 
one terrific sustained, violent effort of coughing 
seemed to clear him. Should he have collapsed, 
Norton in his own weakened state could not have 


A SECOND GREAT VICTORY 255 


got him down to their camp. It is not generally 
known or appreciated how near to disaster both 
these men were. Without this disability to Somer- 
vell, it is quite likely that both men would have 
reached well up on the final pyramid if not to the 
top of Everest. 

They began the descent of the mountain, resting 
at Ice Cliff Camp. 

But their adventures were not at anend. Norton 
developed snow-blindness. Dr. Hingston went up 
to the camp to attend to him. The doctor, although 
not a mountain climber himself (and this was his 
first experience of the redoubtable Ice Cliff), per- 
formed an heroic feat. He got Norton down the 
Chimney, guiding Norton’s feet with his own hands 
into every step—a masterpiece of courage, devotion, 
and skill and perseverance. 

It is impossible to imagine men in a more complete 
stage of exhaustion than these were in when they 
reached Snowfield Camp. They had climbed to the 
rarefied heights of 28,000 feet, to an atmosphere 
hitherto believed to be too thin to permit human life 
to be sustained. We were proud of them, and all 
congratulated them. Hingston hurried them into 
their sleeping-bags. 

Norton’s snow-blindness, a terribly painful but 
mercifully a temporary disability, had been caused 
by his removing his Crookes glasses while on the 
upper rocks. He did not realize that even rocks 
would reflect enough of the baneful infra-red rays 


256 THROUGH TIBET TO EVEREST 


that are the cause of this blindness. They found 
that the whole atmosphere is impregnated at those 
immense altitudes by the baneful rays. Norton’s 
eyes became blood-red, and ached terribly. Tem- 
porarily he was ‘ totally blind.” 

As an instance of Somervell’s amazing resource, 
despite his disability, he, at the highest point he 
reached, summoned the energy to get out his little 
vest-pocket Kodak and take one of the most remark- 
able photographs that have ever been taken in the 
world. He photographed the summit of Everest 
from 28,000 feet with Norton in the foreground going 
forward. Somervell kindly gave me the picture, of 
which he made several duplicate exposures, to com- 
plete my photographic record. 

With the previous theories of many scientists now 
upset that mountain climbers could not reach such 
heights under strain of exertion (although balloon- 
ists and flyers have been as high sitting still and 
breathing oxygen), what conclusion can one draw 
from this record performance of Norton and Somer- 
vell? We can say, ax Norton was the first to say, 
that the summit of Iiverest is possible for man to 
reach by his own efforts without artificial breathing. 
The question of whether oxygen should or should 
not be used will always arise. With an improved 
oxygen apparatus, together with better equipped 
and higher base camps and with longer periods of 
acclimatization, the summit of Everest will one day 
without a doubt become within the reach of the 


A SECOND GREAT VICTORY 257 


ordinary strong mountaineer, and with oxygen even 
within the reach of adventurous tourists of the 
future. 

But the first conquest of this mountain means the 
waging of a whole campaign with separate battles. 
Somervell and Norton had won an important one 
—one that must inevitably influence final triumph. 


CHAPTER XVII 
THE CULMINATING TRAGEDY 


As Mallory had written, “The die is cast. 
Again and for the last time we advance up the 
Rongbuk Glacier for victory or for final defeat.” 

Norton and Somervell had shot their bolts. 
Mallory and Irvine now took up the fight, aided by 
oxygen. Norton said: ‘‘ There is no doubt Mallory 
knows he is leading a forlorn hope.” 

I had an opportunity of observing Mallory closely, 
as I was at Snowfield Camp during this time, and I 
formed the positive opinion that physically he had 
become an unfit man. His bitter but suppressed 
disappointment over the continual setbacks and the 
ill luck of the weather this year, was manifest, but 
so also was his burning ambition. It was his spirit 
that was sending him again to the attack. He had 
his teeth in the job and he meant business. He was 
throwing his last ounce of strength into this fight. 

Only two men were to make the assault. Mallory, 
of course, was to be the leader. It was his theory 
that two make the best climbing party; further- 
more, the high-going porters were so reduced that 
camp equipment for two climbers at the most could 


be carried. For companion there were only two to 
258 


THE CULMINATING TRAGEDY ~~ 259 


choose from—lIrvine and Odell, because these two 
were the oxygen experts. Mallory chose Irvine, with 
Odell and Hazard in support at the higher camps. 
Irvine had virtually taken charge of the oxygen 
apparatus. He had been working hard during 
Norton and Somervell’s climb and had completed 
two sets, with a third in reserve. He was anxious 
and worried about the machines; and, I think, the 
anxiety told heavily on him because he also was far 
from being in good condition. He breathed heavily 
and with labour. We all noticed it. 

Odell stood altitude, and acclimatized perhaps 
better than anybody else on the Expedition. He 
was never ill, never seemed tired; always kept an 
even, placid temperament unruffled by any event 
whatsoever. Geology kept him happy the day long. 
He wandered up and down the North-East Ridge 
and across the face of Everest, reaching 25,000 and 
26,000 feet apparently without particular effort. 
He remained longer than any up at Ice Cliff Camp. 
He had been slower than any other of the men to 
acclimatize, but eventually he appeared to become 
inured to a greater degree than any other. For an 
Everest climber he seems to be the perfection of 
type. 

Many people now consider it was a pity Mallory 
did not take him on his final spurt, making his party 
one of three instead of two. But the reasons against 
that course have been given—the difficulties of the 
transportation of camp equipment for a third man 


260 THROUGH TIBET TO EVEREST 


to Highest Bivouac (Mallory intended this time to 
move Highest Bivouac up another 500 feet to 27,000 
feet), and the necessity of leaving behind a supporting 
party at the Ice Cliff and Windy Ridge 25,000-feet 
Depots. 

Such a chain of support is vital on Everest. The 
ideal ‘‘ Polar method ’’ would have a support party 
of two fit men at each stage; we had only Hazard 
and Odell for this support work. Bruce had be- 
come much reduced, and was losing weight every 
day, I think mainly through the rough and un- 
appetizing food of the high camp. Bruce, however, 
was the father of the porters, so he stayed on at 
Snowfield Camp to organize the team to go with 
Mallory and Irvine. He picked eight of the best 
remaining men. It was not expected that more 
than two or three of them would reach 27,000 feet, 
which was higher than porters had ever yet carried 
loads. Those that broke down would fall out and 
remain at Ice Cliff Camp. It was hoped, however, 
as actually did happen, to get two light tents and 
sleeping-bags, and a supply of food and fuel, up to 
the North-East Shoulder, 27,000 feet above the sea. 

The season was late, the date when the monsoon 
usually breaks had passed, but fortunately the 
weather was still clear, and almost ideal, The days 
were warm and fine, the snow and ice in good con- 
dition, and the wind moderate. 

Mallory and Irvine succeeded in three stages in 
establishing their highest bivouac at the shoulder, 


THE CULMINATING TRAGEDY 261 


500 feet higher than any of the previous parties had 
done. From “ Eagle’s Nest ” I photographed them 
on the way up at 26,000 feet. I then went for one 
afternoon to Ice Cliff Camp; the same day they 
went up to 27,000 feet ; and that evening I received 
the note I have already spoken of—the last letter 
Mallory ever wrote. His message told me to look 
out for him next morning at a certain place on the 
summit ridge which he had previously discussed 
and arranged with me. I spoke to Lakpa, who 
brought me the note and who was one of the few 
porters to attain 27,000 feet. He said that the 
Sahibs were well and the weather was good, and that 
they had successfully reached the higher level. 
After building the camp, the Sahibs had sent the 
porters down. That evening Lakpa and his com- 
panions and my own photographic porters descended 
to Snowfield Camp. Lakpa had thus that day 
climbed with a 20-Ib. load from 25,000 feet to 27,000 
feet and descended from 27,000 feet to 21,000 feet 
—a great performance. He was one of the three 
best of the whole porter corps.? 

Next morning at daybreak I set up my motion- 
picture camera with a long lens trained on the 


1 He came back with mo to Europe afterwards and stayed 
ten months, appearing at the Scala Theatro, London, where 
the film “The Epic of Everest ’’ was shown, and toured Eng- 
land, Jreland, Scotland, France and Germany, together with 
the seven Tibetan lamas from a monastery in the interior of 
Tibet, whom I also brought back to appear in connection with 
tho presentation of the film. 


262 THROUGH TIBET TO EVEREST 


summit pyramid, 3 miles distant, to watch for 
Mallory and Irvine on that last terrible trail. 
Mallory in his note saying 8 p.m. had made a mistake, 
meaning of course 8 a.m. I had two keen-eyed men 
watching in turns, their eyes glued continuously to 
the telescope, but they saw nothing. 8 a.m. went 
by, then 10 a.m., and clouds and mist then obscured 
the whole summit ridge. 

Norton was still in his tent suffering from his 
snow-blindness. Bruce, Hingston and I were at 
the camp. Odell and Hazard were based at Ice 
Cliff Camp and Windy Ridge 25,000-feet Camp. 
Mallory’s note and verbal messages to us had 
cheered us; and we were all optimistic over their 
success in establishing the 27,000-feet Depot. 
Should they have passed a good night there and 
have started well before dawn (Mallory was always 
an early starter), there was a distinct chance they 
might gain the top that day. 

This was the historic climax of our adventure— 
glorious because of the marvel of attainment, sad 
because of the tragedy of death. 

For Mallory and Irvine had gone for ever from our 
sight. Up and up into the blue they had gone 
higher and higher—higher than men have ever 
reached before. Odell got a single fleeting glimpse 
of them within 600 feet of the summit and still going 
up. Then he saw nothing more. What happened 
no one knows. They never came back. 

I will relate all that any of us, who waited and 


THE CULMINATING TRAGEDY = 263 


watched, and searched, and waited again during the 
next anxious and awful days, knows. 

Hour after hour we watched the mountain with 
our telescopes for what we might see through the 
mists. The men were a day and a night overdue. 
We knew nothing. There was no messageeven from 
the support party. Had they slipped and been 
hurled down the 10,000-feet precipice? Perhaps, 
the summit attained, they had found themselves too 
exhausted to reach camp by nightfall and had been 
frozen to death? ‘The silence of the support party 
meant, we hoped, that they had gone out to search. 
We could only hope against hope that they would 
find the two men alive and would bring them 
down. 

To catch the spirit of that tragic time you must 
Tealize the terrible state of body and mind that 
comes upon men in these high altitudes, with the air 
so rarefied that it can scarcely support life although 
the wind blows at tremendous velocities. After 
every effort hearts go pounding until they are in 
agony ; and each spell of toil demands long periods 
of rest. Worst of all is the state of mind. Men fall 
into an almost ghastly psychological condition. 

Think of what the effort had cost those already 
tired men struggling towards the pinnacle. Think 
also of us; our initial joy and expectation sinking 
into as deep a dejection and anxiety when every 
fresh hour brought the certainty of disaster and 
death more overwhelmingly upon us. How we had 


264 THROUGH TIBET TO EVEREST 


desired victory ! Did we not deserve it? This was 
the third time we had returned to the task. 

Two whole days and nights had now gone by, 
with hope fading at every hour. Norton, recovered 
sufficiently from snow-blindness, paced backwards 
and forwards in front of his tent, speaking little, 
visibly affected and, I think, already resigned to the 
worst. Hingston had all his medical aids ready and 
was prepared to go out at once in answer to a call 
from the support party up on the mountain. I had 
left my photographic station on the Cliff above the 
camp and now had my men posted at my telescope 
erected in the middle of Snowfield Camp. The men 
took it in turns to scan the mountain during every 
hour and moment of daylight. Norton, Bruce, 
Hingston and I sat about near the little Whymper 
tent we used for the mess. Now and then we called 
over to the watchers on the telescope, ‘‘ Kutch 
Dekta 1”’—‘‘ Do you see anything?’ The men 
turned and shook their heads each time: ‘‘ Kutch 
Nahin, Sahib ’—‘ Nothing at all, sir.’ Then I 
would at intervals go to the telescope and scan the 
mountain myself to make certain. The days were 
fine and the sun shone, although up on the mountain 
the never-ceasing wind and mist were blowing ; and 
in the distance in the southern sky over the Rapui 
La banks of cloud were collecting and rolling up. 
They told that the monsoon had reached Bengal 
and would soon sweep up here to break and obliterate 
everything. 


THE CULMINATING TRAGEDY 265 


Suddenly our watchers at the telescope called out 
that they saw figures on the crest of the Ice Cliff ! 

We riveted our eyes to the clifi-top. We saw 
through the telescope distinctly a line of men re- 
turning and entering the camp. (The tents on the 
ice shelf could just be seen from Snowfield Camp.) 
It was Odell with his support party. Presently we 
saw figures come out to the edge of the shelf. They 
were coming to make a signal to us. We used to 
communicate between the camps over the space of 
a mile by signals; and Norton had arranged with 
the support party a series by which to tell us their 
news. As we watched we again hoped, against hope, 
that they would tell us they had found the men— 
frost-bitten—exhausted—incapable of moving—any- 
thing, but still alive. While life existed we could 
go to the rescue and do our best and utmost. What 
would the signal be? Life, or ? Isaw them 
place six blankets in the form of a cross. Then they 
went away. This was the signal of DEATH. 

I remember the moment vividly. I saw this 
signal through my telescope as I was making the 
photograph of the scene through my high-powered 
magnifying lens. An electric battery was operating 
the camera. I was so agitated to read the message 
that I could hardly have turned the handle of the 
camera myself. Bruce asked me what Isaw. I saw 
plainly it was a cross, but had not the heart to 
answer him. I handed him the telescope that he 
might look for himself. We all looked. We all 





266 THROUGH TIBET TO EVEREST 


tried to make it different. But it was plainly a cross 
on the white snow. 

Norton called a conference and discussed many 
things. A further search ;—a new search party— 
the futility of it, since no men so long overdue 
could possibly be still alive; the project of searching 
the glaciers below the precipice for their bodies ; 
the hopelessness of that task in such a vast area— 
what cable message should we at once send home; 
the approaching monsoon, and the safety of Odell 
and Hazard and their men; the advisability of with- 
drawing them at once down the Ice Cliff that 
becomes so treacherous in bad weather—and a 
hundred other thoughts. 

In the end Norton ordered an answering signal 
to be made; and Hingston had the task of doing 
it. He went out on the glacier just beyond the 
tents and placed three lines of blankets spaced 
apart. It said to those on the Cliff above: ‘* Aban- 
don hope and come down.” It was all over. Soon 
Odell and Hazard would be with us; and then they 
would tell us details. We sat down and waited for 
them to come. 

That night, our party reunited, Odell told us the 
whole tale—a thrilling tale because of the magnificent 
attainment of Mallory and Irvine as last seen by 
him and because of the heroism of Odell himself in 
the terrific efforts he made to find them. 

- To Odell must fall the honour and praise for 
doing the utmost that any man could do. Twice 


THE CULMINATING TRAGEDY 267 


he went in search to 27,000 feet, the last time alone, 
because the others with him had fallen exhausted. 
I will recount his story as he told it to us himself, 
to the best of my remembrance, it being now three 
years ago. 

‘On the day Mallory and Irvine were to make 
the attempt on the summit, I went up to the 25,000- 
feet Depot to be in close support of them. I was 
gseologizing ! on the way, and I made short trips in 
the neighbourhood of the camps. 

‘* At about half-past twelve there was a sudden 
clearing of the atmosphere; and the entire summit 
of Everest was unveiled. A belt of driving mist 
sweeping across the northern face failed to reach as 
far as the summit and left the final pyramid standing 
out clear against the blue sky. Suddenly I noticed 
high up in the almost perpendicular wilderness a 
moving black speck silhouetted on the second step,? 
then I saw another speck move up to join the first. 
It was no other than Mallory and Irvine within 
600. feet of the summit. They seemed to be going 
strong. I dropped my geologizing, took out my 
glasses and riveted my attention on the spot. The 

1 His ruling passion, exercised in spite of Tibetan pro- 
hibitions. 

2 The second step is the upper of two distinct steps in the 
summit ridge leading froin the North-East Shoulder to the 
summit and is situated just at the foot of the final pyramid. 
It is on the edge of the ridge. On the south side the great 
southern precipice of Everest drops 14,000 feet to the Kang- 


shung Glacier of Nepal. On the north side is the 10,000-feet 
precipice to the Rongbuk Glacier of Tibet. 


268 THROUGH TIBET TO EVEREST 


wind was tearing round me. Then the mist swept 
up, and the whole fascinating vision vanished. I 
waited and watched again, but the mist never cleared, 
although, I think, up where they were there was 
little or no mist. But that was all I saw. When 
I last saw them they were going strong. The sight 
gave me the first impression that they were going 
to reach the top. 

‘‘It was so late when I had seen them at the 
second step—a good four hours behind their schedule 
time—that my fear was of their being overtaken by 
the night in the descent. I expected that to return 
to the 27,000-feet bivouac would be the utmost they 
could do that night. Next day I went up to the 
27,000-feet Depot, taking two of the Sherpas with 
me, hoping to meet Mallory and Irvine coming 
down. At last I reached 27,000 feet and found 
their camp. I approached the tents and called out, 
but there was no answer. I went up and looked in. 
The tents were empty. 

‘“‘T and the porters were in a state of exhaustion, 
and we could not stay up there. I then found a 
white background and made a signal to Hazard at 
the Ice Cliff below. We went back to the 25,000- 
feet camp; and [ spent a night of terrible anxiety. 
Next morning I found the two porters were incapable 
of going up again to 27,000 feet and I was in an 
exhausted state myself, but with oxygen—and there 
was the third spare apparatus here—I thought I 
could do the climb again. Accordingly I struggled 


FEY 
« yy x 


ne Oak 












E 
a 
ey 
’ 


THE CITADEL 


SECOND 
POSITION, 







CLoups» 
COVERING é é 
NORTH RIDGE we 






Prom tre Sphere, by perwmetsston 


ODELL’S LAST VIEW OF MALLORY AND IRVINE. 


MALLORY end ¢RVINE 
ae eT 


ay ons eee 
27,000 FT. 





THE SUMMIT OF EVEREST. 


(Telephoto from the Base Camp. ) 


THE CULMINATING TRAGEDY ~— 269 


up to 27,000 feet again, but alone, leaving the porters 
behind. I hoped that Mallory and Irvine might 
perhaps have got back that night and I might find 
them in the tents. I could then look after them 
and signal down for help. I dragged myself up to 
the two tents, which I found standing as before. I 
went to them and pulled the flaps of the tents apart 
and looked in. They were empty. The two men 
must have perished. There was no trace of them. 
There was no written message left by either of them. 
I looked at everything. It was beyond my power 
to search higher up the mountain. The men had 
been missing from their camp for two nights and 
they could not possibly survive. I made my way 
down and reached the Ice Cliff, where we put out the 
signal to you—that was all I was able to do.” 
Then Odell added: “I think that it is quite 
possible and even likely that Mallory and Irvine 
reached the top and were overtaken by the night in 
the descent, exhausted and frozen to death.” 
Such was the simple, heroic and tragic story Odell 
told us. It was then that we realized to the bitter 
full how hard and how cruelly this mountain fights. 
She had allowed the men to come on, and at the last 
moment had killed them. Maybe she had killed 
them in revenge after they had attained their 
victory. Who knows? She alone holds the secret. 


CHAPTER XVIII 
SOME FINAL CONSIDERATIONS 


Thus the story of Everest ends—tragically, at 
present. Brief consideration of a few of the theories 
as to what happened may not be thought redundant, 
so I venture to deal with them here. 

We talked and reasoned and speculated. Norton’s 
Opinion, although he always carefully emphasized 
that it could only be an opinion, was that the end 
came through an ordinary mountaineering accident. 
Where they were last seen was a point of no excep- 
tional climbing difficulty, although ever dangerous. 
A slip or a break of the loose fragile rock would 
precipitate them to the glacier 10,000 feet below. 
It is unlucky that Everest’s rock is loose and that 
the strata slopes towards the climber. A foot may 
thus slip fatally at any moment, whereas if the 
strata dipped in the reverse direction, it would 
provide ledges and cracks for nailed boots to grip. 
On this tragic day, conditions were aggravated by 
a fall of loose fresh snow, which, of course, made 
the rocks still more slippery. 

Why Mallory and Irvine were four hours behind 
their schedule time will remain a mystery. Mallory 


was always a believer in an early start, and would 
270 


SOME FINAL CONSIDERATIONS 271 


have realized the necessity of getting back to camp 
by nightfall. The only suggestion we can make is 
that they were bothered by the oxygen apparatus, 
and that Irvine had to make some adjustment 
delaying their start. In all Mallory’s climbs, he 
was never known to be a late starter. Even if ill 
or unfit he was always astir before his companions. 
We know by the experience of Norton and Somervell 
that it is possible to sleep well even at an altitude of 
27,000 feet above the sea, so we cannot reason that 
they might not have slept and were consequently 
over-tired in the morning. We think the more 
likely cause is some unforeseen difficulty with the 
oxygen apparatus. 

In trying to reason out the causes of the accident, 
we must take into account not only the condition 
of the mountain, but also the character and prob- 
able course of action of the men in the conditions 
they found. Mallory was cautious and sensitive 
to responsibility, although a man of indomitable 
nervous energy. He had a young companion, with 
relatively little mountain knowledge, but of splendid 
physique, who no doubt through his buoyant tem- 
perament would be ever optimistic. Mallory would 
realize this and temper that enthusiasm with caution. 
He would hesitate co take an unwarranted risk. 
Mallory would not have started so late behind his 
schedule time if he had thought there was danger of 
being overtaken by the night. 

This was Norton’s view, from his personal know- 


272 THROUGH TIBET TO EVEREST 


ledge of Mallory. He thought that Mallory must 
have been confident of reaching the summit and 
returning in safety, and therefore was certain some 
accident must have happened. He believed that 
Mallory’s will power would triumph over all diffi- 
culties and hardships, even against exhaustion in 
the late hours of the night. Norton remembered 
the great climb of 1922 when he with Mallory had 
accomplished the tricky descent of the mountain in 
the middle of the night, with the whole party 
exhausted and with the additional burden of con- 
ducting Morshead step by step. Norton himself 
had then been in a state of collapse, and frost-bitten 
in both hands and feet. It had been Mallory’s 
leadership and will power that had brought the 
party back. Norton, remembering this vivid exper- 
ience, could only visualize Mallory’s death as the 
result of—‘ An ordinary mountaineering  acci- 
dent.” 

There is an alternative theory. At high altitudes 
we know that the blood is changed and the action 
of the heart affected, and it is within the bounds of 
possibility that aclimber at such altitudes may sud- 
denly drop dead. But this we can hardly imagine 
happening to both men at once. Furthermore it 
is unlikely, since both men were young and of the 
best physique, although we know they were tired 
and not in perfect condition before they started. 
Odell, moreover, had described them as ‘ going 
strong.” We can reasonably suppose that their 


SOME FINAL CONSIDERATIONS = 273 


youth and staying power would have prevented the 
sudden collapse one might more readily expect in 
the case of older men. The accident theory seems 
the more likely : possibly a slip on those loose, sloping 
rocks treacherously sprinkled with freshly fallen 
snow on the day of the climb. 

Near the foot of the final pyramid is a place the 
climbers have named ‘‘ The Gully,” which they say 
will always be a dangerous place to cross. If one 
of them had slipped here, the weight of the oxygen 
apparatus would have increased the jerk on the rope 
and perhaps pulled the other man off his feet too. 
The oxygen apparatus tended to make a man top- 
heavy. It projected awkwardly. Hitting a rock 
round a corner it would tend to overbalance a man 
in a difficult place like the Gully. If one man 
slipped, cowld the other single-handed, in his ex- 
hausted state at such an altitude, hold the weight 
of his companion ? 

There arises that vexed question, whether or not 
men should be roped, and further, whether two is 
the ideal climbing party, as claimed by certain 
modern mountain climbers, or whether the party 
should be of three or four or more. Mr. Douglas 
Freshfield, the veteran Alpine, Caucasian and 
Himalayan mountaineer, says of this problem: 
* With all due deference to the younger gencration, 
I doubt gravely the expediency of sending a party 
of two. No doubt a party of two moves somewhat 
more quickly, especially on dificult rock climbs, but 


274 THROUGH TIBET TO EVEREST 


on a long and relatively easy ascent a party of three 
has more obvious advantages.” 

Now Everest is not a difficult rock climb. Our 
climbers consider it easy. The ascent of Everest is 
more a feat of endurance depending upon lucky 
weather conditions and elaborate preparation and 
support from a chain of depots. In a party of three, 
should one be disabled, two can more easily render 
assistance. One can go back for aid while the other 
remains with the sick or injured man. The advan- 
tages of a party of two are mobility, speed, extension 
of porter power which will allow successive parties 
to make a succession of attempts profiting by the 
experience of their predecessors, and economy in 
camp and food transportation. 

Experience teaches that the necessity of a highly 
organized system of support to the party making 
the final effort to the summit is more important than 
has hitherto been realized. It has been suggested 
that if sufficient camp accommodation could be 
provided (a matter only of organization and work) 
a party of six should set out for the summit from 
the last bivouac. If one man dropped out, one 
other fit man would sacrifice himself to bring 
the casualty back. This would allow for two 
failures, reckoning that two at least of the party 
would emerge fit to make the last lap, the last 
200 or 300 feet even, to the summit. To gain 
speed they might move in three separate parties 
of two, unroped, the whole six combining and 


SOME FINAL CONSIDERATIONS = 275 


roping together when dangerous places had to be 
passed. 

Another cause of the accident may have been the 
influence of the gully or the influence of the wind, 
or both together. Mallory told me himself, when 
he talked to me of his possible routes up the final 
pyramid and told me where to watch for him, that 
he expected to go up the North-East Ridge of the 
final pyramid, but if he found the gully particularly 
difficult or if the west wind were particularly bad 
he would take the Eastern Ridge, missing the gully 
by passing across the head of it and gaining better 
protection from the west wind. Such a route 
would bring him along the knife-edge of the Eastern 
Ridge. This ridge is corniced by the continual action 
of the west wind. If a man goes too near the edge 
of a snow cornice he may drop through ; and in this 
case would fall down the southern precipice and 
be dashed to death on the Kangshung Glacier of 
Nepal, 14,000 feet below. This southern precipice 
of Everest is probably the greatest sheer drop in the 
whole world. Again, the wind, which attains a fury 
of 150 miles an hour over the upper ridges of Everest, 
might, in a sudden storm, blow the men over the edge. 

Still another cause of an accident might be the 
Sudden breakdown of the oxygen apparatus. De- 
prived of oxygen, a man would easily collapse ; and 
we knew unfortunately that their apparatus was none 
too dependable. But again, would both machines 
have failed ? 


276 THROUGH TIBET TO EVEREST 


Accepting the accident theory, the question then 
arises: Did it occur on the way up or on the way 
down? Norton thought it more likely that it 
occurred on the way down when they were moving 
more quickly, were more exhausted and perhaps 
were going less carefully. 

Is it possible that they actually did reach the top, 
and that Everest has really been conquered ? Odell 
has said that in his opinion it is possible and even 
likely ; but others of the Expedition are less optim- 
istic. In any case the Expedition and the Geogra- 
phical Society make no positive claim whatsoever 
to the conquest of the mountain. That is obviously 
impossible, since nothing definite is known. 

Try to put yourself in the place of Mallory and 
Irvine as they were ascending those last 600 feet. 
The summit, visible at the time, its height fore- 
shortened by looking up, would look encouragingly 
close. They were going strong, as Odell described, 
when within 600 feet of it. That does not mean 
they were going fast. It means only that they were 
going steadily forward. But at the same time it 
means that their oxygen supply was obviously 
working satisfactorily at the moment. The weather 
was clear and conditions favourable except for the 
lateness of the hour. You can imagine how they 
must have been urged on by one dominating desire 
—the Summit. You can imagine how Mallory’s 
energy of nerve, brain and muscle must have risen 
to the supreme effort of his life. You can imagine 


SOME FINAL CONSIDERATIONS 277 


his spirit straining his physical strength to the last 
limits. The goal was in their grasp. Should they 
turn back and lose it? They were above the clouds, 
which glided swiftly across the northern face of the 
mountain, as Odell told us—above those clouds 
that hid his view of them from below. Their 
atmosphere was a clear one. Cannot you imagine, 
knowing the spirit of both, that with the view of 
half the world below them they were so thrilled that 
they just HAD to goon? At the very top, so near, 
everything on this earth would be BELOW THEM. 
What a goal! Might they not indeed throw every 
other thought to the wind to win such a prize? 

There are many people who look upon mountain- 
eering adventures and activities as a preposterous 
waste of human energy, involving unnecessary risks 
to life and limb. They are entitled to their opinion 
and may be left to lead their comfortable lives and 
to die in their beds. The fact remains that there 
are other men who feel an urge to the high places, 
men whose spiritual natures are drawn to them, 
irresistibly, and who there gain the spiritual susten- 
ance their souls crave. 

The present Pope, Pius XI, who is himself an 
ardent and distinguished mountaineer and who 
followed the Everest Expedition with the liveliest 
interest, sending us repeated cablegrams of encour- 
agement, congratulation and sympathy, wrote this 
on the occasion of the anniversary of the birth of 
St. Bernard: ‘In his laborious effort to attain 


278 THROUGH TIBET TO EVEREST 


mountain tops, where the air is lighter and purer, 
the climber gains new strength of limb. In the 
endeavour to overcome the obstacles of the way, the 
soul trains itself to conquer difficulties; and the 
spectacle of the vast horizon, which from the highest 
crest offers itself on all sides to the eyes, raises his 
spirit to the Divine Author and Sovereign of Nature.” 

Did Mallory and his companion perhaps feel that 
exalting urge to be above everything in the world 
and to get a glimpse, so to speak, of God’s view of 
things ? 

Did Mallory’s spirit drive his body to death? 


THE END 


APPENDIX A 


OXYGEN 


As has been explained in the case of Norton and 
Somervell’s climb, it is now proved to be possible to climb 
Mount Everest without oxygen. This could be done, of 
course, only by very powerful and able climbers. It would 
be safer on a future Expedition to take oxygen, stored and 
used in approved machinery, which should be much better 
than the machinery the Expeditions previously have had. 
Oxygen will facilitate the task and render the climb possible 
to any ordinary fit human being ; and probably some day 
in the future the journey to the top of Everest will become 
an adventurous excursion possible to the ordinary tourist. 

Oxygen enables men to walk faster and therefore lessens 
the time which has to be spent at high altitudes on the 
mountain, thus reducing the risk of disaster through bad 
weather. We know how the problem of Everest is 90 per 
cent. a problem of weather. 

The blood and oxygen are two things to be considered 
together. The colouring matter of the blood is known as 
hemoglobin. It lives upon oxygen, and takes it from the 
air through the lungs. It gives up oxygen with equal 
readiness through the work of the muscles, glands and 
other organs, so there is always a process of oxygen coming 
in and carbonic acid gas being given out. Oxygen is the 
food and carbonic acid is the poisonous product. The 
amount of oxygen food is determined by the rate of breath- 
ing, and this is regulated by the brain, without the neces- 
sary intervention of consciousness, by the reaction of 
carbonic acid in the blood. Now at high altitudes the air 
becomes thinner and there is less oxygen. Almost every- 
body is familiar with the effects of panting and nose bleed- 

279 


280 APPENDIX A 


ing caused by going quickly to a great height. Some 
people cannot even go beyond five or six thousand feet ; 
and if they go higher their breathing becomes laborious 
and painful. The pulse beats at a great speed and the 
heart dilates and thumps. Headaches come on, with sick- 
ness and vomiting, loss of appetite and incapacity to make 
any effort, mental or physical. When this stage becomes 
acute it is called ‘“‘ mountain sickness.”’ 

One of the most serious effects of altitude is this effect 
of starvation of oxygen on the blood, causing a mental 
condition very similar to “ gassing’ in the War. It has 
been observed in aeroplanes that men become insensible to 
their surroundings. An airman once started using his 
Lewis gun magazine to beat his companion on the head 
instead of firing his gun at the enemy! A state of intense 
irritability becomes one of the salient sensations. The 
slightest effort costs more than a hundred yards sprint on 
the ground. It used to be thought that there were alti- 
tudes beyond which men could not go without the help of 
“ artificial ’ oxygen, but this theory—worked out from 
scientific tests in oxygen chambers—has been more or less 
disproved by the practical test of the Everest Expeditions. 
They showed beyond question the astonishing results of 
acclimatization ; how life successfully adapts itself to 
strange, new conditions. 

The celebrated scientist and physician, Dr. Gale, has 
expressed the opinion that the effect of artificial oxygen 
could be obtained, and more easily, by the use of substi- 
tutes which react on the thyroid gland such as quinine, 
hydrobromide, pancreatin, insulin and perhaps parathy- 
roid. Other doctors have suggested the method of injecting 
oxygen by hypodermic syringes direct into the blood ; and 
this method, carefully undertaken in correct doses, has 
been proved to be of extraordinary benefit and to be a 
quicker and more efficient method of applying oxygen to 
patients in hospitals, but I do not know of any case in 
which it has been tried by mountaineers. It would be 
worth trying. Every new method should be tried and 


OXYGEN 281 


not condemned by theory but proved out by practical 
test. Breathing oxygen through the lungs is, of course, a 
comparatively inefficient method, although it is the method 
of Nature. The climber breathing oxygen from storage 
cylinders on his back loses a great deal of the gas by 
breathing out that large proportion of gas that the lungs 
have failed to assimilate in the rapid panting for breath 
under severe physical strain. There is a further loss in 
that the storage tanks deliver a continuous flow of gas 
whether the man is breathing in or out. When he breathes 
out the gas is lost. Thus fifty per cent. is lost, although 
Finch’s storage bladder and rubber delivery tube, which 
he trained himself to grip and seal with his teeth at each 
out-breath, somewhat counteracts this loss. It was a 
simple and most valuable invention. Finch was clever at 
such inventions. 

Then there is the question whether to use gas stored 
in cylinders under pressure with all the attendant disadvan- 
tages of the weight of steel cylinders and the difficulty of 
preventing gas leaks, or whether to use liquid oxygen. 
Longstaff was the first to express the theory that com- 
pressed gas was an inefficient and obsolete method. This 
has been found so by aviators, who now, I believe, always 
use liquid oxygen. The difficulty of equipping an Everest 
Expedition with liquid oxygen is the expense. It is said 
it would cost about £2,000 to provide the Expedition 
with a portable oxygen-liquefying plant. If it could be sup- 
plied, of course it would make the climbing of Everest 
almost an easy matter.} 

From my own observation and use of the compressed- 
oxygen apparatus we had with us, I formed the following con- 
clusions, which I offer as my humble non-technical opinion. 

The faults of the apparatus were : 

l. Too great a weight for the gas capacity. 

1 Liquid oxygen evaporates at a fast, steady rate into gas 
oxygen, and no strength of steel will restrain it from expansion. 
It has to be used therefore within a matter of hours of its 
manufacture. 


282 APPENDIX A 


2. Too many complicated adjustments and joints at 
which under conditions on Everest the gas would, as it did, 
be bound to leak. I would suggest these be remedied in 
the following way. 

(1) A more powerful and better steel be used for the 
storage cylinders and a better design of cylinder be evolved, 
to contain at least six and if possible eight hours’ gas supply 
(instead of four as in 1924) at the normal rate of flow. 

Each climber should carry only one of these larger 
cylinders, and rely upon dumps of supply cylinders and 
supporting parties for renewal. (In the event of break- 
down he would breathe from a by-pass from his com- 
panion’s apparatus.) 

(2) All the complicated gauges, pressure and flow meters, 
taps, tubes and joints should be abolished. Each cylinder 
should have annealed to it (not screwed only) a pressure- 
reducing valve, one main opening tap and one by-pass tap. 
The gas would go direct from the pressure-reducing valve (of 
which the action is to deliver a constant and steady stream 
of gas at a fixed rate irrespective of the pressure within the 
cylinder) by a rubber tube with a Finch storage expansion 
bladder tu the mouth. Thus there is no chance of a leak. 
(In 1924, 60 per cent. of the Expedition’s cylinders of gas 
were absolutely empty when we arrived at the foot of 
Everest !) The reducing valve would be set unalterably 
to deliver gas at what was predetermined to be the most 
economical minimum but sufficient supply of gas for a 
climber. All men of the party would therefore be taking 
gas at the same rate. If any man needed more, that in 
itself would be an indication that he was unfit to go on, and 
he would drop at once out of the party going for the top. 
Thus the leader would know exactly where he was. He 
would know by his watch (not by a pressure meter) how 
much gas his men had left. He would be able to make 
his plans cut-and-dried for his dumps of cylinders. 

The cylinders, so made, would be charged at least two 
months before an Expedition started with perfectly dry 
oxygen, weighed and tested by weight for full charge. 


APPENDIX B 


SCIENCE VERSUS NATURE 


The pioneer explorer of former days conquered natural 
obstacles by determination and brute force. It was an age 
of greater romance ; and we may regret that lost romance. 
Now, however,we can only adapt ourselves to the conditions 
of modern times, because the major tasks of pioneering 
on the earth’s surface, except Everest, are accomplished. 
All the modern explorer can do is to go over the same 
ground as his predecessors have explored. Yet in going 
over that same ground a new thrill and interest can be 
awakened by repeating the task in a different and in a 
modern scientific way. Where the explorer of former days 
matched his physical strength against Nature’s obstacles and 
where he rather emphasized his difficulties, the modern 
explorer vanquishes those same obstacles by the aid of 
science, minimizing his difficulties and making the facility 
and ease of conquering those obstacles the measure of 
the success of his work. Where the explorer of former 
days won glory through the loss of human life in an unequal 
struggle with the forces of Nature, the modern explorer 
considers the loss of human life a mark of failure to his 
enterprise. Amundsen trekked over the snow to the 
South Pole with dogs and sledges. Now he flies over the 
North Polar Continent in an airship with speed, comfort 
and safety. 

Mountaineers have no object in flying over Mount 
Everest in an airship, because the object of the Everest 
Expedition is—to climb the mountain. However, I would 
like to urge here the plea that a future expedition should 
conquer Everest by science. The climbers, Norton and 
Somervell, have shown (Norton has definitely expressed 
his conviction) that the summit of Everest can be reached 

283 


284 APPENDIX B 


by mountaineers without artificial breathing or scientific 
aids, yet men like those two are rare in the world; and 
there are few others who would ever be capable of doing 
the task. With the aid of science and certain preparations 
which I am explaining, I am convinced Everest could be 
put within the reach of the ordinary man. Further, I 
would make the plea, although I expect it will arouse 
hostility among devotees of mountain climbing who do 
not want their sport invaded by outsiders, that Everest 
is a task which should be accomplished by the ordinary 
man for the glory of the modern spirit of exploration— 
to prove that mankind by the application of the devices 
of science can overcome any physical obstacles of Nature. 

People may say : “‘ But why should he want to do this ? 
Why not leave it to mountain climbers? It is their special 
sport. What good can it do the ordinary man?” I 
would reply: ‘‘ Everest is the last stronghold of Nature— 
the last big exploration task left in the world.” } 

Collect an Olympic team of fine young men, who will repre- 
sent the manhood of the world, and send them out equipped 
with modern scientific appliances and devices. Let them 
not attack nor assault Everest, but let them walk up the 
mountain and prove its conquest without loss, injury or 
suffering to themselves. Would not such an accom- 
plishment be a stirring victory ? It would be a victory for 
modern man. It would awaken mankind further to the 
realization that within themselves they possess infinite 
capacity. It would be another step forward in the evolu- 
tion of mankind. I am positive it could be done with the 
correct organization and method. 

Our knowledge of human capacities has been much 
advanced by the Everest Expeditions. In 1921 we thought 
the mountain impregnable even to skilled mountaineers ; 
1922 showed men their undreamt-of capacity to go to 
immense heights, but it left our knowledge of acclima- 
tization still uncertain and imperfect ; 1924 considerably 
advanced that knowledge and proved that men could 

1 Excluding submarine cxploration. 


SCIENCE VERSUS NATURE 285 


rest and sleep at night even at 27,000 feet above the sea. 
Norton and Somervell’s brilliant performance showed that 
the expert mountaineer had it within his power to reach 
the summit of Everest on his own efforts unaided by 
artificial breathing. Formerly people considered that there 
was a definite limit of altitude at which a human being 
could live, beyond which he would deteriorate in health 
and eventually die. Such would no doubt be the case 
under conditions of inadequate shelter and food and 
sleep, but I am convinced that if it were possible to pro- 
vide huts, proper sleeping facilities and well-prepared food, 
there would be no such limit. Any present limit is more 
the result of circumstance and local conditions than the 
intrinsic factor of the effects of altitude on human beings. 
I believe that, supposing there were a house and food up 
there, men could adapt themselves to living and staying 
at the top of Everest. 

Of all experience gained on the Everest Expeditions I 
think the astonishing scope of acclimatization is the most 
important, and every use should therefore be made of it 
in planning the next ascent of the mountain, e.g. : 

(1) Byadvancing the whole base of operations 15 miles 
nearer the mountain and 5,000 feet higher in altitude. 
The Base Camp should be moved up to the head of the 
East Rongbuk Glacier. 

(2) By constructing weather-proof huts for the whole 
Expedition to live in at the Base, and light storm-proof 
shelter huts up the mountain with adequate facilities for 
sleeping and proper preparation of food, instead of using 
tent bivouacs which are ever at the mercy of the weather. 

(3) By extending the period of the Expedition from 
the spring to the autumn in order to allow time both for 
more elaborate preparation and also for the members of 
the party, living comfortably at high altitudes, to 
acclimatize. 

Those would be the three main ways in which our 
experience of acclimatization could be applied. In 
addition : 


286 APPENDIX B 


(1) A differently designed and vastly improved com- 
pressed-oxygen apparatus should be provided for use 
between say 25,000 feet and the summit. 

(2) A roadway fit for yaks should be made as far as the 
head of the glacier where the Base would be established. 

(3) A light aerial rope line (1,700 feet in length) should 
be provided to take loads and stores up to 50 lb. in weight 
up the Ice Cliff. 

N.B.—By means of (2) and (3) all transportation below 
21,000 feet would be transferred from men to animals, and 
up to 23,000 feet (the top of the Ice Cliff) to machinery. 
This would effect an enormous economy in human porter- 
age and would greatly relieve the burden on the porters. 
They would carry only from 23,000 feet upwards. 

(4) Arrangements should be made for wireless communi- 
cation for weather forecasts from India, and for wireless 
intercommunication between the Base and all Depots on 
the mountain, thus ensuring close support to the parties 
making the ascent. 

(5) Modern oil and spirit cooking appliances should be 
installed in the Depots, and a normal diet of healthy, 
appetizing food provided for all. 

The organization for all this could be carried out in the 
following way : 

The Expedition would be primarily organized in two 
groups—the Preparation Party and the Climbing Party. 

The summit of the Ice Cliff would be considered the 
point of departure of the climbing party and the sole 
object of the Preparation Party would be to transport the 
Climbing Party to this point from the starting-point in 
India in the perfection of physical condition without the 
latter having expended an ounce of unnecessary energy or 
strength. 

The Preparation Party would themselves be sub- 
organized into (a) an Engineering Party, and (5) a Trans- 
portation Party. The latter would take charge of the 
transportation of the entire Expedition and its stores and 
equipment in two caravans from India to Mount Everest : 


SCIENCE VERSUS NATURE 287 


first, the Preparation Party, travelling in the very early 
spring, arriving at the Rongbuk in March; and secondly, 
the Climbing Party, who would follow two months later. 

At the Rongbuk Monastery a dump would be made (fed 
and maintained by the Transportation Party), while the 
Engineering Party with a corps of one hundred Nepalese 
and Tibetan coolies (men and women) would build stone- 
walled huts and animal stables at the site of the old No. 1 
Glacier Depot at the junction of the East and Main Rong- 
buk Glaciers. After this they would smooth a path up 
the right (east) bank of the East Rongbuk Glacier fit for 
yaks to follow. 

After the 1924 Expedition, in my photographic wander- 
ings over the glacier, I took particular pains to explore the 
right bank; and I found that this way could be made 
comparatively easy for yaks. It would be about 9 miles 
long, but not more than a total of 3 miles would need work 
upon it to smooth out a yak path. Where the lateral 
glaciers join the parent trunk the ice is broken into bergs 
and the way is now blocked, but, as I have said, not more 
than three miles of path would here need making. The 
yak, the highest-going, the heaviest-load-carrying, the 
most sure-footed and the hardiest mountain-transport 
animal in the world, is the natural means of transportation 
which Tibet offers. I think the Expeditions have rather 
failed to realize the full possibilities of this natural resource 
of the country. 

When this path was made, the Transportation Party 
with their convoy of twenty-five yaks (owned and bought 
by them in Tibet) would transport the whole equipment of 
the Expedition to the head of the East Rongbuk Glacier. 
The animals would have their base at “ Yak Depot,” 
17,500 feet, at the junction of the two glaciers. Local 
Tibetans and their yaks would keep the Preparation Party 
supplied as far as the Monastery. The stage between Yak 
Depot and the Base Camp at 21,000 feet at the head of the 
glacier would be a one-day stage. 

Special fodder for the twenty-five high-going yaks would 


288 APPENDIX B 


be provided in Tibetan tsampa (barley meal, the ration being 
two handfuls per yak per day), and bundles of compressed 
grass brought from India. At the site of this Depot there 
is good grazing for yaks in the summer time along the 
moraine shelves, where many charming Alpine flowers, 
mosses and grasses are to be found by the east bank of the 
main Rongbuk Glacier about one mile from the proposed 
site of Yak Depot, places which I visited myself several 
times during the course of photographic work through the 
main Rongbuk Glacier. Here also there is a supply of 
firewood, sufficient for the members of the party, the 
natives, and one white man as Commandant of the Depot. 

Next as to the building of the Base. There a hut on the 
Polar method would be erected, the object being to enable 
the climbers to live comfortably at this height of 21,000 
feet for a protracted period in order to gain the full measure 
of height acclimatization. During this period of acclimati- 
zation they would get into training by practising on the 
smaller climbs in the neighbourhood, and would maintain 
their condition by comfortable sleeping conditions and 
perfection of diet. Their food would consist of a wide 
variety of palatable foods to suit all tastes and to invite 
appetite. Cooking by native cooks on primus stoves out 
in the open confines the menu to dishes made by heating 
canned stuffs in hot water and turning them out on a dish. 
Bread would be baked, and cooking and baking would be 
done on modern American gasoline stoves. 

The site of the hut would be not at the position of the 
previous camp at 21,000 feet, but on the other bank of the 
glacier beneath the Hlakpa-la, facing Mount Everest at 
an equivalent height of 21,000 feet and at the head of the 
new yak road. 

The hut could be made of sectional duralumin framework 
ready drilled for bolting together with plywood panels and 
roof, the whole held down by guy cables against the wind. 
The hut would have three compartments, one for the white 
men, one for the native porters, and one for the kitchen. 
There would be windows and doors, and bunks for the men 


SCIENCE VERSUS NATURE 289 


to sleep in like ship bunks made of screw-jointed tubing and 
canvas webbing. It should be noted that under this scheme 
of animal and mechanical transportation fewer porters 
would be needed, probably not more than a total of fifteen 
selected men. Ten extra men could be kept at the Rong- 
buk Monastery to be a reserve in case of necessity but 
yet be no encumbrance on the Expedition’s mobility or 
provisioning. 

From the Base to the top of the Ice Cliff would be one 
stage, with a dump with shelter tents and tarpaulins at 
the foot of the Ice Cliff, where the aerial ropeway would 
start. The ropeway would conquer all the difficulties 
and obstacles now offered by the cliff to the porterage of 
equipment and stores. It would enable heavy material 
in large quantities to be transported so that a large Depot 
could be built up there. The Ice Cliff is an obstacle which 
one has every right to defeat by mechanical means. It 
is hot part of the ascent of Everest. It is an outlying 
obstacle of trouble and annoyance to the climbers. The 
air line need be only of the lightest wire sufficient to take 
loads of 50 lb. weight. Its total length would at the most 
be 1,700 feet, therefore its transportation to Everest would 
be nothing serious. It would be of enormous service. 

Such a plan may arouse violent indignation among some 
people who will say, “‘ Oh! This is not sporting.” ‘‘ Well,” 
I would answer, ‘“‘ supposing you are going out to ascend 
Mont Blanc in the Alps, is it sporting to take the train to 
Chamonix ? Why not get out of the train at the foot of 
the mountains and start walking there? Why do you 
stay in a comfortable hotel at Chamonix before you climb 
the mountain ? Why don’t you go out and shelter the 
night in some rock crack half-way up the mountain? Why 
arc an hotel, a cabane-hut and a fine mule-riding road built 
on the Matterhorn at the foot of the actual rock climb ? ”’ 
Simply because the climb is considered to start only from 
the altitude of 10,000 feet. In the same way the ascent 
of Everest for a mountaineer starts at the top of the Ice 
Cliff at 23,000 feet. All transportation below that height 


290 APPENDIX B 


and along the glacier should be done in the easiest and 
most efficient way by animal and mechanical transport. 
It is an absolute waste of human energy and man power 
to man-handle the transportation up the glacier. 

The air-line wire could be carried up in sections of 40 lb. 
weight, linked together on the top and shot down by a 
powerful rocket ; or the draw line of steel strand telephone 
wire could be fired down and used to pull up the load line 
from below. There would be a light wheel and handle to 
wind the draw line. 

At the top of the Ice Cliff would be established either 
permanent light hut shelters, made also of plywood and 
duralumin frames, or else 40 Ib. tents with mattresses and 
sleeping-bags. 

A Depot at 25,000 feet or higher would be constructed 
using some improved form of shelter, such as small sectional 
huts of plywood and duralumin framing, held down by 
wires and adjustable by telescopic supports to steeply 
sloping rock ledges. This would be as far as the Prepara- 
tion Party would go. The Climbing Party would determine 
the position for their high bivouac. For that bivouac im- 
proved shelter tents would have to be designed. 

It would be the duty of the engineer of the Preparation 
Party to link the Expedition by wireless with India for 
the reception of weather forecasts, and also to link up 
the Base with all the Depots up to 25,000 feet with light 
portable wireless telephone sending and receiving sets. 
With the developments of modern wireless this would be 
an easy problem, involving only simple and easily carried 
apparatus of very light bulk and weight. It would ensure 
close communication between the Base, the supporting 
parties and the climbers. High-powered telescopes on 
stands should be affixed permanently at the Base and Ice 
Cliff Depots to watch the progress of the climb. News 
could also be transmitted home by wireless. 

Next as to seasons. It has always been the accepted 
fact, based on the past fifty years’ experience of Himalayan 
explorers and travellers, that the early autumn season at 


SCIENCE VERSUS NATURE 291 


the end of the monsoon gives the best mountain weather. 
In September may be confidently expected a fortnight or 
three weeks continuous stretch of glorious weather with 
little wind at the clearing up of the monsoon. This may 
be followed by spasmodic returns of monsoon clouds before 
the final clearing up in October, when the weather becomes 
brilliant and absolutely dependable. But then in October 
it becomes colder and colder and the days shorter. An 
objection which has been urged to September is that snow 
falling will not melt. However, the snow problem on 
Everest is not so serious comparatively, because the wind, 
frequently blowing on the summit, will blow the snow 
off soon after it falls. A greater danger from snow is the 
risk of avalanches that a fresh fall may cause on the 
Ice Cliff, but now our aerial ropeway will minimize that 
trouble. 

The Everest Expeditions have been very conservative 
in not trying the autumn season. In 1921 when Mallory, 
who had never been to the Himalaya before and had no 
previous knowledge of Himalayan conditions, met an 
unusually unlucky spell of bad weather (just as the Everest 
Expedition of 1924 came into an unlucky spell in the 
spring of that year) this experience prejudiced him against 
the autumn season; and the Everest Expeditions have 
since, following Mallory’s example, chosen the spring season. 
It must, however, be remembered that the plans of the 
Committee in 1922 provided for the Expedition to remain 
out through the summer should they fail in the spring, 
in order to attempt the climb again in the autumn, but 
that that autumn campaign was abandoned because of 
the exhaustion of the climbers, the accident and the death 
of the porters, and also because, unfortunately, many 
members of the Expedition became a little too anxious to 
get home. 

With al] the preliminary work done by the Preparation 
Party ahead, the Climbing Party could arrive at the Base 
one month later and try their hands at the mountain in 
the pre-monsoon period if they wished, but I, myself, 


292 APPENDIX B 


would make the suggestion that they should arrive later, 
during July, and remain at the Base hut during the latter 
half of the monsoon, acclimatizing to altitude at 21,000 
feet, practising preliminary climbs during the short breaks 
of fine weather which do occur even in the middle of the 
monsoon, and be prepared to make the ascent of Everest 
the moment the monsoon cleared. 

Another advantage of arriving at this later season is that 
the climbing party would make the journey across Tibet 
under more favourable conditions and would avoid the 
hardships and damage to health of crossing the Phari 
Plains in the early spring, which experience I have no 
hesitation in saying (as I shared it twice) seriously reduces 
the physical efficiency of an Expedition. To reach Everest 
from India, it must be realized, is an effort for which a 
price has to be paid. In the early period of spring blizzards 
the price was the life of Dr. Kellas in 1921. Although his 
serious illness was due to a variety of causes, still it was 
the hardship of the Phari Plains that finally killed him. 
General Bruce nearly died of malaria brought on again 
by sudden exposure to the ice winds of the Phari Plateau 
after the warm climate of India. It vu d to be a saying 
among us that Everest’s long arm started to hit us before 
we ever reached her. Porters fell ill and became exhausted 
crossing Phari Plain; fever and dysentery attacked us. 
The hardships of the fearful wind on the 17,000-feet plateau 
sapped our strength before we were acclimatized. Beetham, 
who is one of the stoutest men of the Alpine Club, a man 
with a marvel of pace and endurance on mountains, a clim- 
ing companion whom Somervell himself could not outrival 
in the Alps, in 1924 nearly died of dysentery through the 
sudden change of climate and food, arriving on the blizzard- 
swept plains of Tibet fresh from home on this his first 
experience of the Himalaya. It unfortunately put him 
out of action altogether. He was a tremendous loss to 
the Expedition, because, if fit, he might have joined and 
strengthened Mallory’s party for the summit. 

Besides this there is the mental depression that takes its 


SCIENCE VERSUS NATURE 293 


sure toll of the efficiency of all. The journey across Tibet 
in the early spring is a horrible ordeal. It is vital that the 
men should be happy and enjoy themselves to the utmost, 
with their enthusiasm and spirits maintained to the top- 
most level. 

A better plan would be to avoid entirely the crossing 
of the Phari Plains by travelling through the delightful 
Tista valley of Sikkim, ascending gradually to the upper 
Lachen Valley and acclimatizing for ten days at the last 
bungalow of Thangu at 13,000 feet. Under favourable 
weather conditions, and acclimatized to altitude, the party 
would walk over in two days to Khamba Dzong in Tibet 
and stay there for another short acclimatization period 
at that charming place, described by Norton as “the 
sun trap and comfort castle.’ They would then journey 
on across Tibet, the ride being a delightful picnic, refreshed 
by bathing in the streams and the enjoyment of the exqui- 
site scenery of the early summer. 

The food problem is one of the most urgent considerations 
for the success of an Expedition. A competent white man 
cook should be brought and arrangements made for the 
preparation of palatable and nourishing food in quantity 
and large variety, together with the baking of fresh bread. 
I think the natives, although immensely hardworking and 
loyal and keen, are entirely ignorant as cooks and not a 
little dirty. Many times repeated stomach troubles were 
caused directly by poison from unclean cooking. In 1921 
Mallory told me they suffered a great deal at the hands of 
their cooks. In 1924 Mallory at one time became seriously 
ill near Khamba Dzong and Somervell prepared his instru- 
ments to operate for appendicitis, but finally diagnosed 
the trouble as poison from the native cook's kitchen. 
Other members of the party suffered in this respect also. 
The stomach of course is the mainstay of strength in 
mountaineering as in any other form of athletics. 

One other important improvement in food arrangements 
would be to form a mess for the native porters under 
special native cooks assigned to that purpose only. On 


294 APPENDIX B 


previous expeditions the porters have always cooked their 
own food, sometimes each man independently. This has 
caused a waste of fuel and loss of time and energy. Each 
man added his own cooking-pots and food-bag to the weight 
of his load. On the other hand, if the men were collected 
together at fixed times for fixed meals prepared on rations 
apportioned by the stores master and cooked by their own 
cook, this would mean economy and also increased comfort 
to themselves. The men would not, after the fatigue of 
their work, have to set about cooking their own food. 
Anyone understanding the management of Indian people 
will know what the cry of ‘ Khana, Khana ” (‘‘ We must 
eat’) means. It means that that fellow must be left 
absolutely undisturbed and not even spoken to. ‘‘ Khana ”’ 
is a sort of religious fetish with the ‘‘ man of India.” Often, 
when there was a job to be done, we would call one of 
the men. We would probably find him taking his food, 
because every man would be preparing his food indepen- 
dently and at any odd time of the day or night. He would 
leave his food in answer to the call because he is naturally 
obedient and cheerful and willing. But this is not as it 
should be. He should be left absolutely undisturbed when 
he is taking his food. That is a vital thing in handling 
Indian peoples. 

Upon the porters so much depends. They must be under 
the care of one special member of the Expedition, who 
speaks their tongue fluently and who knows their ways 
and how to make them contented. He will see that their 
food is prepared at fixed times as far as possible, that their 
rations are issued in fairness to all, that each receives his 
proportion of comforts, cigarettes and other extra rations, 
that there is always hot tea and tsampa ready for any man 
who arrives in camp after a hard day’s work. He will see 
that the men are all asleep and lights put out at ordered 
hours; and that no one has stolen another's blanket, and 
so on. These may seem silly and trivial things, but they 
are just the little points that make natives happy ; and if 
they are happy, fit and well fed, these simple-minded people 


SCIENCE VERSUS NATURE 295 


will work with the strength of giants and the joyous hearts 
of children. .. . 


Will Everest ever be climbed? Of course it will. Why, 
some day man will fly to the top of Everest and walk down 
breathing liquid oxygen gas. 

This world is owned by man. Man has infinite sapacity 
within himself. 


1 The herculean exploits of the Mount Logan Expedition of 
1925 should be studied, and how the results of their experience 
in depot-laying, general organization and porterage work by 
white men, as opposed to natives, might be applied to the 
conditions of Everest. 


APPENDIX C 


TO EVEREST BY AIR 


Whereas the Mount Everest Expeditions, organized 
solely for the object of mountaineering, have no interest 
in flying over the mountain, yet the conquest of Everest 
by air is a project of absorbing attraction for explorers in 
the field of modern open-air adventure. In my many 
public lectures on the Expeditions there is no question 
that I have been more often asked than that of the chances 
of flying over or to Everest ; and I, myself, after careful 
study of the problem, hold definite views of the possibility 
of the feat and of the method of undertaking it. It might 
therefore be of general interest to append here some brief 
notes of such a plan as I have conceived it. 

The altitude of 30,000 feet is now no difficulty to modern 
high-flying machines. They can now also be constructed 
to be able to hover almost stationary against even mild 
winds. (I do not necessarily refer to heliocopters.) From 
already proved performances in high flying and in hovering, 
it would be possible to provide a machine that could hover 
within 100 feet over the summit of Everest and so allow a 
passenger from the plane under certain right conditions, 
and protected by thickly padded clothing which he would 
discard on landing, to descend by a rope from the machine 
to the ground. The shape of the summit of Everest, as 
far as observed by telescope hitherto, seems to offer suffi- 
cient space, evenness and snow-covering to make such a 
landing possible, although there would be no chance of a 
plane itself landing, nor of even taking off again nor of 
picking up its passenger. That passenger (there could be 
two) would, with the aid of liquid oxygen breathing and 
previous high-altitude acclimatization, descend the moun- 

296 


TO EVEREST BY AIR 297 


tain as far as the East Rongbuk Glacier snowfield at the 
foot of the Ice Cliff, where another suitably constructed 
aeroplane could easily land and pick him up to fly back 
to India. 

The descent of the mountain would be undertaken in 
two days, using sleeping-bags and food dropped in a suitable 
place on the mountain during previous flights. A number 
of these Depots would be dropped for the choice of the 
climbers. 

From fairly extensive knowledge of the Himalayas and 
of Mount Everest in particular, I, myself, am convinced 
that there are periods in the seasons when the atmospheric 
conditions are regular if not sometimes actually calm on 
Everest. 

One aviator has flown north from India towards Kang- 
chenjunga and has reported adversely on the possibility of 
flying over the high Himalayan peaks owing to the winds 
and air pockets, but his report is none other than I would 
anticipate over the country of Sikkim because that country 
and its valleys and mountains lie in a funnel of erratic 
aerial conditions ; furthermore, the aviator did not fly high 
enough. The flight to Everest should be made in a north- 
easterly direction from a Base on the plains of India south- 
west of Everest and not south or south-east. The aviators 
should reach 20,000 feet above the plains and then fly direct 
to Everest. 

It must be remembered that the great advantage the 
flight project enjoys over a mountaineering project to reach 
the summit is that Everest is so close to India—the flight 
need not exceed 200 miles. Therefore the aviators can 
reach the mountain and complete the major part of their 
feat in one day—the most favourable day. They can, 
from their Base, set out each day, reach the mountain, test 
the air conditions, and if not perfect they can merely return 
to their base and set out again at short notice at any other 
moment. Mountaineers have a 400-miles journey on foot 
with enormous impedimenta and caravan of one hundred 
men. 


298 APPENDIX C 


The actual ascent of the mountain from their Base is a 
matter of some seven days. They are dependent on the 
weather, which they cannot forecast, but upon which they 
absolutely depend during all those days to win or to lose. 

I consider it essential that plans for the flight should 
include the acclimatization of the aviator-mountaineers 
to high altitude. This could be done by building at the 
Base on the plains of India a special small house inside 
which the atmospheric pressure could be exhausted and 
controled. The men would not need to dwell all day and 
night in such a chamber, but could goin and perhaps sleep 
there for periods to get acclimatized to varying altitudes, 
—15,000 feet, 20,000 feet, and finally 25,000 feet. Some six 
weeks would be allotted to such acclimatization. 

In this way the aviator-mountaineers would find them- 
selves in the best physical condition when they landed on 
the summit and would be able to effect the descent of the 
mountain, although they would be provided with sufficient 
liquid oxygen to undertake the whole descent to the glacier 
at 22,000 feet. 

The man to carry such a feat to a brilliant conclusion 
will have to be a man with a bird sense and also a mountain 
sense, together with the stoutest pluck and tremendous 
physical endurance. I believe the world will produce 
such a man. 


INDEX 


Abruzzi, Duke of, 28; Expe- 
dition, 116, 118 

Acclimatization, 150, 167, 
188, 239, 280, 284-5, 288, 
298. See Altitude 

Adhu, 31, 33, 37, 47, 49, 58 

Aga Khan, the, 214 

“A. K.,”’ 23-24 

Alpine Club, 28, 97, 116, 178, 
203 

Altitude, high; adaptation 
of animals to, 234-9; 
cooking at, 180; food at, 
170, 180; fuel for, 204; 
physical effects at, 170, 
254, 272; psychological 
effects of, 167-8, 197; 
tobacco at, 172; ultra- 
violet rays at, 171 

Amundsen, 283 

Arun, river, 27, 31, 56, 89, 91 

Ata Mahomed, 22 


Badri, 32, 33 

Base Camp (1922), 148, 153, 
155, 160, 165, 191 ; (1924) 
223, 232 ; reorganization 
of, 285, 288 

Beetham, Bentley, 123, 207, 
223, 236, 250, 292 

Bell, Sir Charles, 97-100 

Bhutias, 36 

Brahmaputra, 22, 24 

Bride Peak, 29, 116, 181 

Bruce, Captain Geoffrey, 123, 
124, 147, 169, 185-91, 
220, 223, 227, 242, 244, 
250, 260, 262, 264 ef seq. 


Bruce, General, 28, 76, 83, 
120, 149,'153, 154, 164, 198, 
206, 207, 215, 218-20, 292 

Bullock, George, 101, 105 

Burroughs, Wellcome & Co., 
214 


Chamalung, 136 

Changmu, 54 

Cheddup (interpreter), 210, 

223 

Chelmsford, Lord, 97 

*“Chimney,”’ the,242, 243, 255 

Chomiomo, 88 

Chomolhari, 129, 219 

Chorten Nyim, pass, 
shrine, 49-51, 141 

Chumbi, 77, 126, 217 

Clothes, 173—4 

Collie, Norman, 122 

Conway, Sir Martin, 122 

Crawford, C. G., 123, 191-7 

Curzon, Marquis, 28 


42; 


Dalai Lama. See Lhasa 

Darjeeling, 35, 90, 126, 214, 
215, 218 

Dent, Clinton, 117 

Dingri Maidan, 26 

Dok-pas, 52, 133 

Dorji Pasang (“‘ tiger ’’), 242 

Drasrinmo, 85, 86 

Dzod-Nga, festival of, 43 

Dzongpens, 84 


East Rongbuk, Glacier, 108, 
115, 148, 153, 180, 287, 
297; Valley, 110 


299 


300 


Equipment, 203-5, Appendix 
B; photographic, 210-14 

Eunah, 53 

Everest Expedition ‘“‘ pass- 
port,” 100-1; ‘‘stamp,”’ 
215 

Everest’s Glacier, 89 

Everest, Sir George, 20 


Farrar, Captain, 97 

Finch, G. I., 97, 123, 169, 172, 
174, 185-91, 198, 206, 
281 

Food, 293 

Freshfield, Mr. Douglas, 273 

Frozen Lake Camp, 153, 154, 
160, 175, 226, 228 


Gale, Dr., 170, 171, 280 
Gangtok, 217 
Gaurisankar, 20 7. 
Gautsa, 126—7 

Gurkas, 121; 6th, 122 
Gyantse, 99 


Haddick, Col, V. A., 214 

Hari Ram. See ‘ M. H.”’ 

Harman, Captain, 24 

Hatia, 57, 91 

Hazard, Mr., 207, 223, 227, 
250, 259 e¢ seq. 

Helps, Francis, 215, 217 
Himalaya, the, 21, 34, 39, 166, 
225; glaciers of, 108 
Hingston, Major R. W. G., 

208, 215, 219, 233-5, 249, 
250, 255, 262, 264, 266 
Hinks, A. R., 116, 203 
Hlakpa-La, 112, 115, 163 
Howard-Bury, Lt.-Col., 
97, 101 
Huts, 285, 288, 290 


76, 


Ice Cliff, 112, 151, 178 e¢ seq., 
205, 227, 241, 243-7, 259 
et seq., 286, 289-91 


INDEX 


Irvine, Andrew, 171, 207, 212, 
242, 249, 250, Chapters 
XVII and XVIII 

Island of Birds, 63 


Jalpaiguri, 33 
Jelep Pass, 99, 126 
Johnson, W. H., 28 


Kalian Singh. See “ A. K.”’ 

Kama Valley, 56, 89, 90 

Kangchenghau, 88 

Kangchenjunga, 31, 34, 35, 
40, 42, 43 

Kangshung Glacier,155,2677n., 
275 

Kellas, Dr., 87-91, 101, 102, 
108, 111, 187, 292 

Khamba Dzong, 31, 40, 41, 
52, 102, 134, 293 

Khanwa Ghat, 91 

Kharta, 57, 89, 105 

Kintup, 24-25 


Lachen, 38; valley, 293 

Lakpa (porter), 261 

Langbu Pass, 52, 54, 55 

Langma La, 89 

Lhasa, 22, 100, 132; Dalai 
Lama, of, 97-8, 100, 142; 
Franciscans at, 26; Mis- 
sion to, 59, 86, 99, 100 

Lhonak, 41, 47 

Lobsang (porter), 211 

Longstatf, Dr. T. G., 102, 108, 
111, 122, 123, 149, 153, 
191, 241, 281 

Lytton, Lord and Lady, 216 


Macdonald, John, 219 

Makalu, 58, 251 

Mallory, George Leigh, 97, 
101, 103, 105-9, 111-14, 
119, 123, 153, 178-85, 
191-7, 206, 213, 223, 
226-7, 233, 240-50, Chap- 


INDEX 


ters XVII and XVIII, 
291, 293 

Merz, Mr. Charles, 214 

“M. H.,” 23, 25, 26, 27 

Mitchell, Professor Chalmers, 
214 

Mirza Shuja, 23 

Monsoon, 110, 151, 225, 264, 
291 

Mont Blanc, 289 

Montgomery, Captain, 22 

Morris, Captain, 123 

Morshead, Major, 101, 103, 
123, 178-85, 191, 198, 
206, 272 

Mount Logan Expedition, 
295 n. 

Mumm, A. L., 28, 122 

Mummery, Mr., 122 


Nepal, 28, 105-6 

Nettlefold, Mr. Archibald, 214 

Newman-Sinclair, Messrs., 214 

New York Times, 120 

Noel, Mrs. J. B. L., 77, 217 

North Col, 106—7, 115 

North-East Ridge, 106, 107, 
151, 180, 187, 205, 252, 
275 

Norton, Lt.-Col. E. F.,76, 123, 
178-85, 204, 220, 227, 
240, 243-57, 258, 262 et 
seqg., 270—2, 283, 293 


Odell, N. E., 171, 207, 223, 
227, 250, Chapter XVII, 
276, 277 

Oxygen, 117, 163, 185, 186, 
189, 256, 258, Appendix 
A; apparatus, 250 


Padma Samblava, 138-9 

Pauhunri, 88 

Pereira, Arthur, 217-8 

Phari, 99, 126, 129-33, 219; 
Plain, 219, 292-3 


301 


Photography on Everest, 155— 
9; artistic ideals of, 208- 
10; equipment 1924, 
210-214; production, etc., 
of film, 214 

Pius XI, 277 

Porters, 160, 163-5, 215-6, 
226-7, 230, 260, 294; 
accident to, 192-7; and 
depot system, 149 ; health 
of, 152; rescue of, 243-9; 
Tibetan, 154, 223-5 

Punch, 95 

Pundit Explorers, The, 22 

Raeburn, Harold, 101, 105, 
111 

Rawling, General, 27, 87 

Romoo (Lepcha), 235 

Rongbuk, Glacier, 104, 114, 
148, 180, 236, 2677n.; 
Grand Lama, 103, 145-6, 
198, 230 ; monastery, 26, 
137-47, 221, 231, 236, 
287; valley, 103 

Royal Geographical Society, 
28, 87, 90, 95, 97, 116, 
203, 276 

Ryder, Major, 27 


Salveson, Lord, 214 

Sarat Chandra Das, 26, 27, 31, 
49 

Shamshar, Naik, 229 

Shaw, Bernard, 209 

Shebbeare, E.. O., 208, 223, 227 

Shekar Dzong, 103, 134-5 

Sherpas, 88, 160, 162-3, 172, 
195. See Porters 

Siliguri, 33, 34, 90 

Snowfield Camp, 153, 160, 
166, 175, 178, 191, 192, 
226-7, 237, 241, 258 et seq. 

Somervell, T. H., 123—4, 171, 
178-85, 191-7, 207, 223, 
234, 243-58, 271, 283, 293 


302 


Songlu, 187, 193 

Spencer, Mr., 116, 203 
Strutt, Frank, 122, 191, 198 
Sukpa, the, 70, 144, 223 

“‘ Support,” system of, 274 


Tambar Valley, 90 

Tashirak, 89, 91; river, 56 

Tebdoo, 31, 33, 37, 41 

Tejbir, 188-9 

Tents, 154 

Tibetan, architecture, 134; 
books, 231-2; customs, 
78-86; fauna, 63, 234— 
8 ; funeral, 64-7 ; lamas, 
64, 67-70, 75—7, 85, 142— 
3; mint, 126; peasants, 
53; plateau, 51; re- 
ligion, 67-75 

“ Tigers,”’ the, 163 

Tingri, 105 

Tinki, Dzongpen of, 59-61 

Tista, river, 38; valley, 37, 
126, 293 

Tok Tok La Pass, 89 

Transport, 149, 286 et seq. 

Trisul, Mount, 102 

Tsanpo, river, 22, 24, 27 

Tsenguikang, 39 


Unna, Mr., 116 


INDEX 


Victoria, Queen, 75 


Wakefield, Dr., 123, 192-7 

Wallanchoon Pass, 91 

Waugh, Sir Andrew, 19, 20 

Weather, 110, 118, 150-1, 216, 
225, 227, 243, 260, 291. 
See Wind 

Wellington & Ward, Messrs., 
214 

Wheeler, Major O. E., 108, 
110, 252 

‘© Wheel of life,’’ 67 

White, Claude, 99 

** White Lion,’’ 69-70 

Wind, 103, 118, 129, 133, 164, 
173, 176, 182; erosion, 
155 ; windproof kit, 173— 
4. See Weather 

Windy Ridge Camp, 252, 260, 
262 


Wollaston, Dr, A. F. R., 101 


Yak, the, 127-8, 157-8, 287 

Yarkand, 23 ° 

Younghusband, Sir Francis, 
27, 28, 95, 97, 119, 122, 
151; Mission to Lhasa, 
59, 86, 99, 100 


Zhidag, the, 139, 176
