The Voyage of the Vega Round Asia and Europe, Vol. II (Adolf Erik Nordenskiöld, 1881)
Public domain. Sourced from Internet Archive: scan of the 1881 first English edition (https://archive.org/details/voyagevegaround01nordgoog). The Vega expedition continued — wintering off Siberia and the triumphant return through Asia.
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

Google 



This is a digital copy of a book that was preserved for generations on library shelves before it was carefully scanned by Google as part of a project 

to make the world's books discoverable online. 

It has survived long enough for the copyright to expire and the book to enter the public domain. A public domain book is one that was never subject 

to copyright or whose legal copyright term has expired. Whether a book is in the public domain may vary country to country. Public domain books 

are our gateways to the past, representing a wealth of history, culture and knowledge that's often difficult to discover. 

Marks, notations and other maiginalia present in the original volume will appear in this file - a reminder of this book's long journey from the 

publisher to a library and finally to you. 

Usage guidelines 

Google is proud to partner with libraries to digitize public domain materials and make them widely accessible. Public domain books belong to the 
public and we are merely their custodians. Nevertheless, this work is expensive, so in order to keep providing tliis resource, we liave taken steps to 
prevent abuse by commercial parties, including placing technical restrictions on automated querying. 
We also ask that you: 

+ Make non-commercial use of the files We designed Google Book Search for use by individuals, and we request that you use these files for 
personal, non-commercial purposes. 

+ Refrain fivm automated querying Do not send automated queries of any sort to Google's system: If you are conducting research on machine 
translation, optical character recognition or other areas where access to a large amount of text is helpful, please contact us. We encourage the 
use of public domain materials for these purposes and may be able to help. 

+ Maintain attributionTht GoogXt "watermark" you see on each file is essential for in forming people about this project and helping them find 
additional materials through Google Book Search. Please do not remove it. 

+ Keep it legal Whatever your use, remember that you are responsible for ensuring that what you are doing is legal. Do not assume that just 
because we believe a book is in the public domain for users in the United States, that the work is also in the public domain for users in other 
countries. Whether a book is still in copyright varies from country to country, and we can't offer guidance on whether any specific use of 
any specific book is allowed. Please do not assume that a book's appearance in Google Book Search means it can be used in any manner 
anywhere in the world. Copyright infringement liabili^ can be quite severe. 

About Google Book Search 

Google's mission is to organize the world's information and to make it universally accessible and useful. Google Book Search helps readers 
discover the world's books while helping authors and publishers reach new audiences. You can search through the full text of this book on the web 

at |http: //books .google .com/I 



\ 




k 



r 



I 



t 

I 



THE VOYAGE OF THE VEGA 



ROUND 



ASIA AND EUKOPE. 



VOL. II. 



.--;£X'r«'»w-«^,' ' 



* 



I -> 



\'-V\(iK Oi" i l;i; •■ VAW 



vsiA Axi> i:ri!()PE 



\\ : ;'M A '^'^l''^.: . .0, ; ■ . ; ., 



»* : V • \' 



■ • * 1 * • 






I I \ 



I.L. \V. 



• J 



A. K. \<»::i>K\,->K'.Lv>| 1) 



'ii- \>;^i An.!' ;.v Ai A:ax i' . i \ 



y ' f- 



:.?.'•■..« t '-r ' -^ A».% ' Af^p '^ .w , '. s 



:V T\V<> \<'M\J!,> \<)[.. M 



11 Ja^DU 

• 

t > . I • 



• > • 



' . # • ■ # 



THE 



VOYAGE OF THE VEGA 



ROUND 



ASIA AND EUEOPE 



WITH A HISTORICAL REVIEW 
OF PREVIOUS JOURNEYS ALONG THE NORTH COAST OF THE 

OLD WORLD 



BY 

A. E. NOEDENSKIOLD 

TRANSLATED BY ALEXANDER LESLIE 



W/TH FIVE 8TEEL PORTf^lTS, NUMEROUS MAPS, AMD IUU8TRATI0NS 



IN TWO VOLUMES— VOL. II 



MACMILLAN AND iiXX-\ 

1881 



■ • • 
, fc - - a 






*.# •" «»♦ • 

, i * w * 

• * , " * s * 

* ' • • . - « 



t * » J J • ■> 






IN.-. " • # ' ♦^ll 



'k. 



^ :^ 



*• • • ••• •• • 



• • • 



« • 



€ • 



• . • • • • 



CONTENTS OF VOL. II. 



CHAPTER XI. 

Hope of release at the new year — BoYe*8 excursion to the open water — Mild 
weather and renewed severe cold — Mercury frozen — Popular lectures — 
Bmsewitz'a excursion to Najtskaj — Another despatch of letters home — ^The 
natives' accounts of the state of the ice on the coast of Chukch Land — The 
Chukches carry on traffic between Arctic America and Siberia — Excursions in 
the neighbourhood of winter quarters — The weather during spring — The 
melting of the snow — The aurora — The arrival of the migratory birds — The 
animal world of Chukch Land — Noah Elisej*s relief expedition — A remarkable 
fish — The country clear of snow — Belease — The North-East Passage 
achieved . . . ; Pc^ges 1—69 



CHAPTER XII. 
The history, physique, disposition, and manners of the Chukches Pages 70—147 



CHAPTER XIII. 

The development of our knowledge of the north coast of Asia— Herodotus — 
Strabo — Pliny— Marco Polo — Herbertstein's map— The conquest of Siberia 
by the Russians — Deschnev's voyages— Coast navigation between the Lena 
and the Kolyma — Accounts of islands in the Polar Sea and old voyages to 
them — The discovery of Kamchatka — The navigation of the Sea of Okotsk is 
opened by Swedish prisoners-of-war — The Great Northern Expedition — 
Behring — Schalaurov — Andreyev's I^and — The New Siberian islands — 
HedenstrSm's expeditions— Anjou and Wrangel — ^Voyages from Behricg's 
Straits «restward-- Fictitious Polar voyages . . . Pages US— 217 



viii ' CONTENTS. 



CHAPTER XIV. 

Passage through Behring's Straits — Arrival at Nuiiamo — Scarce species of seal — 
Kioh vegetation — Passage to America — State of the ice — Port Clarence — The 
Eskimo — Return to Asia — Konyam Bay — Natural conditions there — The ice 
breaks up in the interior of Konyam Bay — St. Lawrence Island — Preceding 
visits to the Island — Departure to Behring Island . . Pages 218—256 



CHAPTER XV. 

The position of Behring Island — Its inhabitants — ^The discovery of the Island by 
Behring — Behring's death — Steller—The former and present fauna on the 
Island : foxes, sea-otters, sea-cows, sea-lions, and sea-bears — Collection of 
bones of the Rhytina — Visit to a ** rookery " — Torporkoff Island — 
Alexander Dubovski — Voyage to Yokohama — Lightning stroke. 

Pages 257—295 

CHAPTER XVI. 

Arrival at Yokohama — A Telegram sent to Europe — The stranding of the Steamer 
A. E, Nordeiiskiold— FHesmia-^Ti—Tlie Minister of Marine, Kawamura — 
Prince Kito-Shira-Kava — Audience of the Mikado — Graves of the Shoguns — 
Imperial Garden at Tokio — The Exhibition there — Visit to Euoshima — 
Japanese Manners and Customs — Thunberg and Kampfer . Pages 296 — 326 



CHAPTER XVII. 

Excursion to Asamayama — The Nakasendo road — Takasaki — Difficulty of obtain- 
ing Quarters for the Night — The Baths at Ikaho — Massage in Japan — 
Swedish matches — Travelling in Kago — Savavatari — Criminals — Eusatsu — 
The Hot Springs and their healing power — Rest at Rokurigahara — The 
Summit of Asamayama — The Descent — Journey over Usui-toge — Japanese 
Actors — Pictures of Japanese Folk-life — Return to Yokohama. 

Pages 327--361 

CHAPTER XVIII. 

Farewell dinner at Yokohama — The Chinese in Japan— Voyage to Kobe — Purchase 
of Japanese Books — Journey by rail to Kioto — Biwa Lake and the Legend of 
its Origin — Dredging there— Japanese Dancing-Girls — Kioto — The Imperial 
Palace — Temples— Swords and Sword-bearers— Shin toism and Buddhism — 
The Porcelain Manufacture— Japanese Poetry— Feast in a Buddhist Temple 
— Sailing across the Inland Sea of Japan — Landing at Hirosami and Shimo- 
uoseki — Nagasaki — Excursion to Mogi — Collection of Fossil l*lants — 
Departure from Japan Page^"^ 362—395 



CONTENTS. ix 



CHAPTEK XIX. 

Hong Kong and Canton — Stone-polishing Establishments at Canton — Political 
Relations in an English Colony — Treatment of the Natives — Voyage to 
Labnan — Coal Mines there — Excursion to the shore of Borneo — Malay 
Villages — Singapore — Voyage to Ceylon — Point de Galle — The Gem Mines 
at Ratnapoora — Visit to a Temple — Purchase of Manuscripts — The Popula- 
tion of Ceylon — Dr. Almquisfs Excursion to the Interior of the Island-. 

Pages 396—436 



CHAPTER XX. 

The Journey Home — Christmas, 1879— Aden— Suez — Cairo— Excursion to the 
Pyramids and the Mokattam Mountains — Petrified Tree-stems— The Suez 
Canal — Landing on Sicily by night — ^Naples— Rome— The Members of the 
Expedition separate — Lisbon — England — Paris — Copenhagen — Festive Entry 
into Stockholm — FStr^t there— Conclusion . . Pages 489 — 464 



PORTRAITS. 

Engnved on Steel by 0. J. Stodart, of London. 

Adolf Erik Nordenskiold To f cue TUU-page, 

Lools Palander „ Page 68 



LITHOGRAPHED MAPS. 

9. Herbertstein's Map of Rossia, 1550 (photolithographic facfiimile) . .156 

10. Map of the North Coast of the Old World from Norway to Behiing's 
Straits, with the track of the Vega^ constructed from old and 
recent sonroes, and from observations made daring the Voyage of 
the Vega, by K. Selander, Captain in the General Staff .464 



LIST OF WOOD-CUTS IN VOL. II. 

The Wood-citU, when not otherwise stated helowy were engraved at Herr Wilhelm 

Meyers Xylographic Institute in Stockholm. 

PAOB 

1. Chnkclies 1 

2. The Encampment Pitlekaj abandoned by its Inhabitants on the 18th 

Febrnary, 1879 4 

3. Notti and his Wife Aitanga 8 

4. Map of the Region round the Vega* 8 "Winter Quarters . .16 

5. The Sleeping Chamber in a Chukch Tent 21 

6. Chukch Lamps 22 

7. Section of a Cbukch Lamp 23 

8. Chukch Shaman Drum 24 

9. The Coast between Padljonna and Enjunni . . 25 

10. Bracelet of Copper 26 

11. The North End of Idlidlja Island 27 

12. The Common Aurora- A re at the Vegans Winter Quarters ... 88 

13. Aurora at the Vegans Winter Quarters, 3rd March, 1879, at 9 p.m. 89 

14. Double Aurora- Arcs seen 20th March, 1879, at 9.30 p.m. . .39 

15. Elliptic Aurora seen 21st March, 1879, at 2.15 a.m 39 

16. Elliptic Aurora seen 21st March, 1879, at 3 a.m 39 

17. Song-Birds in the Rigging of the Vega, June, 1879 .... 41 

18. Spoon-billed Sand-piper from Chukch Land {Eurynorhynehus pyg- 

rnceue, L.) . . ^ 43 



xiv LIST OF WOOD-CUTS IX VuL If. 



rxoK 

19. MMimoU inm Chnk^h Land 45 

20. &Ufoerf^^ut KtmUH^ StnxK 48 

21. SnkiMea wtpUrmoLTimnin^ Salxiie 48 

22. Amnlkfxirjikin Malaa^mu Go» 49 

23. Of^if^J^^jiet mftiojm, Lsik^s 49 

24. XoAh Elisej 51 

25. Bcet2c« from Piikkaj. 55 

2S. Pbosf «haRsoeiit Cm&taoea from Miis»^l Bat 56 

2Sl Dop-FukfrxMi tbe Chnkdi PeniiisalA -Z>tiV4.i ^«^!>T7Lcr:'-r4i, Smidi) . 59 

29. Cnb from the Sea Xordi of Behiin^'s Saaits iCAi9»!^Kxia •yiliy^ 

Krc'jer) -62 

30. Ti«e frmn Fit^k^ tSaiur ^rtir.m, Pa^^) 65 

31. Typiral Omkrii r»«« 84 

32. „ „ ". . . . 85 

33. Flu of a Cliiakdi Gimve 89 

34. Tent Fnaw wX Fttkkaj 90 

35l OakdiOar 93 

36. Do^Sboe 96 

37. C^akdi Faofr-TanzniBg 100 

M. disked CliidrM 101 

39. Sawfw-SiMS 102 

40. JlB Aisck-Mui skmizng mI'js a B^cakm' 103 

41. Hsntiii^ Cap an*! SaKw-«cn|Kr 101 

42. Cl.Ttkc'li Wfapctts and HTaiting ImpWnx-nts 105 

43. di^cli R(«vaj>i Qniv^pr 106 

44. Chii4: Aiwirs 107 

45. S«<«>e HamiDf*? an-i AutiI for Ctu<^.::.i: B.to** 112 

4^, OLtk^ Iitiv*a>fT.U 117 

47. Fiw-IVr. 121 

4S. IpeM»n«4:* 123 

4f. HiiTafci. HrnrM 127 



LIST OF WOOD-CUTS IN VOL. IL xv 



PAOB 

50. Musical Instraments ^^^ 

51. Drawipgs made by the Chukches 182—188 

52. Chukch Buckles and Hooks of Ivory 186 

58. Chukch Bone CarvingR 189 

64. Chukch Doll 141 

55. Chukch Bone Carvings 142—143 

56. Chukch Bone Carvings of Birds 145 

57. Map of the World, said to be of the Tenth Century . . . .151 
68. Map of the World showing Asia to be continuous with Africa . 152 

59. Map of the World after Fra Mauro, from the middle of the Fifteenth 

Century 155 

60. Map of Asia from an Atlas published by the Bussian Academy of 

Sciences in 1787 177 

61. Peter Feodorovitsch Anjou 207 

62. Ferdinand von Wrangel 208 

63. Seal from the Behring Sea, Bistriophoca fasci^Ua, Zimm . .219 

64. 2>ra&a ^/jnna, L., from St. Lawrence Bay 224 

65. Hunting Implements at Port Clarence 229 

66. Eskimo Family at Port Clarence ' 230 

67. Eskimo from Port Clarence . 281 

68. Eskimo from Port Clarence 232 

69. Eskimo Fishing Implements, &c 284 

70. Eskimo Bone Carvings, kc 287 

71. Eskimo Grave 289 

7S. Animal Fignre from an Eskimo Grave 240 

73. Ethnographical Objects from Port Clarence 241 

74. Shell from Behring's Straits, Fums deformis, Peeve .... 248 

75. Diagram showing the temperature and depth of the water at Behring's 

Straits between Port Clarence and Senjavin Sound, by G. Bove . 244 

76. Ronyam Bay 247 

77. Tattooing Patterns from St. (lawrence Island 251 

78. Tattooed Woman from St. Lawrence Island 252 



xvi LIST OF WOOD-CUTS IN VOL. IL 



PAGE 

79. The Colony on Behring Island 259 

80. The Colony on Copper Island 261 

81. Natives of Behring Island . . ' 263 

82. Skeleton of Rhytina, shown at the Fega Exhibition at the Royal Palace, 

Stockholm 279 

83. Original Drawings of the Rhytina 279 

84. Reconstructed Form of the Sea-Cow 280 

85. Sea Bears, Male, Female, and Young 282 

86. "Seal Rookery " on St. Paul's Island, one of the Pribyloo Islands . 285 

87. Slaughter of Sea-Bears 288 

88. Sea-Bears on their way to " the Rookeries " . . . . r 289 

89. Alga from the shore of Behring Island, ThalaAsiophyllwm CUUhruSy 

Post, and Rupr 293 

90. Fusugama 299 

91. The steamer A. E. Nordenski&ld stranded on the East Coast of Yczo . 301 

92. Kawamura Sumiyashi, Japanese Minister of Marine .... 302 

93. The First Medal which was struck as a Memorial of the Voyage of 

the Vega 806 

94. The First Medal which was struck as a Memorial of the Voyage of 

the Vega 307 

95. Stone Lantern and Stone Monument in a Japanese Temple Court. 311 

96. Japanese House in Tokio 312 

97. Japanese Lady at her Toilet 314 

98. AJinrikisha 317 

99. Japanese Bedroom . . 319 

100. Tobacco-Smokers, Japanese Drawing 322 

101. Ito-Keske, a Japanese Editor of Thunberg's Writings . .324 

102. Monument to Thunberg and Kaempfer at Nagasaki .... 325 

103. Japanese Kago 337 

104. Japanese Wrestlers 339 

105. Japanese Bridge, after a Japanese drawing ' . 340 

106. Japanese Mountain Landscape, drawn by Prof. P. D. Holm 341 

107. Inn at Kusatsn, di-awn by R. Haglund 344 



LIST OF WOOD-CUTS IN VOL. IL xvii 



PADS 

lOS. Bath at Kusatsu, Japanese drawing, drawn by 0. Sorling . 347 

109. Japanese Landscape, drawn by Prof. P. D. Holm . .353 

110. Barden-bearera on a Japanese Road, Japanese drawing, drawn by 

O. Sorling 356 

111. Japanese Shop, drawn by V. Andr^n 367 

112. Japanese Court Dress, drawn by ditto 373 

113. Koble in Antique Dress, drawn by ditto 374 

114. Buddhist l*riest, drawn by ditto 375 

115. A Samurai, drawn by ditto 376 

116. Gate across the Road to a Shinto Temple, drawn by Prof. P. D. Holm 378 

117. Buddhist Temple at Kobe, drawn by ditto 379 

118. Rio-San 's Seal 383 

119. Buiying-Place at Kioto, drawn by Prof. P. D. Holm . .385 

120. Entrance to Nagasaki, drawn by R. Haglund . * . 388 

121. Fossil Plants from Mogi — 1, 2, Beech Leaves {Fagus ferruginea, Ait., 

var. pliocena, Nath. ), drawn by M. AVestergren .... 393 

122. Fossil Plant from Mogi — 3, Maple Leaf {Acer Mono^ Max., var. 

pliocena, Nath.) . 393 

123. Fossil Plant from Mogi— Leaf of Zelkova Keakii, Sieb., var. plioccna, 

Nath., drawn by M. "Westergren 894 

124. Gera Diggings at Ratuapoora, drawn by R. Haglund . .419 

125. Statues in a Temple in Ceylon, drawn by ditto 429 

126. A Country Place in Ceylon, drawn by V. Andren . . .431 

127. Highland View from the Interior of Ceylon, drawn by R. Haglund . 434 

128. The Scientific Men of the Fbgra 437 

129. The Officers of the Tc^a 451 

130. The Crew of the Vega, drawn by R. Widing 459 

131. The Entrance of the Vega into Stockholm on the 24th Apiil, 1880, 

drawn by R. Haglund 468 

182. The Vega moored off the Royal Palace, Stockholm, drawn by ditto . 466 



KRBATA. 

Page 2i, under w lod-cat, for " ft. Of wood. b. Of stone," read " a. Wocden cup to place uuder 

the lamp. b. Lamp of bnnud clay." 
Page 41, line fh>m foot, for " beginning of May." read " middle of June." 
Page 41, under wood-cut, /or " May." read ** June." 
Page 44. bne 19, /or ** wtountain,'* read ** Arctic." 
Page 54, last line, for *' contracieto," read *' contracta." 
Page 68, laat line, /or " ^atural size," read " Half the natural size." 
Page 98, lines 9 and 12 fh>m foot, for ** moccassin," read ** moccasin." 
Page 100, line 2 fh>m foot, for ** moccassin," read " moccasin." 
Page 227, Une 11 r^m foot,;br '* American," read *' AsiaUo." 



THE VOYAGE OF THE VEGA 



ROUND 



ASIA AND EUROPE. 



VOL. II. 



CHAPTER XI, 

Hope of reletse at the new year — Bove's escursion to the open water- 
Mild weather and reoewed severe cold — Herciiiy froxen — Popular 
lectures — Bnimwitz'seicuraioD toNajtakaj — Another despatch of letters 
home — The natives' accounts of the state of the ice on the coast of 
Cbnkch Land— Tlie Chukchea cany on trsfiic between Arctic America 
and Sberia — Excursions in the neighbourhood oi winter quarters^ — The 
weather during spring— Tlie melting of the snow — The aurora — The 
arrival of the migratory birds — The animal world of Chukch Land 
— Koah £lisej'« relief expedition — A remarkable fish — The country 
clear of snow— Release — The North-East Passage achieved. 

The new year came in with a faint hope of release. For since 
the north and north-west winds that had prevailed almost con- 
stantly towards the close of Decemher had given place to winds 
from the east and south, considerable " clearings " were again 
formed out at sea, and the Cliukches again began to say that 

VOL 11. II 



THE VOYAGE OF THE VEGA. [chap. 



the ice would drift away, so that the vessel would be able 
to continue her voyage ; a prediction which they always ended 
with a declaration, expressed both by words and gestures, that 
they would then bitterly lament, which they would also have 
had sufficient reason to do, considering the very friendly way in 
which thej" were treated by all on board the Vega, both officere 
and men. 

On New Year's Day, in order to see the state of the ice farther 
out to sea, Lieut. Bove, accompanied by the hunter Johnsen, 
again made an excursion to the open water. Of this he gave 
the following account : — 

" I left the vessel on the forenoon of 1st January and reached 
the open water after four hours' steady walking. The deep 
loose snow made walking very fatiguing, and three roAvs of 
tcrosses also contributed to this, mainly in consequence of the 
often snow-covered cracks, which crossed the ice-sheet in their 
neighbourhood. One of the torosses was ten metres high. The 
size of the blocks of ice, which were here heaped on each other, 
showed how powerful the forces were which had caused the 
formation of the torosses. These ice ramparts now afiford a 
much needed protection to the Vegas winter haven. About 
halfway between the open water and the vessel the way was 
crossed by cracks running from east to west, and clearly indi- 
cating that the opening in the ice would have extended to the 
distance of a kilometre from the vessel, if the violent storm in 
December had lasted twelve hours longer. The Vega would 
thereby have been in great danger. The edge of the ice towards 
the open water was evenly cut, as with an immense knife, and 
was so strong that one could walk along it as on a rock. Even 
from the top of a five-metre-high ice-rampart no boundary of 
the open water could be seen to the north-east or north. Partly 
from this, partly from the extension of the water-sky in this 
direction, I draw the conclusion that the breadth of the open 
water was at least thirty-five kilometres. The " clearing " was 
bounded on the east by an ice-rampart running north, which at 
a distance of nine or ten kilometres appeared to bend to the 
eiist. Possibly farther to the east beyond this ice-rampart there 
was another open water basin. The depth at the edge of the 
ice was twenty-one metres, the temperature of the water 2° C 
The water ran at a considerable speed right out from the 



XI.] DOVE'S EXCURSION TO THE OPEN WATER. 3 



coast (i.e. from S.S.E.). As it ran here nearly in a straight 
line, the current may have been a tidal one. The open 
water swaiined with seals, according to Johnson both bearded 
and rough. Neither Polar beai*s, walrusses, nor birds were 



seen." 



Lieut. Bove's report confirmed me in my supposition that the 
open water, as towards the end of January 1873 at Mussel Bay, 
might possibly extend as far as our anchorage and open for us 
the way to Behring's Straits, in which case we could not refrain 
from continuing our voyage, however unpleasant and dangerous 
it might be at this season of the year. The Chukches also 
declared repeatedly that the open water in January would 
continue for a considerable time, and in expectation of this got 
their simple fishing implements ready. But both they and we 
were disappointed in our expectation. The Vegas ice-fetters 
remained undisturbed, and the blue border at the horizon grew 
less and again disappeared. This caused so great a want of 
food, and above all of train oil, among the natives, that all the 
inhabitants of Pitlekaj, the village nearest to us, were compelled 
to remove to the eastward, notwithstanding that in order to 
mitigate the scarcity a considerable quantity of food was served 
out daily at the vessel. 

It appears, however, as if an actual experience from the pre- 
ceding year had been the ground of the Chukches' weather 
prediction. For on the 6th February a south-east wind began 
to blow, and the severe cold at once ceased. The temperature 
rose for a few hours to and even above the freezing-point. A 
water-sky was again formed along the horizon of the ice from 
north-east to north, and from the heights at the coast there was 
seen an extensive opening in the ice-fields, which a little east 
of Irgunnuk nearly reached the shore. Some kilometres farther 
east even the shore itself was free of ice, and from the hills our 
sailors thought they saw a heavy sea in the blue water border 
which bounded the circle of vision. If this was not an illusion, 

B 2 



4 THE VOYAGE OP THK VEGA. [chap. 

caused by the unequal heating and oscillatory motion of the 
lower stratum of the atmosphere, the open water may have been 
of great extent. Perhaps the statement of the natives was 
correct, that it extended as far as Behring's Straits. But we 
could not now place complete reliance on their statements, since 
we had rewarded with extra treating some predictions, relating 



(Altar 11 drairlng br 0. Nordqulit.) 

to ice and weather, that were favourable to us. Even between 
the vessel's anchorage and the land various cracks had been 
formed, through which the sea water had forced its way under 
the snow, and in which some of us got cold foot or leg baths 
during our walks to and from the land. 

The Chukches at Irguonuk were now successful in killing a 
Polar bear and seventy seals, of which some were ostentatiously 
set up in rows, along with frozen slices of blubber, along the 
outer walls of the tents, and others were laid down in the 



XL] MILD WEATHER FOLLOWED BY SEVERE COLD. 



blubber cellars, which were soon filled to overflowing. At 
Yinretlen, the encampment nearer us, the hunters on the other 
hand had obtained only eight seals. Gladness and want of care 
for the morrow at all events prevailed here also, and our skin- 
dad firiends availed themselves of the opportunity to exhibit a 
self-satisfied disdain of the simple provisions from the Vega, 
which the day before they had begged for with gestures so pitiful, 
and on which they must, in a day or two, again depend. The 
children, who had fallen off during recent weeks, if not in com- 
parison with European children, at least with well-fed Chukch 
ones, began speedily to regain their former condition, and likewise 
the older people. Begging ceased for some days, but the vessel's 
deck still formed a favourite rendezvous for crowds of men, 
women, and children. Many passed here the greater part of 
the day, cheerful and gay in a temperature of —40*" C, gossiped, 
helped a little, but always only a little, at the work on board, 
and so on. The mild weather, the prospect of our getting free, 
and of an abundant fishing for the Chukches, however, soon 
ceased. The temperature again sank below the freezing-point, 
that is of Tnercury, and the sea froze so far out from the shore 
that the Chukches could no longer carry on any fishing. Instead 
we saw them one morning come marching, like prisoners on an 
Egyptian or Assyrian monument, in goose-march over the ice 
toward the vessel, each with a burden on his shoulder, of whose 
true nature, while they were at a distance, we endeavoured in 
vain to form a guess. It was pieces of ice, not particularly 
large, which they, self-satisfied, cheerful and happy at their new 
hit, handed over to the cook to get from him in return some of 
the kauka (food) they some days before had despised. 

The first time the temperature of the air sank under the 
freezing-point of mercury, was in January. It now became 
necessary to use instead of the mercury the spirit thermometers, 
which in expectation of the severe cold had been long ago himg 



THE VOYAGE OF THE VEGA. [chap. 



up in the thermometer case. When mercury freezes in a 
common thermometer, it contracts so much that the column of 
mercury suddenly sinks in the tube, or if it is short, goes wholly 
into the ball. The position of the column is therefore no 
measure of the actual degree of cold when the freezing takes 
place. The reading of —89°, or even of —150", which at a 
time when it was not yet known that mercury could at a low 
temperature assume the solid form, was made on a mercurial 
thermometer in the north of Sweden,^ and which at the time 
occasioned various discussions and doubts as to the trustworthi- 
ness of the observer, was certainly quite correct, and may be 
repeated at any time by cooling mercury under its freezing-point 
in a thermometer of sufficient length divided into degrees under 
0°. The freezing of mercury ^ takes place from below upwards, 
the frozen metal as being heavier sinking down in that portion 
which is still fluid. If when it is half frozen the fluid be poured 
away from the frozen portion, we obtain groups of crystals, 
composed of small octohedrons, grouped together by the edges 
of the cube. None of our mercurial thermometers suffered any 
damage, nor was there any alteration of the position of the 
freezing-point in them from the mercury having frozen in them 
and again become fluid. 



* And. Hellant, Anmlirkningar om en Kelt ovanlig kdld i Tome {Remarks 
on a Quite Unusual Cold in Tome), Vet.-akad. Handl. 1769, p. 314, and 
1760, p. 312. In the latter paper Hellant himself shows that the column 
of mercury in a strongly cooled thermometer for a few moments sinks 
farther when the ball is rapidly heated. This is caused by the expansion 

of the glass when it is warmed before the heat has had time to com- 
municate itself to the quicksilver in the ball, and therefore of course can 
happen only at a temperature above the freezing-point of mercury. 

* That mercury solidifies in cold was discovered by some academicians 
in St. Petersburg on the 25th December, 1759, and caused at the time a 
great sensation, because by this discovery various erroneous ideas were 
rooted out which the chemists had inherited from the alchemists, and 
wliich were based on the supposed property of mercury of being at the 
same time a metal and a iiiiid. 



XI ] POPULAR LECTURES. 



During the severe cold the ice naturally became thicker and 
thicker; and by the continual northerly winds still higher 
torosses were heaped up round the vessel, and larger and larger 
snow masses were collected between it and the land, and on the 
heights along the coast. All hopes or fears of an early release 
were again given up, and a perceptible dullness began to make 
itself felt after the bustle and festivities of the Christmas 
holidays. Instead there was now arranged a series of popular 
lectures which were held in the lower deck, and treated of the 
history of the North-East Passage, the first circumnavigations of 
the globe, the Austrian-Hungarian Expedition, the changes of 
the earth's surface, the origin of man, the importance of the 
leaf to the plants, &c; It became both for the ofiicers and 
scientific men and the crew a little interruption to the monotony 
of the Arctic winter life, and the lecturer could always be certain 
of finding his little auditory all present and highly interested. 
Some slight attempts at nyisical evening entertainments were 
also made, but these failed for want of musical instruments and 
musical gifts among the Vega men. We had among us no 
suitable director of theatrical representations after the English- 
Arctic pattern, and even if wie had had, I fear that the direct:jr 
would have found it very diflBcult to gather together the 
dramatic talents requisite for his entertainment. 

On the 17th February Lieutenant Bnisewitz made an 
excursion to Najtskaj, of which he gives the following 
account : — 

" I and Notti left the vessel in the afternoon, and after two 
hours came to Rirajtinop, Notti's home ; where we passed the 
night, together with his three younger brothers and an invalid 
sister, who all lived in the same tent-chamber. Immediately 
after our arrival one of the brothers began to get the dog-harness 
and sleigh ready for the following day's journey, while the rest 
of us went into the interior of the tent, where the invalid sister 
lay with her clothes off, but wrapt in reiiideer skins. She took 



8 THE VOYAGE OF THE VEGA. [chap. 

charge of two train-oil lamps, over which hung two cooking 
vessels, one formerly a preserve tin, and the other a bucket of 
tinned iron. One of the brothers came in with a tray, on 
which was placed a piece of seal blubber, together with frozen 
vegetables, principally willow leaves. The blubber was cut into 
small square pieces about the size of the thumb, after which 
one of the brothers gave the sister a large portion both of the 
blubber and vegetables. The food was then served out to 
the others. Every piece of blubber was carefully imbedded in 
vegetables before it was eat«n. When the vegetables were 



(Afttr pliotognphi b; 



finished there was still some blubber, which was given to the 
dogs that lay in the outer tent. After this the boiled spare-ribs 
of a seal were partaken of, and finally a sort of soup, probably 
made from seal's blood. The sister had a first and special help- 
ing of these dishes. I also got an offer of every dish, and it did 
not appear to cause any offence that I did not accept the offer. 
After the close of the meal the cooking vessels were set down, 
the "pesks" taken off, and some reindeer skins taken down 
from tne roof and spread out. The older brothers lighted their 
pipes, and the younger lay down to sleep. I was shown to one 
of the side places in the tent, evidently Notti's own. One of the 



XI.] BRUZEWITZ'S EXCURSION TO NAJTSKAJ. 9 

lamps was extinguished, after which all slept. During the night 
the girl compkuned several times, when one of the brothers 
always rose and attended to her. At six in the morning I 
wakened the party and reminded them of our journey. All 
rose immediately. Dressing proceeded slowly, because much 
attention was given to the foot covering. No food was produced, 
but all appeared quite pleased when 1 gave them of my stock, 
which consisted of bread and some preserved beef-steaks. Imme- 
diately after breakfast four dogs were harnessed to the sleigh, with 
which Notti and I continued our journey to Najtskaj, 1 ridiAg 
and he running alongside the sleigh. At Irgunnuk, a Chukch 
village about an English mile east of Rirajtinop, a short 
stay was made in order to tiy to borrow some dogs, but without 
success. We continued our journey along the shore, and at 
10 o'clock AJf. arrived at Najtskaj, which is from fifteen to eigh- 
teen kilometres E.S.E. from Irgunnuk. Here we were received 
by most of our former neighbours, the inhabitants of Pitlekaj. 
Of the thirteen tents of the village the five western- 
most were occupied by the former population of Pitlekaj, 
while the eight lying more to the eastward were inhabited by 
other Chukcnes. The Pitlekaj people had not pitched their 
common large tents, but such as were of inconsiderable size or 
small ones fastened close together. In all the tents here, as at 
Kirajtinop and Irgunnuk, there was much blubber laid up ; we 
saw pieces of seal and whole seals piled up before the tents, 
and on the way to Najtskaj we met several sledges loaded with 
seals, on their way to Pidlin. At Najtskaj I went out hunting 
accompanied by a Chukch. We started eight hares, but did 
not succeed in getting within range of them. A red fox was 
seen at a great distance but neither ptarmigan nor traces of 
them could be discovered. At two in the afternoon I returned 
to Irgunnuk and there got another sleigh drawn by ten dogs, 
with which I soon reached the vessel." 



On the 20th February three large Chukch sledges laden with 
goods and drawn by sixteen to twenty dogs stopped at the Vega, 
They said they came from the eastward, and were on 
their way to the market in the neighbourhood of Nischni 
Kolymsk. I again by way of experiment sent with them home- 
letters, for which, as they declined to take money, I gave them as 
postage three bottles of rum and abundant entertainment for 



10 THE VOYAGE OF THE VEGA. [chap. 



men and dogs. In consideration of this payment they bound 
themselves faithfully to execute their commission and promised 
to return in May. And they kept their word. For on the 8th 
and 9th May a large number of sledges heavily laden with rein- 
deer skins and drawn by many dogs, passed along the coast from 
west to east. Of course all rested at the Vega, the only house 
of entertainment on the coast of the Asiatic Polar Sea, consider- 
ing it as a matter of indisputable right, that they should in 
return for a little talk and gossip obtain food and " ram." Very 
eagerly they now informed us that a letter would come with 
another dog train that might be expected in a few hours. This 
was for us a very great piece of news, the importance of which 
none can understand who has never hungered for months for 
news from home, from the liome-land and the home-world. 
Eager to know if we had actually to expect a post from Europe, 
we asked them how large the packet was. " Very large " was 
the answer, and the " ram " was of course measured accordingly. 
But when at last the letter canae it was found to be only an 
exceedingly short note from some of the Russian officials at 
Kolyma, informing me that our letters had reached him on the 
^^^^ and had been immediately sent by express to Yakutsk. 
Thence they were sent on by post, reaching Irkutsk on the JJ- 
May, and Sweden on the 2nd August. 

During autumn and midwinter the sunshine was not of 
course strong and continuous enough to be painful to the eyes, 
but in February the light from the snow-clouds and the snow- 
drifts began to be troublesome enough. On the 22nd February 
accordingly snow-spectacles were distributed to all the men, an 
indispensable precaution, as I have before stated, in Arctic 
journeys. Many of the Chukches were also attacked with snow- 
blindness somewhat later in the season, and were very desirous 
of obtaining from us blue-coloured spectacles. Johnsen even 
stated that one of the hares he shot was evidently snow-blind. 

On the evening of the 22th February there burst upon us 



xi-1 A FROZEN DOG. 11 



a storm with drifting snow and a cold of —36°. To be out in 
sach weather is not good even for a Chukch dog. Of this we 
had confinnation the next day, when a Chukch who had lost his 
way came on board, carrying a dog, frozen stifif, by the backbone, 
like a dead hare. He had with his dog gone astray on the ice 
and lain out, without eating anything, in a snow-drift for the 
night. The master himself had suffered nothing, he was only 
hungry, the dog on the other hand scarcely showed any sign of 
life- Both were naturally treated on board the Vega with great 
commiseration and kindness. They were taken to the 'tween- 
decks, where neither Chukches nor Chukch dogs were otherwise 
admitted ; for the man an abundant meal was served of what we 
believed he would relish best, and he was then allowed, pro- 
bably for the first time in his life, to sleep if not under a sooty, 
at least under a wooden roof. The dog was for hours carefully 
subjected to massage, with the result that he came to life again, 
which struck us, and, as it appeared, not least the Chukch 
himself, as something wonderful. 

In the beginning of March there passed us a large number of 
sledges laden with reindeer skins, and drawn by eight to ten 
dogs each. Every sledge had a driver, and as usual the women 
took no part in the journey. These trains were on a commercial 
journey from Irkaipij to Pak at Behring's Straits. We found 
among the foremen many of our acquaintances from the preced- 
ing autumn, and I need not say that this gave occasion to a 
special entertainment, for the people, bread, a little spirits, soup, 
some sugar, and tobacco, for the dogs, pemmican. Conversation 
during such visits became very lively, and went on with little 
hindrance, since two of us were now somewhat at home in the 
Chukch language. For if I except two men, Menka and Noah 
Elisej, who could talk exceedingly defective Russian, there was 
not one of the reindeer or dog-foremen travelling past who could 
speak any European language, and notwithstanding this they 
all carry on an active commerce with the Russians. But the 



12 THE VOYAGE OP THE VEGA. [chap. 



Chukch is proud enough to require that his own language shall 
prevail in all international commerce in the north-east of Asia, 
and his neighbours find their advantage in this. 

During the course of the winter, Lieutenant Nordquist 
collected from the Chukch foremen coming from a distance who 
travelled past, information regarding the state of the ice between 
Chaun Bay and Behring's Straits at diflferent seasons of the year. 
Considering the immense importance of the question, even in 
a purely practical point of view, I shall quote verbatim the 
statements which he thus collected. 

Statements regarding the state of the ice an the coast between 
Cape YaJcan and Behring's Straits by Chukches living there. 

" 1. A Chukch from Yekanenmitschikan, near Cape Yakan, 
said that it is usual for open water to be there the whole 
summer. 

" 2. A Chukch from Kinmankau, which lies a little to the west 
of Cape Yakan, said the same. 

" 3. A Chukch from Yakan stated that the sea there becomes 
free of ice in the end of May or beginning of June. On the 
other hand it is never open in winter. 

" 4. Tatan from Yakan stated that the sea there is open fix)m 
the end of May or beginning of June to the latter part of 
September or beginning of October, when the ice begins to drift 
towards the land. 

" 5. Rikkion from Vankarema said that the sea there is covered 
with ice in winter, but open in summer. 

" 6. A reindeer Chukch, Rotschitlen, who lives about twelve 
English miles from the Vega's winter quarters, said that 
Kolyutschin Bay, by the Chukches called Pidlin, is clear of ice 
the whole summer. 

** 7. Urtridlin from Kolyutschin said that neither at that island 
nor in Kolyutschin Bay is there any ice in summer. 

" 8. Ranau, from Yinretlen, also said that Kolyutschin Bay is 
always open in summer. 

"9. Ettiu, from the village Nettej, between Irgunnuk and 
Behring's Straits, stated that the sea at Nettej is open in 
summer, independently of the wind, in winter only when the 
wind is southerly. 

"10. Vankatte, from Nettej, stated that the sea there becomes 



XL] TRAFFIC IN SPIRITS. 13 

open during the month " Tautinyadlin," that is, the latter part 
of May and the beginning of June, and is again covered with 
ice during the month " Kutscshkau," or October and November. 

"11. Kepljeplja, from the village Irgunnuk, lying five English 
miles east of the Vega!s winter quarters at Pitlekaj, said that 
the sea off these villages is open all summer, except when 
northerly winds prevail. On the other hand, he said that 
&rther westward, as at Irkaipij, ice could nearly always be seen 
from the land. 

"12. Kapatljin, from Kingetschkun, a village between Irgun- 
nuk and Behring*s Straits, stated on the 11th January that 
there was then open water at that village. He said further, 
that Behring's Straits in winter are filled with ice when the 
wind is southerly, but open when the wind is northerly. The 
same day a Chukch from Nettej-Kengitschkau, also between 
Irgunnuk and Behring's Straits, stated that ice then lay off 
that village. He confirmed Eapatljin's statement regarding 
Behring's Straits. 

"13. Evano, from Uedlje, near Behring's Straits, said that 
there the sea is always open from May to the end of 
September." 

On the 13th March we came to know that spirits, too, form 
an article of commerce here. For, without having obtained any 
liquor from the Vega, the Chukches at Yinretlen had the means 
of indulging in a general friddle, and that even their friendly 
disposition gives way under the effects of the intoxication we 
had a manifest proof, when t^e day after they came on board 
with blue and yellow eyes, not a little seedy and ashamed. In 
autumn a tall and stout Chukch giantess, who then paid us 
a visit, informed us that her husband had been murdered in a 
drunken quarrel. 

Sledges of considerable size, drawn by reindeer, began after 
the middle of March to pass the Vega in pretty large numbers. 
They were laden with reindeer skins and goods bought at the 
Russian market-places, and intended for barter at Behring's 
Straits. 

The reindeer Chukches are better clothed, and appear to be 
in better circumstances and more independent than the coast 



14 THE VOYAGE OF THE VEGA. [chap. 

Chukches, or, as they ought to be called in correspondence with 
the former name, the dog Chukches. As every one OAvns a 
reindeer herd, all must follow the nomad mode of living, but at 
the same time they carry on traffic between the savages in the 
northernmost parts of America and the Russian fur-dealers in 
Siberia, and many pass their whole lives in commercial journeys. 
The principal market is held annually during the month of 
March, on an island in the river Little Anjui, 250 versts from 
Nischni Kolymsk. The barter goes on in accordance with a 
normal price-list, mutually agreed upon by the Russian mer- 
chants and the oldest of the Chukches. The market is in- 
augurated on the part of the Russians by a mass performed by 
the priest,* who ^always accompanies the Russian crown com- 
missioner, and in the Chukches* camp with buffoonery by one of 
the Chukch Shamans. At such a market there is said to be 
considerable confusion, to judge by the spirited description which 
Wrangel gives of it (Beise, i. p. 269). We ought, however, to 
remember that this description refers to the customs that pre- 
vailed sixty years ago. Now, perhaps, there is a great change 

1 During the market the Russian priest endeavours to make proselytes ; 
he succeeds, too, by distributing tobacco to induce one or two to subject 
themselves to the ceremony of baptism. No true conversion, however, 
can scarcely come in question on account of the difference of language. 
As an example of how this goes on, the^ following story of Wrangel's may 
be quoted. At the market a young Chukch had been prevailed upon, by a 
gift of some pounds of tobacco, to allow himself to be baptised. The cere- 
mony began in presence of a number of spectators. The new convert 
stood quiet and pretty decent in his place till he should step down into the 
baptismal font, a large wooden tub filled with ice-cold water. In this, 
according to the baptismal ritual, he ought to dip three times. But to 
this he would consent on no condition. He shook his head constantly, and 
brought forward a large number of reasons against it, which none under- 
stood. After long exhortations by the interpreter, in which promises of 
tobacco probably again played the principal part, he finally gave way and 
sprang courageously down into the ice-cold water, but immediately jumped 
up again trembling with cold, crying, " My tobacco I my tobacco I " All 
attempts to induce him to renew the bath were fruitless, the ceremony 
was incomplete, and the Chukch only half baptised. 



XI J CHUKCH TRAFFIC. 15 



there. In the commercial relations in north-eastern Asia in the 
beginning of this century, we have probably a faithful picture 
of the commerce of the Beormas in former days in north- 
eastern Europe. Even the goods were probably of the same 
sort at both places, perhaps, also, the stand-points of the culture 
of the two races. 

Besides the traders, a large number of Chukches from Kol- 
yutschin Island and other villages to the west, travelled past us 
with empty sledges, to which were harnessed only a few dogs. 
They returned in the course of a few days with their sledges 
fully laden with fish which they said they had caught in a 
lagoon situated to the eastward. They also sometimes sold a 
delicious variety of the Coregonus taken in a lake in the 
interior some distance from the coast. 

Further on in winter a number of excursions were under- 
taken in different directions, partly to find out these fishing 
places, partly to get an idea of the mode of life of the reindeer 
Chukches. I, however, never ventured to give permission for 
any long absence from the vessel, because I was quite convinced 
that the sea round the Vega after a few days' constant southerly 
storm might become open under circumstances which would not 
permit us to remain in the open road where we lay moored ; 
my comrades' desire to penetrate far into the Chukch peninsula 
could not on that account be satisfied. But short as these 
excursions were, they give us, however, much information re- 
garding our winter life, and our contact with the little-known 
tribe, on the coast of whose homeland the Vega had been beset, 
and on that account, perhaps, there may be reasons for making 
extracts from some of the reports given in to me with reference 
to these journeys. 

Palander's and Kjellman's excursion to a reindeer Chukch camp 
wuthrwest of Pitlekaj, is sketched by the former thus : — 

"On the 17th March, 1879, accompanied by Dr. Kjellman, I 
went out with a sledge and five men, among them a native as 



THE VOYAGE OF THE VEGA. 



[chap. 



guide, to the reindeer Chukch camp in the neighbourhood of 
Taflfelberg {Table Mountain), with a view to obtain fresh rein- 
deer flesh. The expedition was fitted out with two days' pro- 
visions, tent, mattrassea, and pesks. The reindeer Chukches were 
met with eleven English miles from the vessel. On an eminence 
here were found two tents, of which one at the time was unin- 
habited. The other was occupied by the Chukch, Botschitlen, 
his young wife, and another young pair, the latter, if I under- 




stood them right, being on a visit, and properly having their 
home at Irgunnuk. 

" Bound ibe tent, which was considerably smaller than those we 
daily saw at the coast, lay a number of sledges piled up on one 
another. These sledges differed from the common dog-sledges 
in being considerably larger and wider in the gauge. Tne 
runners were clumsy and axed from large wood. 



xij A REINDEER CHUKCH ENCAMPMENT. 17 

" Our proposal to purchase reindeer was immediately declined, 
although we oflFered in exchange bread, tobacco, rum, and even 
guns. As a reason for this refusal they stated that the reindeer 
at this season of the year are too lean to be slaughtered. We 
saw about fifty reindeer pasturing on an eminence at a distance 
of several thousand feet from us. 

" In the afternoon Kjellman and I were invited into the tent, 
where we passed an hour in their sleeping chamber. On our 
entrance the lamp, which was filled with seal oil, was lighted; 
a sort of moss (sphagnum) was used as a wick. Our hostess 
endeavoured to make our stay in the tent as agreeable 
as possible ; she rolled together reindeer skins for pillows 
and made ready for us a place where, stretched at full length, 
we might enjoy much needed repose. In the outer tent 
the other women prepared supper, which consisted of boiled 
seal's-flesh. We received a friendly invitation to share their 
mealy but as we had no taste for seal's-flesh, we declined their 
oflfer under the pretext that we had just had dinner. They 
took their meal lying with the body in the inner tent, but with 
the head under the reindeer-skin curtain in the outer, where the 
food was. After the meal was partaken of, their heads were 
drawn within the curtain ; our host divested himself of all his 
clothes, the trousers excepted, which were allowed to remain. 
Our hostess let her pesk fall down from her shoulders, so that the 
whole upper part of the body thus became bare. The reindeer- 
skin boots were taken off, and turned outside in ; they were 
carefully dried and hung up in the roof over the lamp to dry 
during the night. We treated the women to some sugar, which, 
in consequence of their want of acquaintance with it, they at 
first examined with a certain caution, finding afterwards that it 
tasted exceeding well. After the meal our host appeared to 
become sleepy ; we accordingly said good-night, and went to our 
own tent, where it was quite otherwise than warm, the 
temperature during the night being about — 11'' C. 

" After for the most part a sleepless night, we rose at half-past 
six next morning. When we came out of the tent we saw all 
the reindeer advancing in a compact troop. At the head was an 
old reindeer with large horns, that went forward to his master, 
who had in the meantime gone to meet the herd, and bade him 
good-morning by gently rubbing his nose against his master's 
hands. While this was going on the other reindeer stood 
drawn up in well-ordered ranks, like the crew in divisions on 
board a man-of-war. The owner then went forward and saluted 
every reindeer ; they were allowed to stroke his hands with their 

VOL. n. c 



18 THE VOYAGE OF THE VEGA. [chap. 

noses. He on his part took every reindeer by the horn and 
examined it in the most careful way. After the inspection was 
ended at a sign given by the master the whole herd wheeled 
round and returned in closed ranks, with the old reindeer in 
front, to the previous day's pasture. 

" The whole scene made a very favourable impression on us ; it 
was not the grim hard savage showing in a coarse and barbarous 
way his superiority over the animals, but the good master 
treating his inferiors kindly, and having a friendly word for 
each of them. Here good relations prevailed between man and 
the animals. Rotschitlen himself was a stately young man, 
with an intelligent appearance and a supple handsome figure. 
His dress, of exceedingly good cut and of uncommonly fine 
reindeer skin, sat close to his well-grown firame, and gave us an 
opportunitv of seeing his graceful and noble bearing, which was 
most observable w;hen he was in motion. 

" On our repeating our proposal to purchase reindeer we again 
met with a refusal, on which we struck our tent and commenced 
our return journey. We came on board on the 18th March 
at 3 o'clock P.M., after a. march of four hours and three- 
quarters. 

" The way to the reindeer camp rose and fell gently. The 
snow was hard and even, so that we could go forward rapidly. 
On the way out four foxes and some ravens were seen. At one 
place we found a large number of lemming passages excavated 
through the snow in an oblique direction towards the ground. 
Most of them were scratched up by foxes. The descent to an 
untouched lemming nest was cylindrical, and four and a half 
centimetres in diameter. During both days we had snow, and a 
thick and foggy atmosphere, so that we could see only a short 
distance before us ; we did not however go astray, thanks to the 
good eyes and strongly developed sense of locality of our guide, 
the native." 

Brusewitz's arid Nordqwid's Excursion to Nutschoitjin, 
Of this Nordquist gives the following account : — 

"On the 20th March, at 9 o'clock A.M. Lieut. Brusewitz, 
boatswain Lustig, the Norwegian hunters Johnsen and Sievertsen, 
the Chukch Notti, and I, left the Vega, Our equipment, which 
consisted of provisions for eight days, cooking apparatus, canvas 
tent, india-rubber mattrasses, reindeer-skin pesks, &c., we drew 
after us on a sledge. At 2.45 P.M. we came to Nutschoitjin 
(Coregonus Lake). During our journey we passed a river 



ri.] EXCURSION TO COREGONUS LAKE. 19 

which flows between Nutschoitjin and the mountain Hotsch- 
keanranga about ten English mUes south of this lake and falls 
into the great lagoon south of Pitlekaj. Farther into the 
interior this river, according to Notti's statement, flows through 
several lakes : he also informed us that in summer it abounds 
very much in sahnon (lienne). Some sandy hUls formed the 
watershed between it and Nutschoitjin. The only animal we 
saw during our outward journey was a fox. On the other hand 
we found traces of hares, ptarmigan, and a couple of lemmings. 
After we had found a suitable camping-place, we began to build 
a snow-house, which, however, we could not get ready till 
next day. 

" On the 21st Brusewitz and I went out to view our nearest 
surroundings. On a hill north of the lake, where Potentilla, 
Carex, and Poa stuck up through the snow-covering, we saw a 
large number of traces of the fox, the hare, and the ptarmigan. 
We employed the 22nd in cutting some holes in the ice, which 
was about one and a half metres thick, and in setting a net. For 
I wished to ascertain what species of Coregonus it is which, 
according to Notti's statement, occurs in abundance in this lake. 
At the place where the net was set there was something more 
than a metre of water under the ice. The bottom consisted of 
mud. When we cut a hole in the middle of the lake in order to 
get deeper water we found that the ice, one and a half metres 
thick there, reached to the bottom. 

" Next morning we got in the net eleven Coregoni, of which 
the largest were about thirty-five centimetres long. Although 
the weather was grey and we could not see very far, we went the 
same day to the hill Hotschkeanranga ; partly to determine its 
height, and partly from its summit, which is visible for a great 
distance, to get a view of the appearance of the surrounding 
country. After crossing the river which flows between Nuts- 
choitjin and Hotchkeanranga, we began to ascend the long slope 
on whose summit Hotchkanrakenljeut (Hotchkeanranga's head) 
rises with steep sides above the surrounding country. Over the 
slope were scattered loose blocks of stone of an eruptive rock. 
The crest of "the head" was also closely covered with loose 
stones. On the noi-th or wind side these stones were covered 
with a hard beaten crust of snow nearly two feet thick ; on the 
south side most of them were bare. According to Brusewitz the 
southern slopes are still steeper than the northern. South of 
the hill he saw a large valley — probably a lake — through which 
flows the river which we crossed. 

" As on the outward journey I went with Notti, he advised me 

c 2 



20 THE VOYAGE OF THE VEGA. [chap. 

to offer a little food and ^brandy to the Spirit of the Lake, 
itjaken karjiak, in order to get good net fishing. On my inquiring 
what appearance he had, Notti replied " uiiiga lUapen,'* " I have 
never seen him." Besides this spirit there are in his view others 
also in streams, in the earth, and in some mountains. The 
Chukches also sacrifice to the sun and moon. On the other 
hand they do not appear, as some other races, to pay any sort of 
worship to their departed friends. When I gave him a biscuit 
and bade him offer it, he made with the heel a little depression 
in the snow on Nutschoitjin, crumbled a little bit of the biscuit 
in pieces, and threw the crumbs into' the hollow. The rest of 
the biscuit he gave back, declaring that kamdk did not require 
more, and that we should now have more fish in the net than 
the first time. Notti said also that the Chukches are wont to 
sacrifice something for every catch. Thus have probably arisen 
all the collections of bear and seal skulls and reindeer horns, 
which we often saw on the Chukch coast, especially on 
eminences. 

"After we had read off the aneroid, we speedily made our way 
to the snow-house, because during the interval a violent storm of 
drifting snow had arisen, so that we could not see more than 
half a score of paces before us. On the slope below " the head " 
we had already on our way thither seen traces of two wild 
reindeer. Notti said that there are a few of them on the hill 
the whole winter. The greater number, however, draw farther 
southward, and approach the coast only during summer. Johnsen 
had wounded an owl {Strix nydea), which however made its 
escape. On the 24th snow fell and drifted during the whole 
day, so that we could not go out to shoot. On the 25th we 
came on board again. 

"According to the aneroid observations made during the 
journey, the highest summit we visited had a height of 197 
metres." 

Lieutenant Bove^s Accoxtnt of an Excursion to Najtskaj and 

Tja'pka, 

"On the 19th April, at 4 o'clock A.M. the hunter Johnsen 
and I started on a short excursion eastward along the coast, 
with a view to pay a visit to the much frequented fishing 
station Najtskaj, where our old friends from Pitlekaj had settled. 
We had a little sledge which we ourselves drew, and which was 
laden with provisions for three days and some meteorological 
and hydrographical instruments. 



II.] EXCURSION TO NAJTSKAJ AND TJAPKA. 21 

"At 6 o'clock A.M. we reached Rirajtinop, where we found 
Nottj, a serviceable, talented, and ac;reeahle youth. The vill^e 
Riiajtiaop, which formerly consisted of a great many tents, now 
had only one tent, Notti's, and it was poor enough. It gave the 
inhabitants only a sUght protection against wind and cold. 
Among household articles in the tent I noticed a face-mask of 
wood, less shapeless than those which according to Whymper's 
drawings are found among the natives along the river Youcon, 
in the territory of Alaska, and according to Dr. Simpson among 
the West-Eskimo, I learned afterwards that this mask came 
from Pak, Behring's Straits, whither it was probably carried 
from the opposite Americaa shore. 

" The village Irgunnuk lies from three to four hundred metres 
from Rirajtinop, and consista of five tents, one of which two days 



before bad been removed from Yinretleo, The tents are as 
usual placed on earthy eminences, and have if possible the en- 
trance a couple of paces from some steep escarpment, manifestly 
in order that the door-opening may not be too much obstructed 
with snow. I reckon the population of Irgunnuk at forty persons. 
" Off this village the ice is broken up even close to the land 
into torossea, five to six metres high, which form a chain which 
closely follows the shore for a distance of five to six hundred 
metres to the eastward. The coast from Irgunnuk to N'ajtskaj 
runs in » straight line, is low, and only now and then interrupted 
by small earthy eminences, which all bear traces of old dwellings, 
Mch of these heights has its special name : first Uelkantinop, 
then Tiumgatti, and lastly Tiungo, two miles west of Najtskaj. 



22 THE VOYAGE OF THE VEGA. [chap. 

In the neighbourhood of Uetkantinop we were overtaken by a 
reindeer-Chukch, who accompanied ua to Najtskaj in order 
there to purchase fish and seal-blubber. At noon we reached 
Najtskaj, where our arrival had been announced by a native, 
who, with his dog-team, had driven past us on the way. Ac- 
Gordii^ly on our entrance we were surrounded by the youth of 
the village, who deafened us with their unceasing cries for 
bread {kauka), tobacco, ram, &c. After some moments the 
begging urchins were joined both by women and full-grown men. 
We entered a tent, which belonged to a friend or perhaps 
relation of Notti. There we were very well received. In the 
same tent the reindeer-Chukch also lodged who had given us his 
company on the way. He went into the sleeping chamber, threw 
himself down there, took part in the family s evening meal, all 
almost without uttering a word to the hostess, and the next morn- 
ing he started without having saluted the host. Hospitality b here 



Oo*.(ltl)i of the nltnril dis. 

of a peculiar kind. It may perhaps be expressed thus : To-day I 
eat and sleep in your tent, to-morrma you eat and Bleep in mine ; 
and accordingly, as far as I saw, all, both rich and poor, both those 
who travelled with lai^e sledges, and those who walked on foot, 
were received in the same way. All are sure to find a comer in 
the tent-chamber. 

" The tent-chamber, or yaranga, as this part of the tent is 
called by the natives, takes up fully a third-part of the whole 
tent, and is at the same time work-room, dining-room, and 
sleeping chamber. Its form is that of a parallelepiped ; and a 
moderately large sleeping chamber has a height of 1'80 metre, 
a length of 3'50, and a breadth of 220 metres. The walls are 
formed of reindeer skin with the hair inwards, which are 
supported by a framework of posts and cross-bars. The floor 



XL] CHDKCH LAMPS. 23 

consists of a layer of grass undermost, on which a wah^s skin is 
E[»%ad. The grass and the skin do not form a very soft bed, 
yet one on which even a tired European wanderer may find 
rest. The interior of the sleeping-chamber is Hghted and 
wanned by lamps, whose number varies according to the size of 
the room. A moderately large chamber has three lamps, the 
lai^est right opposite the entrance, the two others on the cross 
walls. The lamps are often made of a sort of stone, which is 
called by the natives viulschi. They have the form of a lai^ 
ladle. The fuel consists of train-oU, and moss is used for the 
wick. These lamps besides require constant attention, because 
half-an-hour's neglect is sufficient to make them smoke or go 
out. The flame is at one comer of the lamp, whose moss wick 
b trimmed with a piece of wood of the shape shown in the 
drawing. The lamp rests on a foot, and it in its turn in a basin. 
In this way every drop of oil that may be possibly spilled is 



(Afler ■ diHring by O. Bore.) 
■a. HwoIL a. Thtirlcli. e. Thslbot. d. Ilubailniiiidatlt. 

I. Stick lor triiDDiliig Um wick. 

collected. If there is anything that this people ought to save, it 
is certainly oil, for this signifies to them both light and heat. 
In the roof of the bedchamber some bars are fixed over the 
lamps on which clothes and shoes are hung to dry. The lamps 
are kept alight the whole day; during night they are com- 
monly extii^uished, as otherwise they would require continual 
attention. Some clothes and fishing implements, two or three 
reindeer skins to rest upon — these are the whole furniture of a 
Chakch tent. 

" Every tent is besides provided with some drums (i/drar). 
These are made of a wooden ring, about. seventy centimetres in 
diameter, on which is stretched a skin of seal or walrus gut. 
The drum is beaten with a light stick of whalebone. The 
sound thus produced is melancholy, and is so in a yet higher 
degree when it is accompanied by the natives' monotonous. 



24 THE VOYAGE OF THE VEGA. [chap. 

commonly rhythm ic&l songs, which appear to me to have a strong 
resemblance to those we hear in Japan and China. A still 
greater resemblance I thought I observed in the dances of these 
peoples. Notti is a splendid ydrar-pl&yer. After some pressing 
he played several of their songs with a feeling for which I had 
not given him credit. The auditors were numerous, and by their 
smiles and merry eyes one could see that they were transported 
by the sounds which Notti knew how to call from the drmn. 
Notti was also listened to in deep silence, with an admiration 
like that with which in a lat^e room we listen to a distinguished 
pianist. I saw in the tent no other musical instrument than 
that just mentioned. 

" The day we arrived at Najtskaj we 
employed in viewing the neighbourhood 
of the village. We accordingly ascended 
a hill about thirty metres high to the 
south of the village in order to get a 
clear idea of the region. From the 
summit of the hill we bad a view of the 
two lagoons west and east of Najtskaj. 
The western appeared, with the ex- 
ception of some earthy heights, to 
embrace the whole stretch of coast 
between Najtskaj, the hill atYinretlea, 
and the mount^uns which are visible 
in the south from the Observatory. 
The lagoon east of Najtskaj is separated 
from the sea by a high rampart of sand, 
and extends about thirty kilometres into 
the interior, to the foot of the cliain of 
OHUKOB aHUfiM DBUM. hOls whicfa TUDS along there. Totheeast- 

one^ightii UH ii.to«i >iu. ^^^ ^^^^ lagoon extends along the coast 
to the neighbourhood of Serdze Kamen, 
This cape was clearly seen and, according to an estimate which I 
do not think was far from the truth, was situated at a distance of 
from twenty-five to twenty-six kilometres from Najtskaj. It 
sinks terracewise towards the sea, and its sides are covered 
with stone pillars, like those we saw in the neighbourhood of Cape 
Great Baranoff. Serdze Kamen to the south is connected with 
mountain heights which are the higher the farther they are 
from the sea. Some of these have a conical form, others are 
table-shaped, reminding us of the Ambas of Abyssinia. Ten or 
twelve miles into the interior they appear to reach a height of 
six hundred to nine hundred metres. 



XI.} LAGOON FISHING. 25 

" The fishing in ihe eastern lagooa takes place mainly in 
ihe neighbourhood of Najtskaj, at a distance of about five 
kilometres fi^m the village. Hooks are exclusively used, and 
no nets or other fishing implements. In a few minutes I saw 
twenty cod (umkadlin) caught, and about as many small fish, 
called by the natives nvkionukio. For the fishing the natives 
miake a hole in the ice, a decimetre in diameter. Round the 
hole they build, as a protection against wind and drifting snow, 
a snow wall eighty centimetres high, forming a circle with an 
inner diameter of a metre and a half. The fish-hooks are of 
iron and are not barbed. The line is about five metres lung. 



To Ui« wtBt IdliiUJn bUnd, Id Oat tuckgnaiid th« vllligi -ntpki, to Vie right U» grut ItgonD. 
<AneT m drmiring bj O. Nordqulat.) 

and is fixed to a rod nearly a metre in length. At the end of 
the angling line hangs a weight of bone, and beside it the hook. 
It is generally the women who fish, yet there are generally two 
or three men about to open the holes, build the walls, and keep 
the fishing-places clear. All the holes with their shelter-walls 
lie in an arc, about a kilometre in length, whose convex side is 
turned to the east. The ice in the lagoon was 17 metre thick, 
the water 32 metres deep, and the thickness of snow on the 
ice 03 metre. 

" The day afler our arrival at Najtskaj we visited the village 
Tjapka, which lies at a distance of six kilometres. This village 



26 THE VOYAGE OP THE VEGA. [chap. 

contains thirteen tents, some of which are more roomy and 
better built than any Chukch tent I have previously seen. 
We lodged in a tent which belonged to Erere, a jfriendly man 
with a face that was always cheerful. His sleeping-chamber 
was so large that it could hold liiore than one family. We 
found the inmates there completely naked, Erere's wife, 
Eedlanga, not excepted. Kedlanga was well formed, her 
bosom full, her stomach somewhat projecting, the thighs poor, 
the legs slender, the feet small, l^e men appeared to have 
a greater disposition to stoutness than the women. Some of the 
children had disproportionately large stomachs. Both men and 
women wore copper rings on the legs, the wrists, and the upper 
arms. On festivals they decorate themselves with irqn rings, 
with which some reminiscence appears to be connected, to judge 
by the fact that they will not part with them. 

" Erere's family was very numerous, according to the prevailing 
state of matters here. He had five children, whose names, 
according to their age, were, Hatanga, Etughi, Vedlat, Uai, and 

Umonga. In all the tents which 
I visited I have inquired the 
number of children. Only two 
or three wives had more than 
three; the average may be esti- 
BRAOELRT OF COPPER. mated at two. 

Half tiw natural sise. " The children are from their 

tenderest years set apart for 
each other; thus Etughi, Erere's second son, who was little 
more than eight, was set apart for Keipteka, a girl of six or 
seven. Etughi and Keipteka slept under the same roof, though 
apart. "When they grow bigger," said Erere to me, "their 
sleeping-places wiU be put alongside each other." At what 
age this takes place I have not ascertained, but I suppose that 
it is very early, as is common with all Oriental races. 

"Right opposite Tjapka lies a small 'island, by the natives 
called Idlidlja, which is about 800 metres in circumference. Its 
shores rise perpendicularly on all sides except that which is 
opposite Tjapka, in which direction it sinks with a steep slope. 
On the north end of it we found three or four whales bones 
and some pieces of driftwood, but nothing to indicate that 
there had been any Onkilon dwellings there. The island 
swarmed with hares, which the inhabitants of Tjapka hunt with 
the bow. For this hunting they are -accustomed to build 
circular walls of snow, pierced with loopholes, through which 
they shoot the unsuspecting animals. 




sl] life in a reindeer church tent. 27 

" Regarding life in the tent I have still the following notes : 
The most troublesome work ia given to the older women. They 
rise early to light and attend to the lamps, yoke the dogs, and 
go fishing. The young women, on the other hand, sleep far 
into the day. The housewives return at noon ; their work is 
then finished, if we do not consider as work the constant motion 
of the tongue in talk and gossip. The younger people have it 
assigned to them to sew clothes, arrange the fishing-lines and 
nets, prepare skins, &c. Sewing-thread is made trom the back 



(AKer m dnwlDg by O. Hoidqnist) 

sinews of the reindeer, which they procure by barter from the 
reindeer-Chukches, giving for them fish and seal-blubber. 

" One cannot, without having seen it, form any idea of the 
lame quantity of food they can consume. One evening I saw 
eight persons, including one child, eat about 30 lbs. of food. 
The bill of fare was: 1, raw fish; 2, soup; 3, boiled fish; 
4, seal-blubber ; 5, seal-fiesh. The raw fish commonly consists 
of frozen cod. The soup is made partly of vegetables, partly of 



28 THE VOYAGE OF THE VEGA. [chap. 



seal-blood ; I saw both kinds. Vegetable soup was prepared by 
boiling equal quantities of water and vegetables, till the mixture 
formed a thick pap. The blood soup is cooked by boiling the 
blood together with water, fish, and fat. They are very fond of 
this soup. The seal-blubber they eat by stuflSng into the mouth 
the piece which has been served to them, and then cutting a 
suitable mouthful with the knife, which they bring close to the 
lips. In the same way they do with the flesh. 

" With the exception of the old women's gossip the greatest 
quietness prevails in the sleeping-chamber. It is not uncom- 
mon for men to visit each other. Thus the first night we spent 
at Najtskaj the tent where we lodged was fiill of people, but 
without the least disturbance arising. If one had anything to 
say he talked in quite a low tone, as if he were shy. He was 
listened to attentively, without any interruption. First when he 
had finished another began. 

" AfiFection between spouses and parents and children is 
particularly strong. I have seen fathers kiss and caress their 
children before they went to rest, and what I found most 
remarkable was that the children never abused this tender 
treatment. Whatever one gave them, it was their first thought 
to divide it with their parents. In this respect and in many 
others they were far in advance of a large number of European 
children." 

Lieutenant Bove's Beport on an Excursion along loith Dr. 
Almquist to the Interior of the Chukch PeninMila, from the 
13th to the 17th Juiu, 1879. 

" We started from the vessel on the morning of the 13th June 
with a view tor penetrate as far as possible into the interior of 
the Chukch peninsula. For the journey we had hired, for a 
liberal pa3rment, two sledges drawn by dogs from Rotschitlen, a 
Chukch ' at Irgunnuk. The dogs and sledges surpassed our 
expectation. In fourteen hours we traversed a distance of 
nearly forty minutes, including bends, which corresponds to a 
speed of three, perhaps four, English miles an hour, if we deduct 
the rests which were caused by the objects of the journey — 
scientific researches. This speed strikes me as not inconsider- 
able, if we consider the weight which the dogs must draw, and 
the badness and unevenness of the way. For the ground was 
undulating, like a sea agitated by a storm. But pleased as we 
were with our sledges and dogs, we were as dissatisfied with 



XL] THE INTERIOR OF THE CHUKCH PENINSULA. 29 

Rotschitlen, a faint-hearted youth, without activity or experience. 
With another driver we might have been able in a few days to 
penetrate as far as the bottom of Kolyutschin Bay, which differs 
greatly in its form from that which Russian, English, and 
German maps give to it. It is not improbable that it is almost 
connected by laJtes, lagoons, and rivers with St. Lawrence Bay or 
Metechigme Bay, whose inner parts are not yet investigated. 

" After we left the lagoons at Pitlekaj and Yinretlen, the coast 
began gradually to rise by escarpments, each about five metres 
in height. The plains between the escarpments are full of 
lagoons or marshes. Such a terrain continued until, about five 
hours* way firom the vessel, we came to a height of twenty-seven 
metres. From this point the terrace-formations cease, and the 
terrain then consists of a large number of ranges of heights, 
intersected by rivulets, which during the snow-melting season 
must be very much flooded. Seven or eight hours' way from 
the vessel we met with such a rivulet, which farther to the 
S.S.E. unites with another which runs between two rocky 
escarpments twenty metres high. On one of these we pitched 
our tent, in order to draw and examine some hills which were 
already divested of the winter dress they had worn for nine long 
months. On the top of one of the hills we found marks of two 
recently-struck tents, which probably belonged to a reindeer 
Chukch, who had now settled halfway between Pitlekaj and 
Table Mount upon a chain of heights which appears to separate 
the Irgunnuk lagoon from the rocky eastern shore of Kolyutschin 
Bay. At our resting place we found a large number of reindeer 
horns and a heap of broken bones. 

" After resuming our journey we came in a short time to the 
foot of Table Mount, whose height I reckoned at 180 metres. 
It slopes gently to the west and south (about 10°), but more 
steeply to the east and north (about 15°). The animal world 
there showed great activity. In less than an hour we saw more 
than a dozen foxes that ran up and down the hills and circled 
round us^ as if they ran with a line. Fortunately for them they 
kept at a respectful distance from our doctor's sure gun. 

" On the other side of Table Mount the ground sinks regularly 
towards Kolyutschin Bay. Here for a while we sought in vain 
for Yettugin's tent, in which we intended to pass the night, and 
which had been fixed upon as the starting-point of fiiture 
excursions, till at last reindeer traces and afterwards the sight of 
some of these friendly animals brought us to the right way, so 
that about 9 o'clock P.M. we got sight of the longed-for dwelling 
in the middle of a snow-desert. At the word yaranga (tent) 



30 THE VOYAGE OF THE VEGA. [chap. 



the dogs pointed their ears, uttered a bark of joy, and ran at full 
speed towards the goal. We arrived at 10.30 P.M. In the tent 
we were hospitably received by its mistress, who immediately 
made the necessary preparations for our obtaining food and 
rest. Yettugin himself was not at home, but he soon returned 
with a sledge drawn by reindeer. These animals had scarcely 
been unharnessed when they ran back to the herd, which 
according to Yettugin' s statement was six kilometres east of 
the tent. 

" I have never seen a family so afflicted with ailments ss 
Yettugin's. The sexagenarian father united in himself almost 
all the bodily ailments which could fall to the lot of a mortal. 
He was blind, leprous (?), and had no use of the left hand, the 
right side of the face, and probably of the legs. His body was 
nearly everywhere covered with the scars of old sores from four 
to five centimetres in diameter. As Dr. Almquist and I were 
compelled to pass the night in the same confined sleeping- 
chamber with him, it was therefore not to be wondered at that 
we drew ourselves as much as possible into our comer. The 
sleeping-chamber or inner tent of a reindeer-Chukch is besides 
much more habitable than that of a coast-Chukch ; the air, if 
not exactly pure, may at least be breathed, and the thick layer 
of reindeer skins which covers the tent floor may well compare 
in softness with our beds on board. Yettugin, his wife 
Tengaech, and his brother Keuto, slept out of doors in order 
to give us more room and not to disturb us when rising. 
Keuto had inherited no small portion of his father's calamity. 
He was deaf, half idiotic, and on his body there were already 
traces of such spots as on the old man's. Keuto was however an 
obliging youth, who during our stay in the tent did all that he 
could to be of use to us, and constantly wandered about to get 
birds and plants for us. He was a skilful archer; I saw him at a 
distance of twenty or twenty-five paces kill a small bird with a 
blunt arrow, and when I placed myself as a target he hit me right 
in the middle of the breast at a distance of perhaps thirty metres. 

"The 14th was employed by me in astronomical and 
geodetical observations, and by Dr. Almquist in excursions in 
the neighbourhood of Yettugin's tent in order to investigate the 
fauna and flora of the neighbourhood. About 10 o'clock P.M. 
he returned, quite exhausted after eight hours' walking in deep 
water-drenched snow under a perceptible solar heat. The 
results of the excursion were in all respects exceedingly good, 
not only in consequence of a number of finds in natund history, 
but also through the discovery that the shore of Kolyutschm 



XL] KOLYUTSCHIN BAY. 31 

Bay runs three-quarters of a mile south-west of Yettugin's tent, 
which was situated in 66° 42' 4" North Lat., and 186° 24' 0" 
Long.^ east from Greenwich. Dr. Almquist had walked four or five 
miles along the eastern shore of the bay, which at most places is 
perpendicular with a height of fifbeen metres. In consequence 
of this discovery we determined to continue our hydrographical 
observations as far as the bottom of the bay, which, according to 
Tettugin's account, was two days' march from the tent. But we 
could not carry out our plan in consequence of our guide's 
laziness, for he declared that on no conditions would he 
aooompany us farther. Neither entreaties nor threats availed 
to disturb this his resolution. I endeavoured myself to drive 
the sledges, but the dogs would not move out of the spot, 
though, following Botschitlen's system, I thrashed them very 
soundly. 

" The place where Yettugin's tent was pitched ofiFered us a 
view of an extensive snow-plain, which was enclosed on all sides 
by high hills. In the north and north-east Table Mount and 
the Tenen hill keep off the north winds, and to the south the 
encampment is protected by a long and high mountain chain 
firom the winds coming from that quarter. I calculated the 
height of some of the mountains at from 1200 to 1500 metres, 
and their azure-blue colour furrowed by dark lines appears to 
me to indicate the presence of ice on the slopes. One of the 
summits of this mountain chain was easily recognisable. It was 
a truncated cone, perhaps 1500 metres high. Kolyutschin Bay 
lies between these mountains and Yettugin's tent. Its western 
shore also appears to rise perpendicularly from the sea, and it is 
higher than the eastern. The bay, which appears to be much 
larger than it is represented on the maps, was covered with level 
ice ; only here and there a piece of ice covered with snow was 
seen sticking up. 

** As we were forced to desist from visiting the interior of Koly- 
utschin Bay, we determined to go to the ground where Yettugin's 
reindeer pastured. We therefore left the tent on the evening 
of the 15th and travelled E.N.E. The warmth, which had now 
commenced, began to make travelling over snow fields difficult ; 
the dogs sank to the stomach, and not unfrequently we had to 
alight in order to help the poor animals to climb the hills we were 
obliged to ascend. Scarcely however had they come to the 
reindeer tracks before even the most exhausted of them rushed 
along at the top of their speed, which might be pleasant 
enough uphill, but when they were coming down it was very 
dangerous, because the slope nearly always ends with a steep 



32 THE VOYAGE OF THE VEGA. [chap. 

escaxpment. We came once, without observing it, to the edge of 
such a precipice, and if we had not succeeded in time in slackening 
our speed a nice confused mass of men, dogs, and sledges would 
have tumbled over it. In order to excite their draught animals 
the Chukches avail themselves of their dogs' inclination to run 
after the reindeer, and during their journeys they endeavour to 
spur them on yet more by now and then imitating the reindeer's 
cry. After two or three hours travelling we fell in with the 
first reindeer, and then by degrees with more and more, until 
finally about 11 o'clock P.M. we came to a numerous herd, 
tended by Yettugin. I applied to him, asking him to barter a 
reindeer in good condition for a gun which I had brought along 
with me. After various evasions Yettugin at length promised 
to give us next day the reindeer for the gun. He would not 
however himself, or with his own knife, kill the reindeer ; on 
which account I requested Dr. Almquist to give it the coup 
de grdce, 

" In consequence of the soft state of the snow we were obliged 
to defer the commencement of our return journey to the evening 
of the 16th. We now travelled over the chain of hills which 
unites Table Mount with Tenen, and descended their northern 
steep slope towards an extensive plain, studded for the most 
part with bogs and marshes. The 17th came in with mist and 
considerable warmth. The mist limited the circle of vision to a 
distance of some few metres, and the high temperature in a 
short time destroyed the crust which had been formed in the 
course of the preceding night on the surface of the snow, and 
melted the layers of snow which still covered the northern slopes 
of these two hills. The southern slopes on the other hand were 
almost quite bare, and the valleys began to be filled with water. 
Four or five days as warm as these and I believe there scarcely 
would be any snow remaining round Koljrutschin Bay. The 
illusions caused by the white fog illuminated by the sunlight were 
very astonishing. Every small spot of ground appeared as an 
extensive snow-free field, every tuft of grass as a bush, and a fox 
in our immediate neighbourhood was for a moment taken for a 
gigantic bear. Besides, during such a fog the action of the sunlight 
on the eyes was exceedingly painftil even in the case of those who 
carried preservers. During the return Rotschitlen lost his way in 
consequence of the numerous different tracks. Fortunately I 
had observed how we travelled, and could with the help of 
the compass pilot our two small craft to a good haven. On the 
17th of June at 1.30 P.M. we were again in good condition on 
board the Vega!* 



n.] THE WEATHER DURING MAY AND JUNE. 33 



In the society on board the prospects of an alteration in the 
constant north winds, the perpetual snow-storms and the un- 
ceasing cold, and the hope of a speedy release from the fetters of 
the ice, were naturally constantly recurring topics of conversa- 
tion. During this time many lively word-battles were fought 
between the weather prophets in the gunroom, and many bets 
made in jest between the optimists and pessimists. The former 
won a great victory, when at noon on the 8th February the 
temperature rose to + O*"*! C, but with the exception of this 
success fortune always went against them. The north wind, the 
drifting snow and the cold, would never cease. A blue water- 
sky indeed was often visible at the horizon to the north and 
north-east, but the ** clearing " first reached our vessel a couple 
of hours before we left our winter haven for ever, and up to the 
15th June the thickness of the ice was almost undiminished (1^ 
metre). The sun rose higher and higher, but without forming 
any crust upon the snow, although upon the black hull of the 
Vega, perhaps with the help of the heat in the interior, it had 
by the 14th March melted so much snow that small icicles were 
formed at the gunwale. It was one of the many deceptive 
prognostications of spring which were hailed with delight. 
However, immediately after severe cold recommenced and 
continued during the whole of the month of April, during 
which the temperature of the aii* never rose above — 4*''6, the 
mean temperature being — 18°'9. 

May began with a temperature of — 20°' 1. On the 3rd the 
thermometer showed — 26°'8, and in the "flower-month" we 
had only for a few hours mild weather with an air temperature 
+ l**-8. Even the beginning of June was very cold ; on the 3rd 
we had — 14***3, with a mean temperature for the twenty-four 
hours of — 9'''4. Still on the 13th the thermometer at midnight 
showed — S'^'O, but the same day at noon with a gentle southerly 
wind a sudden change took place, and after that date it was 
only exceptionally that the thermometer in the open air sank 

VOL. II. D 



34 



THE VOYAGE OF THE VEGA. 



[chap. 



below the freezing-point. The melting and evaporation of snow- 
now began, and went on so rapidly that the land in the end of 
the month was almost free of snow. 

Under what circumstances this took place is shown by the 
following abstract of the observations of temperature at FitlekaJ 
from the 13th June to the 18th July, 1879 :— 



Max. Min. Mean. 

June 13 + 3-6° - 8*0° - 1-95^ 

14 + 2-6 + 0-2 + 1-47 

15 4-3-1 4-1-7 4- 2-28 

16 4- 1-6 -0-6 +0-90 

17 4- 30 4- 0-2 4- 1-22 

18 + 2-4 - 6 + 1-23 

19 4-36 4-1-4 4. 2-43 

20 4- 3-5 + 1-7 + 2-50 

21 + 2-6 + 1-5 + 2-07 

22 + 3-0 4- 1-5 + 2-28 

23 4- 41 + 1-8 + 3-00 

24 4- 6-8 4- 0-9 + 318 
26 + 4 4 4- 0-4 + 2-30 

26 + 3-8 + 6 + 1-77 

27 + 1-4 + 0-7 4- 1-02 

28 4- 2-1 4 0-2 + 0-92 

29 4-0-9 - 1-0 - 0-12 
30+1-0 - 1-8 - 27 



Mux. 



Min. 



Mean. 



July 1 + 0-8° - 0-6^ + 0-07'' 

2 + M - 10 + 040 

3 4. 5-0 + 10 + 2-28 

4 4. 3 8 +1-4 +2-68 

5 4_ 6 2 + 2-0 + 3-60 
r, 4- 3.3 + 10 + 2-28 

7 4- 5-0 + 1-4 + 2-68 

8 + 86 +06 + 4-82 
94- 18 +0-4 +0-97 

10 + 1-4 + 0-5 + 0-90 

11 4. 1-4 4- 0-6 + 1-00 

12 + 9-0 + 0-6 + 4-73 

13 + 6-6 + 3-7 + 5-03 

14 4. 5.4 4- 1-8 + 3-63 

16 + 1-6 + 0-6 + 113 

16 + 3-0 + 0-6 + 1-62 

17+11-6 +3-8 +7-80 

18 + 92 + 6-2 + 7-52 



The figures in the maximum column, it will be seen, are by 
no means very high. That the enormous covering of snow, 
which the north winds had heaped on the beach, could disap- 
pear so rapidly notwithstanding this low temperature probably 
depends on this, that a large portion of the heat which the solar 
rays bring with them acts directly in melting the snow without 
sun-warmed air being used as an intermediate agent or heat- 
carrier, partly also on the circumstance that the winds pre- 
vailing in spring come from the sea to the southward, and before 
they reach the north coast pass over considerable mountain 
heights in the interior of the country. They have therefore the 
nature oifohn winds, that is to say, the whole mass of air, which 



XL] THE AURORA AT THE VEGA'S WINTER QUARTERS. 36 

the wind carries with it, is heated, and its relative humidity is 
slight, because a lai^e portion of the water which it originally 
contained has been condensed in passing over the mountain 
heights. Accordingly when the dry fohn winds prevail, a con- 
siderable evaporation of the snow takes place. The slight 
content of watery vapour in the atmosphere diminishes its 
power of absorbing the solar heat, and instead increases that 
portion of it which is found remaining when the sun's rays 
penetrate to the snowdrifts, and there conduce, not to raise the 
temperature, but to convert the snow into water.^ 

The aurora is, as is well-known, a phenomenon at the same 
time cosmic and terrestrial, which on the one hand is confined 
within the atmosphere of our globe and stands in close con- 
nection with terrestrial magnetism, and on the other side is 
dependent on certain changes in the envelope of the sun, the 

^ In Lapland, too, the melting of the enow in spring is brought about in 
no inconsiderable degree by similar causes, i.e. by dry warm winds 
which come from the fells. On this point the governor of Norbotten ISn, 
H. A. Widmark, has sent me the following interesting letter : — 

*' However warm easterly and southerly winds may be in the parts of 
Swedish Lapland lying next the Kolen mountains, they are not able in any 
noteworthy degree to melt the masses of snow which fall in those regions 
during the winter months. On the other hand there comes every year, if 
we may rely on the statements of the Lapps, in the end of April or begin- 
ning of May, from the west (i.c. from the fells), a wind so strong and at the 
same time so warm, that in quite a short time — six to ten hours — it breaks 
ap the snow-masses, makes them shrink together, forces the mountain sides 
from their snow covering, and changes the snow which lies on the ice of the 
great fell lakes to water. I have myself been out on the fells making measure- 
ments on two occasions when this wind came. On one occasion I was on 
the Great Lule water in the neighbourhood of the so-called Great Lake Fall. 
The night had been cold but the day became warm. Up to 1 o'clock 
P.M. it was calm, but immediately after the warm westerly wind began 
to bloW) and by 6 o'clock p.m. all the snow on the ice was changed to 
water, in which we went wading to the knees. The Lapps in general 
await these warm westerly winds before they go to the fells in 
spring. Until these winds begin there is no pasture there for their rein- 
deer herds." 

D 2 



36 THE VOYAGE OF THE VEGA. [chap 



nature of which is as yet little known, and which are indicated 
by the formation of spots on the sun ; the distinguished Dutch 
physicist, voN Baumhaukr, has even placed the occurrence of 
the aurora in connection with cosmic substances which fall in 
the form of dust from the interstellar spaces to the surface of 
the earth. This splendid natural phenomenon besides plays, 
though unjustifiably, a great rSle in imaginative sketches of 
winter, life in the high north, and it is in the popular idea so 
connected with the ice and snow of the Polar lands, that most 
of the readers of sketches of Arctic travel would certainly con- 
sider it an indefensible omission if the author did not give an 
account of the aurora as seen from his winter station. The 
scientific man indeed knows that this neglect has, in most cases, 
been occasioned by the great infrequency of the strongly lumi- 
nous aurora just in the Franklin archipelago on the north coast 
of America, where most of the Arctic winterings of this century 
have taken place ; but scarcely any journey of exploration has at 
all events been undertaken to the uninhabited regions of the 
high north, which has not in its working plan included the 
collection of new contributions towards clearing up the true 
nature of the aurora and its position in the heavens. But the 
scientific results have seldom corresponded to the expectations 
which had been entertained. Of purely Arctic expeditions, so 
far as I know, only two, the Austrian-Hungarian to Franz Josef 
Land (1872-74) and the Swedish to Mussel Bay (1872-73), have 
returned with full and instructive lists of auroras.^ Ross, Parky, 
Kane, McClintock, Hayes, Nares, and others, have on the 



- I do DOt include La Rechereh£» wintering in 1838-39 at Bosekop, in the 
northernmost part of Norway, as it took place in a region which is all the 
year round inhabited by hundreds of Europeans. During this expedition 
very splendid auroras were seen, and the studies of them by Lottjn, 
Bbayais, Lillieh()Ok, and Siljbstb()m, are among the most important 
contributions to a knowledge of the aurora w^e possess, while we have 
to thank the draughtsmen of the expedition for exceedingly faithful and 
masterly representations of the phenomenon. 



XL] THE AURORA A PERMANENT PHENOMENON. 37 

other hand only had opportunities of registering single auroras ; 
die phenomenon in the case of their winterings has not formed 
any distinctive trait of the Polar winter night. It was the less 
to be expected that the Vega expedition would form an excep- 
tion in this respect, as its voyage happened during one of the 

years of which we knew beforehand that it would be a mini- 

■ 

mum aurora year. It was just this circumstance, however, 
which permitted me to study, in a region admirably suited for 
the purpose, a portion of this natural phenomenon under un- 
commonly favourable circumstances. For the luminous arcs, 
which even in Scandinavia generally form starting-points for the 
radiant auroras, have here exhibited themselves undimmed by 
the more splendid forms of the aurora. I have thus, undisturbed 
by subsidiary phenomena, been able to devote myself to the 
collection of contributions towards the ascertaining of the posi- 
tion of these luminous arcs, and I believe that I have in this 
way come to some very remarkable conclusions, which have been 
developed in detail in a separate paper printed in The Sden- 
tific Work of the Vega Expedition, (Part I. p. 400). Here 
space permits me only to make the following statement 

The appearance of the aurora at Behring's Straits in 1878-79 
is shown in the accompanying woodcuts. We never saw here 
the magnificent bands or draperies of rays which we are so 
accustomed to in Scandinavia, but only halo-like luminous arcs, 
which hour after hour, day after day, were unaltered in position. 
When the sky was not clouded over and the faint light of the 
aurora was not dimmed by the rays of the sun or the fiill moon, 
these arcs conamonly began to show themselves between eight 
and nine o'clock P.M., and were then seen without interruption 
during midwinter till six, and farther on in the year to three 
o'clock in the morning. It follows &om this that the aurora 
even during a minimum year is a permanent natural 
phenomenon. The nearly unalterable position of the arcs has 
further rendered possible a number of measurements of its 



40 THE VOYAGE OF THE VEGA. [chap. 



height, extent, and position from which I believe I may draw the 
following inferences : that our globe even during a minimum 
aurora year is adorned with an almost constant, single, double, or 
multiple luminous crown, whose inner edge is situated at a height 
of about 200 kilometres or 0*03 radius of the earth above its 
surface, whose centre, " the aurora-pole," lies somewhat under the 
earth's surface, a little north of the magnetic-pole, and which, 
with a diameter of 2,000 kilometres or 0'3 radius of the earth, 
extends in a plane perpendicular to the radius of the earth, which 
touches the centre of the circle. 

I have named this luminous crown the aurora glory on account 
of its form and its resemblance to the crown of rays round the 
head of a saint. It stands in the same relation to the ray and 
drapery auroras of Scandinavia as the trade and monsoon winds 
in the south to the irregular winds and storms of the north. The 
light of the crown itself is never distributed into rays, but re- 
sembles the light which passes through obscured glass. When 
the aurora is stronger, the extent of the light-crown is altered : 
double or multiple arcs are seen, generally lying in about the 
same plane and with a common centre, and rays are cast between 
the different arcs. Arcs are seldom seen which lie irregularly to 
or cross each other. 

The area in which the common arc is visible is bounded by 
two circles drawn upon the earth's surface, with the aurora-pole 
for a centre and radii of 8" and 28*^ measured on the circumference 
of the globe. It touches only to a limited extent countries 
inhabited by races of European origin (the northernmost part of 
Scandinavia, Iceland, Danish Greenland), and even in the middle 
of this area there is a belt passing over middle Greenland, South 
Spitzbergen, and Franz Josef Land, where the common arc forms 
only a faint, very widely extended, luminous veil in the zenith, 
which perhaps is only perceptible by the winter darkness being 
there considerably diminished. This belt divides the regions 
where these luminous arcs are seen principally to the south from 



r 



il] the ARBIVAL of migratory birds. 41 

those in which they mainly appear on the northern horizon. In 
the area next the aurora-pole only the smaller, in middle 
Scandinavia only the larger, more irregularly formed luminous 
crowns are seen. But in the latter region, as in southern 
British America, aurora storms and ray and drapery auroras are 
instead common, and these appear to lie nearer the surface of the 
earth than the arc amwra. Most of the Polar expeditions have 
wintered so near the aurora-pole that the common aurora arc 
there lay under or quite near the horizon, and as the ray aurora 
appears to occur seldom within 
this circle, the reason is easily 
explained why the winter night 
was so seldom illuminated by the 
aurora at the winter quarters of 
these expeditions, and why the 
description of this phenomeooa 
plays so small a part in their 
sketches of travel. 

Long before the ground be- 
came bare and. mild weather 
commenced, migratory birds be- 
gan to arrive : first the snow- 
bunting on the 23rd April, then 
large flocks of geese, eiders, long- 
tailed ducks, gulls, and several ^ j^^^ 

kinds of waders and soi^-birds. 

First among the latter was the little elegant Sylvia Eioers- 
manni, which in the beginning of May settled in great flocks 
on the only dark spot which was yet to be seen in the quarter 
— the black deck of the Vega. All were evidently much 
exhausted, and the first the poor things did was to look out 
convenient sleeping places, of which there is abundance in the 
rigging of a vessel when small birds are concerned. I need 



42 THE VOYAGE OP THE VEGA. [chap. 

scarcely add that our new guests, the forerunners of spring. Were 
disturbed on board as little as possible. 

We now began industriously to collect material for a know- 
ledge of the avi- and mammal-fauna of the region. The 
collections, when this is being written, are not yet worked out, 
and I can therefore only make the following statement on 
this point : 

From the acquaintance I had made during my own preceding 
journeys and the study of others*, with the bird-world of the high 
north, I had got the erroneous idea that about the same species of 
birds are to be met with everywhere in the Polar lands of Europe, 
Asia, and America. Experience gained during the expedition of 
the Vega shows that this is by no means the case, but that the 
north-eastern promontory of Asia, the Chukch peninsula, forms 
in this respect a complete exception. Birds occur here in much 
fewer numbers, but with a very much greater variety of types 
than on Novaya Zemlya, Spitzbeigen, and Greenland ; in con- 
sequence of which the bird-world on the Chukch peninsula has 
in its entirety a character diflFering wholly from that of the 
Atlantic Polar lands. We indeed meet here with types closely 
allied to the glaucous gull (Larus glaucus, Briinji.), the ivory gull 
{L, ebumetts, Gmel.), the kittiwake {L. tridadylus, L.), the long- 
tailed duck {Harelda gladalis, L.), the king duck (Somateria 
specfahUis, L.),^ the phalarope (Phalaroptis fulicaritts, Bonap.), the 
purple sandpiper ( Triiiga maritima, Briinn.), &c., of Spitzbergen 
and Novaya Zemlya ; but along with these are found here many 
peculiar species, for instance the American eider {Somateria 
V.-nigrum, Gray), a swanlike goose, wholly white with black 
wing points (Anscr hyperhoreus, Pall.), a greyish-brown goose with 
bushy yellowish-white feather-covering on the head (Anser pictii8> 
Pall.), a species of Fuligula, elegantly coloured on the head in 
velvet-black, white, and green, (Fuligula Stelleri, Pall.), the 

* Tlie common eider (S. moUissimay L.) is absent here, or at least excee<1- 
ingly rare. 



3CJ.] THE SPOON-BILLED SANDPIPEB. 43 

beautifully marked, scarce Larus Rossii, Richards, of which Dr. 
Almquist on the 1st July, 1879, shot a specimen from the vessel, 
a little brown sandpiper with a spoonlike widened bill-point 
{Euiyuorhyjukuspygmwus, L.), and various song-birds not found in 
Sweden, &c. Besides, a number of the Scandinavian-types living 
here also, according to Lieutenant Nordquist, are distinguished 
by less considerable differences in colour-marking and size. The 
sin^lar spoon-billed sandpiper was at one time in spring so common 
that it was twice served at the gunrooiu table, for which aft«r 



At Ihfl )uc1« the bird^i bill ttta from above, of Uu utuiAl iAk. 

our return home we had to endure severe reproaches from animal 
collectors. This bird is found only in some few museums. It 
was first described by LlNK-EUS in Museum Adolphi Friderici, 
Tomi secundi prcdromvs, HolmiEe 1764, and then by C. P. 
Thunberg in the TTajisadions of the Swedish Academy of 
Sciences for 1816 {p. 194), where it is stated that the homeland 
of this bird is tropical America. It has since been caught a few 
times in south-eastern Asia. Probably, like Sylvia. Euersmnnni, 
it passes the winter in the Philippine group of islands, but in 



44 THE VOYAGE OF THE VEGA. [chap. 



sominer visits the high north* like several other hirds which 
appeared in spring with the first bare spots it disappeared in 
July. Perhaps it retired to the interior to breed in the bush, or, 
which is more probable, went Csuther north to the islands or 
continents not yet discovered by Europeans, which in all pro- 
bability connect Wnmgel Land with the Franklin Archipelago. 
The higher animal forms which, along with the Polar traveller, 
dare to brave the cold and darkness of the Arctic night, exert 
on him a peculiar attraction. Regarding these. Lieutenant 
Nordquist has given me the following notes : — 

" The mammal most common in winter on the north coast of 
the Chukch peninsula is the hare. It differs from the fell hare 
(Lejpus borealis, Lillj.) by its larger size, and by the bones of its 
nose not tapering so rapidly. It is generally met with in flocks 
of five or six on the hills in the neighbourhood of the tents, 
which are covered only with a thin layer of snow, notwith- 
standing the large number of hungry dogs which wander about 
there. 

" The mountain foxes ( Vulpes lagopus, L.) are very numerous. 
The common fox ( Vulpes vulgaris, Gray) appears also to be 
common. A red fox, which Lieutenant Brusewitz shot from the 
vessel in October, differed considerably from the common fox, 
and approached the mountain fox. The food of the fox appears 
in winter to consist of hares, ptarmigan, and lemmings. I have 
twice seen holes in the snow about a metre deep and at the 
mouth not more than thirty centimetres wide, which the 
Chukcbes said were excavated by foxes searching for lemmings. 

" Of the lemming I have seen three varieties, viz. Myodes 
ohensis, M, torquatus, and Arvicola obscurus. There is found 
here, also, according to the statements of the Chukches, a little 
mouse, in all probability a Sorex. Myodes torquatus were got 
the first time on the 12th January, Myodes obensis on the 13th 
February. Both species were afterwards frequently brought on 
board by Chukches, and during the winter lemmings were seen 
not unfrequently running on the snow. Myodes obensis appeared 
to be more numerous than the other species. It is singular that 
all the nine specimens of Myodes torquatus I obtained during the 
winter were males. Differing from both these species, Arvicola 
obscurus does not appear to show itself above the snow during 
winter. Of the latter I got eight specimens from the village 



IL] THE MAMMALIA OP CHUKCH LAND. 46 

Tjapka, lying between Yinretlen and Behring's Straits. I after- 
waitls got another from the village Iigunnuk, situated iiTe 
English miles cast of Yinretlen. 

"The more uncommon land mammals wintering in these 
regions are the vx>lf and the wild reiruieeT. Footprints of the 
latter were seen on the 23rd Miirch, in the mountain region, 
fifteen to twenty miles south of Yinretlen, According to the 
Chukches' account some few reindeer remain on the bills along 
the coast, while the greater number migrate southwards towards 



winter. Besides these, two other mammals live here during 
winter, though they are only seen during summer and autumn, 
because they hibernate the rest of the time. These are the 
land hear and the ma-nnot (Arctomys sp.). We saw no land 
bear, but on the 8th October Lieutenant Hovgaard and I found 
traces of this animal two or three English miles from the coast. 
The Chukches say that the land bear is not uncommon in 
sunmier. The marmot occurs in laige numbers. It was brought 
on board for the first time by a Chukch, and the following day 



46 THE VOYAGE OF THE VEGA. [chap. 

I myself saw it sitting on the top of a little hill, where it had 
its dwelling. 

'' Besides the animals enumerated above the natives talked of 
another, which is called by them nennet, and is said to live by 
the banks of rivers. According to their description it appears 
to be the common otter. As at most places where the lemming 
is common the weasel {Mustela vulgaris, Briss.) is also found 
here. I got from the Chukches two skins of this animal. 
Whether the beaver occurs in the part of Chukch Land which 
we visited I cannot say with certainty. It is probable, because 
the Chukches informed me that there was found here a weasel 
which has the point of the tail black. 

'« Only two sea mammals have been seen in this region in the 
course of the winter, viz. the rough or bristled seal and the 
Polar hear. On two occasions traces of the latter have been 
observed in the neighbourhood of land. They appear, however, 
for the most part to keep by openings in the ice farther out to 
sea, where during our stay two of them were killed by Chukches 
from the neighbouring villages. The rough seal is probably the 
only species that occurs near the coast during winter. It is 
caught in great numbers, and forms, along with fish and various 
vegetable substances, the main food of the Chukches. 

" Of land birds there winter in the region only three species, 
viz. an owl (Strix ngctea, L.), a raven {Corvus sp.), and a. ptarmi- 
gan {Lagoptbs svibalpina, Nilss.) ; the last-named is the most 
common. On the 14th December, during a sledge journey into 
the country I saw, about ten or twelve English miles from the 
coast, two large coveys of ptarmigan, one of which probably 
numbered over fifty. Nearer the coast, on the other hand, there 
were found, especially during spring, for the most part only single 
birds. The raven is common at the Chukch villages, and builds 
its nest in the neighbouring cliffs. The first egg was got on the 
31st May. The mountain owl was seen for the first time on the 
11th March, but, according to the statements of the Chukches, 
it is to be met with during the whole winter. In April and May 
we also saw some mountain owls ; on the 21st May I saw two. 

" At open places in the sea there are found here in winter, the 
Chukches say, two swimming birds, the looin ( Uria Brilnnichii, 
Sabine) and the hla^ck guillemot (Uria grylle, L.). Of the 
former we obtained two specimens for the first time on the 
1st May, of the latter on the 19th of the same month. 
Possibly there winter in open places of the sea besides these 
birds a species of Mergulus, one of which came to the winter 
quarters of the Vega on the 3rd November, and a FuHgula, a 



xj.] "LEADS" FORMED. 47 

speciiDeii of which was sold to us on the 9th March by a 
Chukch, who said he had killed it at a clearing off the coast." 

After the arrival of the migratory birds hunting excursions 
began to form a welcome interruption in our monotonous winter 
life, and the produce of the hunting a no less agreeable change 
&om the preserved provisions. The Chukches besides offered 
us daily a large number of different kinds of birds, especially 
when they observed that we paid a higher price for many rare 
kinds of birds, though small and of little use for food, than for 
a big, fat goose. The Chukches killed small birds either by 
throwing stones, or by shooting them with bow and arrows, in 
connection with which it may be observed that most of them 
were very poor archers. They also caught them with whale- 
bone snares set on bare spots on the beach, generally between 
two vertebrae of the whale. For pebbles are very scarce, but 
the bones of the whale are found, as has been already stated, at 
most places in large numbers on the strand-banks where the 
tents are pitched. In June we began to get eggs of the gull, 
eider, long-tailed duck, goose, and loom, in sufiBcient number for 
table use. The supply, however, was by no means so abundant 
as during the hatching season on Greenland, Spitzbergen, or 
Novaya Zemlya. 

A little way firom the vessel there were formed, in the end of 
May, two " leads," a few fathoms in breadth. On the 31st May 
I sent some men to dredge at these places. They returned 
with an abundant yield, but unfortunately the openings closed 
again the next day, and when I and Lieutenant Bove visited 
the place there was a large, newly-formed toross thrown up along 
the edge of the former channel. Another " lead " was formed 
some days after, but closed again through a new disturbance of 
the position of the ice, a high ice-rampart, formed of loose 
blocks, heaped one over another, indicating the position of the 




I ¥"' 



50 THE VOYAaE OF THE VEGA. [chap. 



former opening. Even the strongest vessel would have been 
crushed in such a channel by the forcing together of the ice. 
Of a different sort firom both these occasional leads was an 
extensive opening, which showed itself a kilometre or two north 
of the vessel. It is probable that with few interruptions, which, 
however, might have been difficult to pass, it extended as far as 
Behring's Straits, where, according to the statements of the 
Chukches, several whalers had already made their appearance. 
Round the vessel itself, however, the ice still lay &st and 
unbroken. Nor did the Chukches appear to expect that it 
would break up very soon, to judge by the number of vehicles 
drawn by dogs or reindeer which still passed us, both to the 
east and west. One of these travellers must here be specially 
mentioned, as his journey has been talked about as an expedition 
sent to our relief. 

It was the 19th June. A large number of Chukches 
travelling past us as usual came on board, partly to receive 
the tribute of hospitality to which they considered themselves 
entitled, partly to satisfy an easily understood curiosity and 
gossip a little about the most important occurrences of the 
preceding day. One of them, a middle-aged man, whom we had 
not seen before, with a £riendly and self-satisfied bearing, whose 
face was a mere collection of wrinkles, and over whose peak was 
drawn an old velvet shirt, presented himself with a certain 
pretentiousness as the chief Noah Elisej. Since the mistake 
with the stately Chepurin, and since even Menka's supposed 
slave declared himself to be at least as good as Menka, we had 
begun to be rather indifferent to the rank of chief among the 
Chukches. Noah Elisej however, notwithstanding he thus 
brought forward his pretensions, was received like a common 
man, at which he appeared to be a little offended. But our 
behaviour soon changed, when Notti, or some other of our daily 
guests, who had become quite familiar with our fancies, tastes 
and weaknesses, informed us that Noah Elisej had with him a 



r 



II.] A RELIEF EXPEDITION. 51 

laige,aver7 lai^ letter. Old Noah thus caxried a mail, perhaps 
a Eniopean mail. At ODce he became in our eyes a man of 
importance. After being stonned for a time with questions, be 
took from a bag which hung from his neck the ordinary pieces 
of board fastened together, wbicb here serve as a postbag. They 
were found however to contain only a letter of a couple of lines 
from a Russian ofBcial at Nischni Kolymsk, without any news 



(AAer i photot^ph bj L, Faludec.) 

from Europe, but informing us that chief Noah Elisej was sent 
to as to assist us, if necessary. Noah first patted his stomach 
to indicate that he was hungry and wanted food, and hawked 
and pointed with his finger at his throat to let us know that a 
rum would taste well. He then told us something which we did 
not then exactly understand, but which we now have reason to 
interpret as a statement that Noah was the leader of an expedition 



52 THE VOYAGE OF THE VEGA. [chap. 



sent by the Siberian authorities to our relief, and that he was 
therefore willing in return for suitable compensation to give us 
some reindeer. I availed myself of the offer, and purchased three 
animals for sugar, tea, and a little tobacco. Noah besides was 
a friendly and easy-going man, who, Christian though he was, 
travelled about with two wives and a large number of children, 
who all of course would see the vessel and get their treat of 
tobacco, clay pipes, sugar, ram, &c. 

So much flood water had now begun to collect on the ice, 
especially near the land, that it was exceedingly diflBcult to walk 
from the vessel to the shore and back. Many a proposed land 
excursion was broken off by somebody, immediately after leaving 
the vessel, sinking into some deep hole in the ice and thus getting 
a cold bath. Excursions on land however began to be exceedingly 
interesting to the botanists and zoologists ; and therefore to avoid 
the inconveniences mentioned I caused a tent to be pitched by 
the side of the lai*ge lagoon between Pitlekaj and Yinretlen, and 
a light boat to be carried thither. The bottom of the lagoon was 
still filled with ice, above which however the water stood so high 
that the boat floated in it. The naturalists settled by turns in 
the tent, and from it made excursions in different directions, as 
I hope with the result that the neighbourhood of Pittekaj is now 
the best known tract on the north of Asia, which after all is not 
saying much. The first plant in flower (CocMearia fenestrata, 
R. Br.) was seen on the 23rd June.^ A week after the ground 
began to grow green and flowers of different kinds to show 
themselves in greater and greater numbers.* Some flies were 



* During the expedition of 1861, when we were shut up by ice in Tteu- 
renberg Bay on Spitzbergcn (79° 67' N.L.) the first flower (Saxifraga opposi- 
tifolia, L.), was pulled on the 22nd June. After the wintering in 1872-73, 
Palander and I during our journey round North-east Land, saw the first 
flower on the same species of saxifrage as early as the 15th June, in the 
bottom of Wahlenberg Bay (1^ 46' N.L.). 

' For the sake of conipletenesp, I shall here also enumerate the plants 



xr.] 



THE FLOKA AT PITLEKAJ. 



53 



seen on a sunshiny day in May (the 27th) in motion on the 
surface of the snow, but it was not until the end of June that 

which Dr. Kjellman found at Pitlekaj. Those marked with an * either 
themselves occur in Scandinavia or are represented by nearly allied forms. 

Leucantherouni arcticum (L. ) DC. * Sibbaldia procnmbens L. 



Artemisia arctica Less. 

* „ vulgaris L. f. Tilesii 

Ledrb. 
Cineraria frigid a Richards. 

* „ palustris L. f. congesta 

Hook. 
*- Antennaria alpina (L.) B. Bb. f. 
Friesiana Trautv. 

* Petasites f rigida. 

* Saussurea alpina (L.) DC. f. an- 

gustifolia (DC.) 

* Taraxacum officinale Web. 
Valeriana capitata Pall. 
Gentian a glauca Pall. 
Pedicnlaris sadetica Willd. 

Langsdorffii FiscH. 
lanata Willd. f. lei- 
antba Trautv. 
„ capitata Adams. 

* Polemoniom coeruleum L. 

* Diapensia lapponica L. 

* Anneria idbirica Tubcz. 



« 
* 



* 



ft 



}} 



»> 



1) 



>» 



♦ Dry as octopetala L. 

Spirssa betulasfolia Pall. f. typica 

Maxim. 
Hippuris vulgaris L. 
Saxifraga stellaris L. f. comosa 
PoiR. 

punctata L. 
cemua L. 
rivularis L. 
Rhodiola rosea L. 
Empetrum nigrum L. 
Cardamine belHdifolia L. 
Cochlearia fenestrata R. Bb. 

f. typica Malhgr. 
f. prostata Malmgr. 
Ranunculus Pallasii Sehlbcht 
nivalis L. 
pygmseus Wo. 
hyperboreus Rottb. 

* Aconitum Napellus L. f. delphini- 

folia Reichekb. 






» 



>» 



>> 






Claytonia acutifolia Willd. 
Primula nivalis Pall. f. pygmsea * Wahlbergella apetala (L.) Fr. 

Ledeb. * Stellaria longipes G oldie, f. hn- 

,, borcalis Dubt. 
Loiseleuria procumbens (L.) Desv. * 
Ledum palustre L. f . decumbens Ait. 



Vaccinium vitis idea L. 
Arctostapbylos alpina (L.) Sprekg. 

* Cassiope tetragona (L.) Don. 
Hedysarum obscurum L. 
Oxytropis nigre8cen6(PALL.)FiECH. 

f. pygmaea Cham. 
species? 

* Sobus Chamsemorus L. 

* Comarum palustre L. 
Potentilla fragiformis L. 

f. parviflora Trautv. 
f. villosa (Pall.) 



milis Fbnzl. 
„ humifiisa Rottb. 
Cerastium maximum L. 

,, alpinum L. f. hirsuta EoCH. 
Halianthus peploides (L.) Fr. 
Alsine arctica (Stev.) Fenzl. 
Sagina nivalis (Lindbl.) Fr. 
Polygonum Bistorta L. 

viviparum L. 
polymorphum L. f. 
frigida Cham. 
Rumex arcticus Trautv. 
* Oxyria digyna (L.) Hill. 

Saljx boganidensis Trautv. f . lati- 
folia. 



* 

* 
* 
* 



)} 



>» 



54 



THE VOYAGE OF THE VEGA. 



[chap. 



insects began to show themselves in any large numbers, among 
them many Hai-palids, two large species of Carabus, and a large 
Curculionid. The insects occurring here however are not very 
numerous either in respect of species or individuals, which is not 
strange when we consider that the earth at a limited depth from 
the surface is constantly frozen. As even the shallow layer, 
which thaws in summer, is hard frozen in winter, all the insects 
which occur here must in one or other phase of their develop- 
ment endure being frozen solid for some time. But it may be 
remarked with reason with reference to this, that if life in an 
organism may so to speak be suspended for months by freezing 
stiiF without being destroyed, what is there to prevent this 
suspension being extended over years, decades, or centuries ? 

The common idea, that all animal life ceases, when the interior 
animal heat sinks under the freezing-point of water, is besides 
not quite correct. This is proved by the abundant evertebrate 
life which is found at the bottom of the Polar Sea, even where 
the water all the year round has a temperature of — 2* to — ¥'7 
C, and by the remarkable observation made during the wintering 



»> 



y| 



>» 






Salix Chainissoiiis Andebs. 
arctica Pall. 
cuneata TuRCZ. 
reticulata L. 
„ species ? 
Betula glandulosa MiCHX. £. rotun- 

dif olia Reqbl 
Elymus mollis Tbin. 
Festuca rubra L. f. arenaria 

OSB. 

Poa flexuosa Wg. 
Arctophila effusa J. Lge. 
Glyceria vilf oidea (Ands.) Th. Fr. 
,, vaginata J. Lgb. f . con- 
tracteta J. Lgb. 
Catabrosa algida (Sol.) Fr. 
Golpodium latifolium R. Br. 
Dupontia Fischeri R. Br. 
Trisetum subspicatum (L.) P. B. 



* Aira cespitosa L. £. borealis 

Trautv. 
Alopecurus alpinus Sm. 

* Hierochloa alpina (Liuebl.) Roem. 

and ScH. 

* Carex rariflora (Wg.) Sm. 

* „ aqvatilis f. epijegoa LiEsr. 

* „ glareosa Wo. 

* „ lagopina Wg. 

* Eriopborum angustifolium Roth. 

vaginatum L. 
russeolum Fb. 

* Luzula parviflora (Ehrh.) Dbsv. 

* „ Wablenbergii Rupr. 

* „ arcuata (Wg.) Sw. £. con- 

f USa LiNDBB. 

* JuDcus biglumis L. 

Lloydia serotina (L.) Rbichbnb. 






>i 



» 



XL] PHOSPHORESCENT CRUSTACEA. 66 



at Mussel Bay in 1872-73, that small Crustacea can live by 
millions in water-drenched snow at a temperature of from — 2** 
to — 10*"2 C. On this point I say in my account of the expedition 
of 1872-73 :-i 

"If during winter one walks along the beach on the snow 
which at ebb is dry, but at flood tide is more or less drenched 
through by sea-water, there rises at every step one takes, an 
exceedingly intense, beautiful, bluish-white flash of light, which 
in the spectroscope gives a one-coloured labrador-blue spectrum. 
This beautifiil flash of light arises from the snow, before com- 
pletely dark, when it is touched. The flash lasts only a few 





b. 

BBBTLa FROM PITLEXAJ. 



a. Cktmbu* truneoHeoUU EaoasOHOLTz. (One and a half the natnial »\m».) 
h. Ahpkusip. (One and two-thirds the natural dze.) 



moments after the snow is left untouched, and is so intense, that it 
appears as if a sea of fire would open at every step a man takes. 
It produces indeed a peculiar impression on a dark and stormy 
winter day (the temperature of tne air was sometimes in the 
neighbourhood of the freezing-point of mercury) to walk along 
in this mixture of snow and flame, which at every step one takes 
n)lashes about in all directions, shining with a light so intense 
that one is ready to fear that his shoes or clothes will take 
fire." 



^ Redogarelse for den svenska polarea^editionen dr 1872-73. BihaDg til] 
Vet-Akad. Handl. Bd. 2, No. 18, p. 62. 



56 



THE VOYAGE OF THE VEGA. 



[chap. 



On a closer examination it appeared that this light-pheno- 
menon proceeded from a minute crustacean, which according to 
the determination of Prof. W. Lilljeborg belongs to the species 
Metridia armata, A. Boeck, and whose proper element appears 
to be snow-sludge drenched with salt water cooled considerably 
under 0** C. First when the temperature sinks below — 10** 
does the power of this small animal to emit light appear to cease. 
But as the element in which they live, the surface of the snow 





J. 2. 

PHUSPHORESCENT CRUST AC£AM FROM 1IDS6EL B\V. 

Metridia armata, A. Boeck, 
1 . A male magnified twelve times. 2. A foot of the seoond pnir. 



nearest the beach, is in the course of the winter innumerable 
times cooled twenty degrees more, it appears improbable that 
these minute animals suffer any harm by being exposed to a cold 
of from - 20° to - 30°, a very remarkable circumstance, as they 
certainly do not possess in their organism any means of raising 
the internal animal heat in any noteworthy degree above the 
temperature of the surrounding medium. 



iL] FISHING IN A FRESH-WATER LAGOON. 67 

We did not Bee these Euiimals at Pitlekaj, but a similar pheno- 
nienon, though od a smaller scale, was observed by Lieut. Bellot* 
duiing a sledge-journey in Polar America. He believed that the 
light arose &om decaying organic matter. 

After the Chukches had told us that an exceedingly delicious 
black fish was to be found in the fresh-water lagoon at Yinretlen, 



(After ■ photognph by L. FkIuuIft.) 

which is wholly shut off from the sea and in winter freezes to 
the bottom, we made an excursion thither on the 8th July. Our 
friends at the encampment were immediately ready to help us, 
especially the women, Aitanga, and the twelve-year-old, somewhat 

' Journal tTun Vof/age avx 3fers Polairt: Pane, 1854. Pp- 117 
•Dd223. 



68 THE VOYAGE OF THE VEGA. [chap. 



spoiled Fe^a-favoiirite Reitinacka. They ran hither and thither 
like light-hearted and playful children, to put the net in order 
and procure all that was needed for the fishing. We had carried 
with us from the vessel a net nine metres long and one deep. 
Along its upper border floats were fixed ; to the lower was bound 
a long pole, to which were fastened five sticks, by which the pole 
was sunk to the bottom of the lagoon, a little way from the 
shore. Some natives wading in the cold water then pushed 
the net towards the land with sticks and the pole, which glided 
easily forward over the bottom of the lake, overgrown as it was 
with grass. In order to keep the fish from swimming away, the 
women waded at the sides of the net with their peaks much 
tucked up, screaming and making a noise, and now and then 
standing in order to indicate by a violent shaking that the water 
was very cold. The catch was abundant. We caught by 
hundreds a sort of fish altogether new to us, of a type which 
we should rather have expected to find in the marshes of the 
Equatorial regions than up here in the north. The fish were 
transported in a dog sledge to the vessel, where part of them was 
placed in spirits for the zoologists and the rest fried, not without 
a protest from our old cook, who thought that the black slimy 
fish looked remarkably nasty and ugly. But the Chukches 
were right: it was a veritable delicacy, in taste somewhat 
resembling eel, but finer and more fleshy. These fish were 
besides as tough to kill as eels, for after lying an hour and a 
half in the air they swam, if replaced in the water, about as fast 
as before. How this species of fish passes the winter is still more 
enigmatical than the winter life of the insects. For the lagoon 
has no outlet and appears to freeze completely to the bottom. 
The mass of water which was found in autumn in the lagoon 
therefore still lay there as an unmelted layer of ice not yet 
broken up, which was covered with a stratum of flood water 
several feet deep, by which the neighbouring grassy plains were 
inundated. It was in tliis flood water that the fishing took place. 



XL] UALLIA DEUCATISSIMA. 69 

After our return home the Yinretlen fish was examined by 
IVofessor F. A. Smitt in StxKskholm, who stated, in an address 
which he gave on it before the Swedish Academy of Sciences, 
that it belongs to a, new species to which Professor Smitt gave 
the name Dallia delieatiasima. A closely allied form occurs in 
Alaska, and has been named Dallia peetoralia, Bean. These 
fishes are besides nearly allied to the dog-fish {Umbra Krameri, 
Fitzii^), which is found in the Neusidler and Flatten Lakes, and 
in grottos and other water-filled subterranean cavities in southern 
Europe. It is remarkable that the European species are con- 
sidered uneatable, and even regarded with such loathing that 
the fishermen throw them away as soon as caught because they 



consider them poisonous, and fear that their other fish would 
be destroyed by contact with it. They also consider it an 
afiiont if one aaks them for dog-fish.' If we had known 
this we should not now have been able to certify that Dallia 
ddicaiimma, Smitt, truly deserves its name. 

In the beginning of July the ground became free of snow, 
and we could now form tm idea of how the region looked in 
summer in which we had passed the winter. It was not just 
attractive. Far away in the south the land rose with terrace- 
formed escarpments to a hill, called by us Table Mount, which 
* Heckel and Kner, Die SiUttBa»erfieche Oeslerreklit, p. 296, 



60 THE VOYAGE OF THE VEGA. [chap. 



indeed was pretty high, but did not by any steep or bold cliffs 
yield any contribution to such a picturesque landscape border as 
is seldom wanting on the portions of Spitzbergen, Greenland, and 
the north part of Novaya Zemlya which I have visited ; south 
Novaya Zemlya has at least at most places bold picturesque 
shore-cliffs. If I except the rocky promontory at Yinretlen, 
where a cliff inhabited by ravens rises boldly out of the sea, 
and some cliffs situated farther in along the beach of Kolyut- 
schin Bay, the shore in the immediate neighbourhood of our 
wintering station consisted everywhere only of a low beach 
formed of coarse sand. Upon this sand, which was always 
frozen, there ran parallel with the shore a broad bank or 
dune, 50 to 100 metres broad, of fine sand, not water-drenched 
in summer, and accordingly not bound together by ice in 
winter. It is upon this dune that the Chukches erect their 
tents. Marks of them are therefore met with nearly every- 
where, and the dune accordingly is everywhere bestrewed with 
broken implements or refuse from the chase. Indeed it may 
be said without exaggeration that the whole north-eastern 
coast of the Siberian Polar Sea is bordered with a belt of 
sweepings and refuse of various kinds. 

The coarse sand which underlies the dune is, as has been 
stated, continually frozen, excepting the shallow layer which 
is thawed in summer. It is here that the " frost formation " 
of Siberia begins, that is to say, the continually frozen layer of 
earth, which, with certain interruptions, extends from the Polar 
Sea far to the south, not only under the treeless tundra, but 
also under splendid forests and cultivated corn-fields.^ To 

* Even pretty far south, in Scandinavia, there occur places with frozen 
earth which seldom thaws. Thus in Egyptinkorpi mosses in Nurroi and 
Pjeli parishes in Finland pinewoods are found growing over layers or 
" tufts " of frozen sand ; but also, in other places in Eastern Finland, 
we find layers containing stumps, roots, &c., of different generations of 
trees, alternating with layers of frozen mould, according to a comnmni- 
cation from the agronome Axel Asplund. A contribution to the knowledge 



X1.J THE FROST FORMATION OF SIBERIA. 61 



speak correctly, however, the frozen earth begins a little from 
the shore wader the sea} For on the coast the bottom often 
consists of hard frozen sand — " rock-hard sand," as the dredgers 
were accustomed to report. The frost formation in Siberia thus 
embraces not only terrestrial but also marine deposits, together 
with pure clear layers of ice, these last being formed in the 
mouths of rivers or small lakes by the ice of the river or lake 
frozen to the bottom being in spring covered with a layer 
of mud sufficiently thick to protect the ice from melting during 
summer. The frozen sea-bottom again appears to have been 
formed by the sand washed down by the rivers having carried 
with it when it sank some adhering water from the warm 
and almost fresh surface strata. At the sea-bottom the sand 
surrounded hj fresh water freezing at 0"* C. thus met a stratum 
of salt water whose temperature was two or three degrees under 
0', in consequence of which the grains of sand froze fast to- 
gether. That it may go on thus we had a direct proof when 
in spring we sank from the Vega the bodies of animals to be 
skeletonised by the Crustacea that swarmed at the sea-bottom. 
If the sack, pierced at several places, in which the skeleton was 
sunk was first allowed to fill with the slightly salt water from 
the surface and then sink rapidly to the bottom, it was found to be 
so filled with ice, when it was taken up a day or two afterwards, 
that the Crustacea were prevented from getting at the flesh. 
We had already determined to abandon the convenient cleansing 
process, when I succeeded in finding means to avoid the in- 
convenience; this was attained by drawing the sack, while 
some distance under the surface, violently hither and thither 

of the way, or one of the ways, in which such formations arise, we 
obtain from the known fact that mines with an opening to the air, so far 
south as the middle of Sweden, are filled in a few years with a coherent 
mass of ice if the opening is allowed to remain open. If it is shut the 
ice melts again, but for this decades are required. 

' Middendorff already states that the bottom of the sea of Okotsk is 
frozen. {Silnrisehe Reiae, 6d. 4, 1, p. 502.) 



C2 THE VOYAGE OF THE VEGA. [chap. xr. 



so that the surface water carried down with it was got rid of. 
Frozen clay and ooze do not appear to occur at the bottom of 
the Polar Sea. Animal life on the frozen sand was rather 
scanty, but algae were met with there though in limited numbers. 

From the shore a plain commences, which is studded with 
extensive lagoons and a large number of small lakes. In spring 
this plain is so water-drenched and so crossed by deep rapid 
snow-rivulets, that it is di£5cult, often impossible, to traverse it. 
Immediately after the disappearance of the snow a large number 
of birds at all events had settled there. The Lapp sparrow had' 
chosen a tuft projecting from the marshy ground on which to place 
its beautiful roofed dwelling, the waders in the neighbourhood had 
laid their eggs in most cases directly on the water-drenched moss 
without trace of a nest, and on tufts completely surrounded by 
the spring floods we met with the eggs of the loom, the long- 
tailed duck, the eider and the goose. Already during our stay, 
the water ran away so rapidly, that places, which one day were 
covered with a watery mirror, over which a boat of light draught 
could be rowed forward, were changed the next day to wet 
marshy ground, covered with yellow grass-straws from the pre- 
ceding year. At many places the grassy sward had been torn 
up by the ice and carried away, leaving openings sharply defined 
by right lines in the meadows, resembling a newly worked off 
place in a peat moss. 

In summer there must be found here green meadows covered 
with pretty tall grass, but at the time of our departure vegetation 
had not attained any great development, and the flowers that could 
be discovered were few. I presume however that a beautiful 
Arctic flower-world grows up here, although, in consequence of 
the exposure of the coast-country to the north winds, poor in 
comparison with the vegetation in sheltered valleys in the interior 
of the country. There are found there too pretty high bushes, 
but on the other hand trees are represented at Pitlekaj only by 
a low species of willow which creeps along the ground. 



r 



II 

til 

£3 I 



TBEE FROM PITLEKAJ. 



We did DOt^ however, see even tins " wood " in full leaf. 
For Id order that full summer heat may b^in it is necessary. 






even here, that the ice break up, and this longed-for 
moment appeared to be yet far distant. The ice indeed 
VOL. n. F 



66 THE VOYAGE OF THE VEGA. [chap. 



became clear of snow in the beginning of July, and thus the 
slush and the flood water were lessened, which during the pre- 
ceding weeks had collected on its surface and made it very 
diflScult to walk from the vessel to land. Now, again pretty 
diy-shod and on a hard blue ice-surface, we could make ex- 
cursions in the neighbourhood of the vessel. We had however 
to be cautious. The former cracks had in many places been 
widened to greater or smaller openings by the flood water run- 
ning down, and where a thin black object — a little gravel, a 
piece of tia from the preserved provision-cases, &c. — ^had lain 
on the ice there were formed round holes, resembling the seal- 
holes which I saw in spring laid bare after the melting of the 
snow on the ice in the Qords of Spitzbergen. The strength 
of the ice besides was ilearly unaltered, and on the 16th July 
a heavily loaded double sledge could still be driven from the 
vessel to the shore. 

On the 17th the "year's ice" next the land at last broke up, 
so that an extensive land clearing arose. But the ground- 
ices were still undisturbed, and between these the "year's ice '* 
even lay so fast, that all were agreed that at least fourteen 
days must still pass before there was any prospect of getting 
free. 

When on the 16th the reindeer-Chukch Yettugin came on 
board, and, talking of the collection of whale-bones in which 
we had been engaged some days before, informed us that 
there was a mammoth bone at his tent, and that a mammoth 
tusk stuck out at a place where the spring floods had cut into 
the bank of a river which flows from Table Mount to Riraitiuop, 
I therefore did not hesitate to undertake an excursion to the 
place. Our absence from the vessel was reckoned at five or six 
days. It was my intention to go up the river in a skin boat 
belonging to Notti to the place where the mammoth tusk was, 
and thence to proceed on foot to Yettugin's tent. Yettugin 
assured us that the river was suflSciently deep for tlie flat- 



XL] RELEASE. 67 

bottomed boat. But when we had travelled a little way into 
the country it appeared that the river had fallen considerably 
during the day that Yettugin passed on the vessel. So certain 
was I however that the ice-barrier would not yet for a long 
time be broken up, that I immediately after my return from the 
excursion, which had thus been rendered unsuccessful, made 
arrangements for a new journey in order with other means of 
transport to reach the goal. 

While we were thus employed the forenoon of the 18th passed. 
We sat down to dinner at the usual time, without any suspicion 
that the time of our release was now at hand. During dinner 
it was suddenly observed that the vessel was moving slightly. 
Palander rushed on deck, saw that the ice was in motion, ordered 
the boiler fires to be lighted, the engine having long ago been 
put in order in expectation of this moment, and in two hours, by 
3.30 P.M. on the 18th July, the Vega, decked with flags, was 
under steam and sail again on the way to her destination. 

We now found that a quite ice-free " lead " had arisen between 
the vessel and the open water next the shore, the ice-fields 
west of our ground-ices having at the same time drifted farther 
out to sea, so that the clearing along the shore had widened 
enough to give the Vega a suflScient depth of water. The 
course was shaped at first for the N.W. in order to make a 
d/tovr round the drift-ice fields lying nearest us, then along the 
coast for Behring's Straits. On the height at Yinretlen there 
stood as we passed, the men, women, and children of the village 
all assembled, looking out to sea at the fire-horse — the Chukches 
would perhaps say fire-dog or fire-reindeer — which carried their 
friends of the long winter months for ever away from their 
cold, bleak shores. Whether they shed tears, as they often said 
they would, we could not see from the distance which now 
parted us from them. But it may readily have happened that 
the easily moved disposition of the savage led them to do this, 
Certain it is that in many of us the sadness of separation 

F 2 



68 THE VOYAGE OF THE VEGA. [chap. 

mingled with the feelings of tempestuous joy which now rushed 
through the breast of every Vega man. 

The Fega met no more ice-obstacles on her course to the 
Pacific. Serdze Kamen was passed at 1.30 A.M. of the 19th, but 
the fog was so dense that we could not clearly distinguish the 
contours of the land. Above the bank of mist at the horizon 
we could only see that this cape, so famous in the history of the 
navigation of the Siberian Polar Sea, is occupied by high 
mountains, split up, like those east of the Bear Islands, into 
ruin-like gigantic walls or columns. The sea was mirror-bright 
and nearly clear of ice, a walrus or two stuck up his head 
strangely magnified by the fog in our neighbourhood, seals swam 
round us in large numbers, and flocks of birds, which probably 
breed on the steep clifi^s of Serdze Eamen, swarmed round the 
vessel. The trawl net repeatedly brought up from the sea- 
bottom a very abundant yield of worms, molluscs, Crustacea, &c. 
A zoologist would here have had a rich working field. 

The fog continued, so that on the other side of Serdze Eamen 
we lost all sight of land, until on the morning of the 20th dark 
heights again began to peep out. These were the mountain 
summits of the easternmost promontory of Asia, East Cape, an 
unsuitable name, for which I have substituted on the map that 
of Cape Deschnev after the gallant Cossack who for the first 
time 230 years ago circumnavigated it. 

By 11 A.M. we were in the middle of the sound which unites 
the North Polar Sea with the Pacific, and from this point the 
Vega greeted the old and new worlds by a display of flags and 
the firing of a Swedish salute. 

Thus finally was reached the goal towards which so many 
nations had struggled, all along from the time when Sir Hugh 
Willoughby, with the firing of salutes from cannon and with 
hurrahs from the festive-clad seamen, in the presence of an 
innumerable crowd of jubilant men certain of success, ushered 
in the long series of North-East voyages. But, as I have before 



•;* •»• « ' 



* • 



f 

V 






IWi»^^ •'a 



rv c^ 




II J THE NORTH-BAST PASSAGE ACHIEVED. 69 

related, their hopes were grimly disappointed. Sir Hugh and all 
his men perished as pioneers of England's navigation and of 
voyages to the ice-encumbered sea which bounds Europe and Asia 
on the north. Innumerable other marine expeditions have since 
then trodden the same path, always without success, and generally 
with the sacrifice of the vessel and of the life and health of 
many brave seamen. Now for the first time, after the lapse of 
336 years, and when most men experienced in sea matters had 
declared the undertaking impossible, was the North-East Passage 
at last achieved. This has taken place, thanks to the discipline, 
zeal, and ability of our man-of-war's-men and their oflScers, 
without the sacrifice of a single human life, without sickness 
among those who took part in the undertaking, without the 
slightest damage to the vessel, and under circumstances which 
show that the same thing may be done again in most, perhaps 
in all years, in the course of a few weeks. It may be permitted 
us to say, that under such circumstances it was with pride we 
saw the blue-yellow flag rise to the mast-head and heard the 
Swedish salute in the sound where the old and the new worlds 
reach hands to each other. The course along which we sailed 
is indeed no longer required as a commercial route between 
Europe and China. But it has been granted to this and the 
preceding Swedish expeditions to open a sea to navigation, and 
to confer on half a continent the possibility of communicating 
by sea with the oceans of the world. 




CHAPTER XII. 

The history, physique, disposition, and manners of the Chukches. 

The north coast of Siberia is now, with the exception of its 
westernmost and easternmost parts, literally a desert. In the 
west there projects between the mouth of the Ob and the 
southern portion of the Kara Sea the peninsula of Yalmcd, 
which by its remote position, its grassy plains, and rivers 
abounding in fish, appears to form the earthly paradise of the 
Samoyed of the present day. Some hundred families belonging 
to this race wander about here with their numerous reindeer 
herds. During winter they withdraw to the interior of the 
country or southwards, and the coast is said then to be unin- 
habited. This is the case both summer and winter, not only with 
Beli Ostrov and the farthest portion of the peninsula between 
the Ob and the Yenisej (Mattesol), but also with the long stretch 
of coast between the mouth of the Yenisej and Chaun Bay. 
During the voyage of the Vega in 1878 we did not see a single 
native. No trace of man could be discovered at the places 
where we landed, and though for a long time w^e sailed quite 
near land, we saw from the sea only a single house on the shore, 
viz., the before-mentioned wooden hut on the east side of 
Chelyuskin peninsula. Russian simovies and native encamp- 
ments are indeed still found on the rivers some distance from 
their mouths, but the former coast population has withdrawn to 



CHAP. XII.] POPULATION OF THE NORTH COAST OF ASIA. 71 

the interior of the country or died out/ and the north coast of 
Asia first begins again to be inhabited at Chaun Bay, namely, 
by the tribe with whom we came in contact during the latter 
part of the coast voyage of the Vega in 1878 and during the 
wintering. 

I have already, it is true, given an account of various traits 
of the Chukches' disposition and mode of life, but I believe at 
all events that a more exhaustive statement of what the Vega 
men experienced in this region will be interesting to my readers, 
even if in the course of it I am sometimes compelled to return 
to subjects of which I have already treated. 



^ The noi-th coast of America still fonns the haunt of a not incon- 
siderable Eskimo population which, for a couple of centuries, has extended 
to the 80th degree of latitude. As the climate in the nortli part of the 
Old World differs little from that which prevails in corresponding regions 
of the New, as at both places there is an abundant supply of fish, and as the 
seal and walrus hunting — at least between the Yenisej and the Chatanga — 
ought to be as productive as on the north coast of America, this difference, 
which has arisen only recently, is very striking. It appears to me to be 
capable of explanation in the following way. Down to our days a large 
number of small savage tribes in America have carried on war with each 
other, the weaker, to escape extermination by the more powerful races, 
being compelled to flee to the ice deserts of the north, deeming themselves 
fortunate if they could there, in peace from their enemies, earn a living by 
adopting the mode of life of the Polar races, suitable as it is to the climate 
and resources of the land. The case was once the same in Siberia, and, 
there are many indications that fragments of conquered tribes have 
been in former times driven up from the south, not only to the 
north coast of the mainland, but also beyond it to the islands lying 
off it. In Siberia, however, for the last 250 years, the case has 
been completely changed by the Russian conquest of the country. 
The pressure of the new government has, notwithstanding many single 
acts of violence, been on the whole less destructive to the original popu. 
lation than the influence which the Europeans have exerted in America. 
The Russian power has at least had a wholly beneficial influence, inasmuch 
as it has prevented the continual feuds between the native races. The 
tribes driven to the inhospitable North have been enabled to return to 
milder regions, and where this has not taken place they have, in the 
absence of new migrations from the South, succumbed in the fight with cold, 
hunger, and small-pox, or other diseases introduced by their new masters. 



72 THE VOYAGE OF THE VEGA. [chap. 

In West-European writings the race, which inhabits the 
north-easternmost portion of Asia, is mentioned for the first 
time, so far as I know, by WrrsEN, who in the second edition of 
his work (1705, p. 671) quotes a statement by VoLODOMiR 
Atlassov, that the inhabitants of the northernmost portions of 
Siberia are called Tsjuktsi, without, however, giving any detailed 
description of the people themselves. In maps from the end of 
the seventeenth century names are still inscribed on this portion 
of land which were borrowed from the history of High Asia, as 
" Tenduc," " Quinsai," " Catacora," &c., but these are left out in 
van Eeulen's atlas of 1709, and instead there stands here 
Zuczari. From about the same time we fall in with some 
accounts of the Chukches in the narrative of the distinguished 
painter CoRNELis de Bruin's travels in Russia. A Russian 
merchant, Michael Ostatiof, who passed fourteen years in 
travelling in Siberia, gave de Bruin some information regarding 
the countries he had travelled through ; among others he spoke 
of Karakie and Soegtsie. The latter were sketched as a godless 
pack, who worship the devil and carry with them their fathers' 
bones to be used in their magical arts. The same Russian who 
made these statements had also come in contact with " stationary " 
(settled) Soegtsi, so called " because they pass the whole winter 
hibernating, lying or sitting in their tents." ^ I have found the 
first somewhat detailed accounts of the race in the note on p. 
110 of the under-quoted work, Histoire g4n6dlogique des Tartares, 
Leyden, 1726. They are founded on the statements of Swedish 
prisoners of war in Siberia. 

The Russians, however, had made a much earlier acquaintance 
with the Chukches ; for during their conquest of Siberia they 
came in contact with this race before the middle of the seven- 
teenth centuiy. A company of hunters in 1646 sailed down the 

^ Comelis de Bruin, Reizen over Moskovie, door Persie en Indie, &c., 
Amsterdam, 1711, p. 12. The author's name is also written De Bmyn 
and Le Brun. 



xil] RUSSIANS AND CHUKCHES. 73 

Kolyma river to the Polax Sea. East of the Kolyma' they fell 
in with the Chukches, with whom they dealt in this way : they 
laid down their goods on the beach and then retired, on which 
the Chukches came thither, took the goods, and laid furs, walrus 
tusks, or carvings in walrus ivory, in their place.^ How such 
journeys were repeated and finally led to the circumnavigation 
of the north-easternmost promontory of Asia belongs to a 
following chapter. 

During these journeys the Russians often came in contact 
with the tribe which inhabited the north-eastern part of Asia, a 
contact which in general was not of a friendly nature. The bold 
hunters who contributed powerfully to the conquest of Siberia, 
and who even at their own hand entered into conflicts with 
whole armies from the heavenly empire, appear not to have 
behaved well when oonfront.ed with the warriors of the Chukch 
race. Even the attempts that were made with professional 
soldiers to conquer the land of the Chukobes were without 
result, less however, perhaps, on account of the armed opposition 
which the Chukches made than from the nature of the country 
and the impossibility of even a small body of troops supporting 
themselves. The following may be quoted as examples of these 
campaigns which throw light upon the former disposition and 
mode of life of this tribe. 

In 1701 some Yukagires who were tributary to Russia deter- 
mined to make an attack on the Chukches, and requested from 
the commandant at Anadyrsk assistance against these enemies. 
A body of troops numbering twenty-four Russians and 110 
Tukagires, was accordingly sent on a campaign along the coast 



^ Herodotus already states in book iv. chapter 196| that the Cartha- 
genians bartered goods in the same way with a tribe living on the coast of 
Africa beyond the Gates of Hercules. The same mode of barter was still 
in use nearly two thousand years later, when the west coast of Africa 
was visited by the Venetian Cadamosto, in 1454 {Ramusio, i., 1588, 
leaf 100). 



74 THE VOYAGE OF THE VEGA. [chap. 



from Anadyrsk to Chukotskojnos. By the way they fell in with 
thirteen tents, inhabited by Chukches who owned no reindeer. 
The inhabitants were required to submit and pay tribute. This 
the Chukches refused to do, on which the Russians killed most 
of the men and took the women and children prisoners. The 
men who were not cut down killed one another, preferring death 
to the loss of freedom. Some days after there was another fight 
with 300 Chukches, which, however, was so unfortunate for the 
latter that 200 are said to have fallen. The rest fled, but 
returned next day with a force ten times as strong, which finally 
compelled the Russo-Yukagirean troop to return with their 
object unaccomplished. 

A similar campaign on a small scale was undertaken in 1711, 
but with the same issue. On a demand for tribute the Chukches 
answered : " the Russians have before come to us to demand 
tribute and hostages, but this we have refused to give, and thus 
we also intend to do in future." ^ 

About fifteen years after this resultless campaign the Cossack 
colonel Affanassej Schestakov proposed to the Government 
again to subdue this obstinate race, intending also to go over to 
the American side, yet known only by report, in order to render 
the races living there tributary to the Russians. The proposal 
was accepted. A mate, Jacob Hens, a land-measurer, Michael 
GvosDEV, an ore-tester, Herdebol, and ten sailors were 
ordered by the Admiralty to accompany the expedition. At 
Yekaterinenburg Schestakov was provided with some small 
cannon and mortars with ammunition, and at Tobolsk with 400 
Cossacks. In consequence of a great number of misfortunes, 
among them shipwreck in the sea of Okotsk, there stood how- 
ever but a small portion of this force at his disposal when he 

• 

^ As security for the subjection of the conquered races, the Russians 
were accustomed to take a number of men and women from their prin- 
cipal families as hostages. These persons were called amanateSy and were 
kept in a sort of slavery at the fixed winter dwellings of the Russians. 



XII.] PAULUTSKI'S CAMPAIGN. 75 



began his campaign by marching into the country from the 
bottom of Penschina Bay. This campaign too was exceedingly 
unfortunate. After only a few days' march he came unexpect- 
edly on a large body of Chukches, who themselves had gone to 
war with the Koryaks. A fight took place on the j-?th March, 
1730, in which Schestakov himself fell, hit by an arrow, and his 
followers were killed or put to flight. 

Among those who were ordered to accompany Schestakov in 
this unfortunate campaign was Captain Dmitri Paulutski. 
Under his command a new campaign was undertaken against 
the Chukches. With a force of 215 Russians, 160 Cossacks and 
60 Yukagires, Paulutski left Anadyrsk on the J^ March, 1731, 
and marched east of the sources of the Anadyr to the Polar Sea, 
which was only reached after two months' march. Then he 
went along the coast, partly by land, partly on the ice, to the 
eastward. After fourteen days he fell in with a large Chukch 
army, and having in vain summoned it to surrender, he 
delivered a blow on the '^th June, and obtained a complete 
victory over the enemy. During the continuation of the 
campaign along the coast he was compelled to fight on two 
other occasions, one on the ^JJ j^^ and the other on the ^th July, 
at Chukotskojnos itself, over which promontory he wished to 
march to the mouth of the Anadyr. In both cases the victory 
lay with the Russians, who, according to Miiller's account based 
on the ofiicial documents, in all three engagements lost only 
three Cossacks, one Yukagire and five Koryaks. But notwith- 
standing all these defeats the Chukches refused to submit and 
pay tribute to the Russians, on which account the only gain of 
the campaign was the honour of avenging Schestakov's defeat 
and of marching in triumph over Chukotskojnos. For this, ten 
days were required. On the promontory, hills of considerable 
height had to be passed. It appears as if Paulutski followed the 
shore of Kolyutschin Bay to the south, and then marched over 
the tongue of land which separates this bay from Anadyr Bay, 



i 



76 THE VOYAGE OF THE VEGA. [chap. 



or to express it otherwise, which unites the Chukch peninsula ^ 
to the mainland of Siberia. 

Many mistakes in comprehending the accounts of old travels 
to these regions have arisen from our ignorance of the great " ' 
southern extension of Kolyutschin Bay, and from the same 
name being frequently used to distinguish different places on 
the coasts of Siberia. Thus we find on the map by A. Arrow- 
smith annexed to Sauer's account of Billings' travels a Serdze 
Kamen on the south side of Chukch peninsula, and it was : 
perhaps just this Serdze Kamen, known and so named by the ' 
dwellers on the Anadyr, that is mentioned in Muller's accounts 
of Paulutski's campaign. 

^^ *^^ Mrto^r Paulutski returned to Anadyrsk, crowned with. I 
victory indeed, but without having brought his adversaries U 
lasting submission. No new attempt was made to induce th< _ 
Chukches to submit, perhaps because Faulutski's campaign hat 
rendered it evident that it was easier to win victories over th 
Chukches than to subdue them, and that the whole treasures < 
walrus tusks and skins belonging to the tribe would scarcel 
suffice to pay the expenses of the most inconsiderab 
campaign. 

Perhaps too the accounts of Paulutski's victories may n 
be quite correct, at least the old repute of Chukches 
a brave and savage race remained undiminished. Thus " 
read in a note already quoted at page 110 of the Histo 
g&ndalogique des Tartares : ^ " The north-eastern part of Asia 
inhabited by two allied races, Tzuktzchi and TzchakUzki, a 
south of them on the Eastern Ocean by a third, called Olvion 
They are the most savage tribe in the whole north of Asia, i 

^ The work is a translation made at Tobolsk by Swedish offic 
prisoners of war from the battle of Pultava, from a Tartar manuscrip 
Abulgasi Bayadur Chan. The original manuscript (?) is in the librar 
Upsala, to which it was presented in 1722 by Lieutenant-Colonel Sc^ 
Strom. Tlie translation has notes by Bentinck, a Dutchman by birth, 
was also taken prisoner in the Swedish service at Pultava. 



xil] 



CHARACTER OF THE OLD CHURCHES. 



77 






wfll have nothing to do with the Russians, whom they inhuioanly 
kill when they fall in with them, and when any of th*^ ^'^ 
into the hands of the Russians they kill themseWeH," ^>i« y^- 
map of LOTTERUS (1765) the Chukch Peninsula U a.l^rjr^i » » 
nay differing firom Russian Siberia; and th*;r*: L% tf^ i,.^'-'»'^? 
inscription: Tfukizchi natio feroeissinui d ?^V>/>*« Ri^'"^^^ 
imimica, qui eapti se invicem inJUrJU\''\i. In \iii ^jl^'i^-" 
ays in his BtsthreSbung allrr Sai\rjhA,9i 4*a hi^- -^^^^ -'^•' 
^jMt iL, p. 350) of the Chukcb^ : " Turj ^^, xu r*r »' ^--"^ 
coarse, proud, refinactory, thieTi-b, fil^ *iii r-'^r^^''''*-- "-^^^ " 
i^ighboaring^ nomads the K'jiyck^. Ti»-:7 tr^ **♦ "•^- 
^bngeroos as the XuncirsiErs aiv irrfn-s^. 'Z.'^^f^Z '• '^a*'-*^ 
beat fifty Kuryaks. TLe Osf-r-oi i ndt^: }'is»--^ ' -^ == 

ne^boorhood of ibeir e:fzz--Err ae»r *^^^ n. •'■: 

them, and cost »> iLi'^ii "Lii^;;: "-iit O-.^'-^rmii'^ir i--*' ''"'^■^ 
withdrawn iLe cSiess ^-i^^^iui *rrrj-^n*-'ir n '.- -*^ '^'- 

.vtctl an J eivrii i=. :*r:r 



iU 



w f 



•-- -— ^ • ' - rx-^ ' " -' 






• «• • ^ 



^^* 



T* — r. ' .-•"- *^ 



Lfckt SI-? Z.-m-zr 



rr. 









.•I 



78 THE VOYAGE OF THE VEGA. [chap. 

Among former travellers on the Chukch peninsula, who visited 
the encampments of the coast Chukches, besides Behring, Cook, 
and other seafarers, the following may be mentioned : — 

The Cossack, Peter Iliin Sin Popov, was sent in 1711 with 
two interpreters to examine the country of the Chukches, and 
has left some interesting accounts of his observations there 
(MCller, Sammlung Htcssischer Geschichten, iii. p. 56).^ 

Billings, with his companions Sauer, Sarytschev, &c., 
visited Chukch-land in 1791. Among other things, accora- 
companied by Dr. Merk, two interpreters and eight men, he 
made a journey from Metschigme Bay over the interior of 
Chukch-land to Yakutsk. Unfortunately the account we 
have of this remarkable journey is exceedingly incomplete.* 

Ferdinand von Wrangel during his famous Siberian 
travels was much in contact with the Chukches, and among his 
other journeys travelled in the winter of 1823 in dog sledges 
along the coast of the Polar Sea from the Kolyma to Kolyutschin 
Island (Wrangel, Beise, ii. pp. 176-231). There are besides 
many notices of the Chukches at other places in the same 
work (i. pp. 267-293 ; ii. pp. 156, 168, &c.). 

Friedrich von LCtke in the course of his circumnavigation 
of the globe in 1826-29, came in contact with the population 
of the Chukch peninsula, whom he described in detail in 
Erman's ArcMv (iii. pp. 446-464). Here it ought to be noted 
that, while the population on the North coast consists of true 
Chukches, the coast population of the region which Lutke visited. 



* Muller has likewise saved from oblivion some other accounts regarding 
the Chukches, collected soon after at Anadyrsk. When we now read tliese 
accoimts, we find not only that the Chukches knew the Eskimo on tlie 
American side, but also stories regarding the Indians of Western America 
penetrated to them, and further, through tlie authorities in Siberia, came 
to Europe, a circumstance which deserves to be kept in mind in judging of 
the writings of Herodotus and Marco Polo. 

* Sauer, An Account, &c., pp. 266 and .319. Sarytschev, Eeise^ iibersetzt 
vofi Bunse. ii. p. 102. 



XII.] TRAVELS IN CHUKCH LAND. 79 



the stretch between the Anadyr and Cape Deschnev consists of 
a tribe, Namollo, which differs from the Chukches, and is 
nearly allied to the Eskimo on the American side of 
Behring's Straits. 

The English Franklin Expedition in the Plover, commanded 
by Captain Mooke, wintered in 1848-49 at Chukotskojnos, and, 
both at the winter station and in the course of extensive 
excursions with dogs along the coast and to the interior of the 
country, came much into contact with the natives. The ob- 
servations made during the wintering were published in a work 
of great importance for a knowledge of the tribes in question 
by Lieutenant W. H. Hooper, Ten Months among the Tents of 
the Tuski, London, 1853. 

C. VON DiTTMAR* travelled in 1853 in the north part of 
Kamchatka, and there came in contact with the reindeer 
nomads, especially with the Koryaks. The information he 
gives us about the Chukches (p. 126) he had obtained from the 
Nischni-Kolymsk merchant, Trifonov, who had traded with 
them for twenty-eight years, and had repeatedly travelled in the 
interior of the country. 

Interesting contributions to a knowledge of the mode of living 
of the reindeer-Chukches were also collected by Baron G. VON 
Maydell, who, in 1868 and 1869, along with Dr. Carl von 
Neumann and others, made a journey from Yakutsk by Sredni- 
Kolymsk and Anjui to Kolyutschin Bay. Unfortunately, with 
regard to this expedition, I have only had access to some notices 
in the Proceedings of the Royal Geographical Society (vol. 21, 
London 1877, p. 213), and Das Ausland (1880, p. 861). The 
proper sketch of the journey is to be found in Isvestija, published 
by the Siberian division of the Russian Geographical Society, 
parts 1 and 2. 

* [/her die Koriaken ttnd die ihnen seJir nahe verwandien Tschuhtschen 
(Bulletin historico-philologique de TAcad^iTiie de St. P^tersbourg, t. xiii., 
1856, p. 126.) 



80 THE VOYAGE OP THE VEGA. [chap. 



With reference to the other traveUers whose writings are 
usually quoted as sources for a knowledge of the Chukches, it 
may be mentioned that Steller and Krascheninnieov only 
touch in passing on the true Chukches, but instead give very 
instructive and detailed accounts of the Koryaks, who are as 
nearly allied to the Chukches as the Spaniards to the Portuguese, 
but yet dififer considerably in their mode of life ; also that 
a part of these authors' statements regarding the Chukches do 
not at all refer to that tribe, but to the Eskimo. It appears 
indeed that recently, after the former national enmity had 
ceased, mixed races have arisen among these tribes. But it 
ought not to be forgotten that they differ widely in origin, 
although the Chukches as coming at a later date to the coast 
of the Polar Sea have adopted almost completely the hunting 
implements and household furniture of the Eskimo; and the 
Eskimo again, in the districts where they come in contact with 
the Chukches, have adopted various things frem their language. 

Like the Lapps and most other European and Asiatic Polar 
races, the Chukches fall into two divisions speaking the same 
language and belonging to the same race, but differing con- 
siderably in their mode of life. One division consists of reindeer 
nomads, who, with their often very numerous reindeer herds, 
wander about between Behring's Straits, and the Indigirka 
and the Penschina Bays. They live by tending reindeer and 
by trade, and consider themselves the chief part of the Chukch 
tribe. The other division of the race are the coast Chukches, 
who do not own any reindeer, but live in fixed but easily 
moveable and frequently moved tents along the coast between 
Chaun Bay and Behring's Straits. But beyond East Cape there 
is found along the coast of Behring's Sea another tribe, nearly 
allied to the Eskimo. This is Wrangel's OnJcUon, Liitke's 
NaTTiollo. Now, however, Chukches also have settled at several 
points on this line of coast, and a portion of the Eskimo have 
adopted the language of the superior Chukch race. Thus the 



III.] THE COAST AND REINDEER CHUKCHES. 81 

inhabitants at St. Lawrence Bay spoke Chukch, with little 
mixture of foreign words, and dififered in their mode of life and 
appearance only inconsiderably from the Chukches, whom 
during the course of the winter we learned to know from nearly 
all parts of the Chukch peninsula. The same was the case with 
the natives who came on board the Vega while we sailed past 
East Cape, and with the two families we visited in Konyam Bay. 
But the natives in the north-west part of St. Lawrence 'Island 
talked an Eskimo dialect, quite different from Chukch. There 
were, however, many Chukch words incorporated with it. At 
Port Clarence on the contrary there lived pure Eskimo. Among 
them we found a Chukch woman who informed us that there 
were Chukch villages also on the American side of Behring's 
Strait, north of Prince of Wales Cape. These cannot, however, 
be veiy numerous or populous, as they are not mentioned in the 
accounts of the various English expeditions to those regions ; 
they are not noticed for instance in Dr. John Simpson's 
instructive memoir on the Eskimo at Behring's Straits. 

We were unable during the voyage of the Vega to obtain any 
data for estimating the number of the reindeer-Chukches. But 
the number of the coast Chukches may be arrived at in the follow- 
ing way. Lieutenant Nordquist collected from the numerous 
foremen who rested at the Vega information as to the names 
of the encampments which are to be found at present on the 
coast between Chaun Bay and Behring's Straits, and the number 
of tents at each village. He thus ascertained that the number 
of the tents in the coast villages amounts to about 400. The 
number of inhabitants in every tent may be, according to our 
experience, averaged at five. The population on the line of coast 
in question may thus amount to about 2,000, at most to 2,500, 
men, women, and children. The number of the reindeer-Chukches 
appears to be about the same. The whole population of Chukch 
Land may thus now amount to 4,000 or 5,000 persons. The 
Cossack Popov already mentioned, reckoned in 1711 that all the 

VOL. IT. G 



d 



82 THE VOYAGE OF THE VEGA. [chap.xii. 



Chukches, both reindeer-owning and those with fixed dwellings, 
numbered 2,000 persons. Thus during the last two centuries, 
if these estimates are correct, this Polar race has doubled its 
numbers. 

In order to give the reader an idea of the language of the 
Chukches, I have in a preceding chapter given an extract fipom 
the large vocabulary which Nordquist has collected. There 
appear to be no dialects dififering very much from each other. 
Whether foreign words borrowed from other Asiatic languages 
have been adopted in Chukch we have not been able to make 
out. It is certain that no Russian words are used. The language 
strikes me as articulate and euphonious. It is nearly allied to 
the Koryak, but so different from other, both East-Ajsiatic and 
American, tongues, that philologists have not yet succeeded in 
clearing up the relationship of the Chukches to other races. 

Like most other Polar tribes, the Chukches now do not belong 
to any unmixed race. This one is soon convinced of, if he con- 
siders attentively the inhabitants of a large tent-village. Some 
are tall, with tallowlike, raven-black hair, brown complexion, 
high aquiline nose — in short, with an exterior that reminds us 
of the 'descriptions we read of the North American Indians. 
Others again by their dark hair, slight beard, sunk nose or 
rather projecting cheek-bones and oblique eyes, remind us 
distinctly of the Mongolian race ; and finally we meet among 
them with very fair faces, with features and complexion which 
lead us to suspect that they are descendants of runaways or 
prisoners of war of purely Russian origin. The most concmion 
type is — straight, coarse, black hair of moderate length; the 
brow tapering upwards; the nose finely formed, but with its 
root often flattened: eyes by no means small; well-developed 
black eyebrows; projecting cheeks often swollen by frostbite, 
which is specially observable when the face is looked at from the 
side ; light, slightly brown complexion, which in the young women 
is often nearly as red and white as in Europeans. The beard is 



^ -^ 



(Arter plLOtogrmpha by L. PklajideTr) 



■■aUing. Bwnnisn rrom PitlekHj. 3,4. RutuhlUen*. 5. 

15, Young mHn rh>m Jrguntiuk. 

(Afler photogrni*» by I. P»liuiilw, 



HIP. xiL] HARDINESS OF THE CHURCHES. 87 



always scanty. Nearly all are stout and well grown ; we saw no 
cripples among them. The young women often strike one as 
reiy pretty if one can rid oneself of the unpleasant impression of 
the dirt, which is never washed away but by the drifting snow of 
winter, and of the nauseous train-oil odour which in winter they 
cany with them from the close tent-chamber. The children 
nearly always make a pleasant impression by their healthy 
appearance, and their friendly and becoming behaviour. 

The Chukches are a hardy race, but exceedingly indolent 
when want of food does not force them to exertion. The men 
during their hunting excursions pass whole days in a cold of 
—30** to — 40° out upon the ice, without protection and without 
carrying with them food or fuel. In such cases they slake their 
thirst with snow, and assuage their hunger, if they have been suc- 
cessful in hunting, with the blood and flesh of the animals they 
have killed. Women nearly naked often during ^severe cold leave 
for a while the inner tent, or tent-chamber, where the train-oil 
lamp maintains a heat that is at times oppressive. A foreigner s 
visit induces the completely naked children to half creep out from 
under the curtain of reindeer skin which separates the sleeping 
chamber from the exterior tent, in which, as it is not heated, the 
temperature is generally little higher than that of the air outside. 
In this temperature the mothers do not hesitate to show their 
naked children, one or two years of age, to visitors for some 
moments. 

Diseases are notwithstanding uncommon, with the exception 
that in autumn, before the severe cold commences, nearly all 
suffer from a cough and cold. Very bad skin eruptions and 
acres also occur so frequently that a stay in the inner tent is 
thereby commonly rendered disgusting to Europeans. Some of 
the sores however are merely frostbites, which most Chukches 
bring on themselves by the carelessness with which during 
high winds they expose the bare neck, breast, and wrists to 
the lowest temperature. When frostbite has happened it is 



88 THE VOYAGE OF THE VEGA. [chap. 



treated, even though of considerable extent, with extreme care- 
lessness. They endeavour merely to thaw the frozen place as fast 
as possible partly by chafing, partly by heating. On the other 
hand we never saw any one who had had a deep frostbite on the 
hands or feet, a circumstance which must be ascribed to the 
serviceable nature of their shoes and gloves. From the beginning 
of October 1878 to the middle of July 1879 no death appears 
to have happened at any of the encampments near us. During 
the same time the number of the inhabitants was increased by 
two or three births. During the wife's pregnancy the husband 
was very affectionate to her, gave her his constant company in 
the tent, kissed and fondled her frequently in the presence of 
strangers, and appe^-red to take a pride in showing her to 
visitors. 

We had no opp<Mrtunity of witnessing any burial or marriage. 
It appears as if the Chukches sometimes bum their dead, some- 
times expose them on the tundra as food for beasts of prey, with 
weapons, sludges, and household articles. They have perhaps 
begun to abandon the old custom of burning the dead, since the 
hunting has fallen oflF so that the supply of blubber for burning 
has diminished. I have before described the pits filled with 
burned bones which Dr. Stuxberg found on the 9th September, 
1878, by the bank of a dried-up rivulet. We took them for 
graves, but not having seen any more at our winter station, we 
began to entertain doubts as to the correctness of our observa- 
tion.^ It is at least certain that the inhabitants of Fitlekaj 
exclusively bury their dead by laying them out on the tundra, 

^ That the Chukches bum their dead with various ceremonies is stated 
b}' Sarytschev on the ground of communications by the interpreter Daurkin, 
who lived among the reindeer-Chukches from 1787 to 1791, in order to 
learn their language and customs, and to announce the arrival of Billings* 
expedition (Sarytschev's Reise^ ii. p. 108). The statement is thus certainly 
quite trustworthy. The coast population with whom Hooper came in 
contact, on the other hand, laid out their dead on special stages^ where 
the corpses were allowed to be eaten up by ravens or to decay (loc. cit 
p. 88). 



111.] CHURCH BURIAL. 89 



Regarding the man, buried or exposed in this way, whom 
Johnsen found on the 15th October, Dr. Almquist, who himself 
visited the place the next day, makes the following statement : — 

" The place was situated five to seven kilometres from the 
village Yinretlen, near the bottom of the little valley which 
runs from this village in a southerly direction into the interior. 
The body was exposed on a little low knoll only two fathoms 
across. It was covered vrith loose snow, and was not frozen very 
bard. When it was loosened there was no proper pit to be seen in 
the underiying snow and ice. The corpse lay from true N.N.W. 
to S.S.E., with the head to the former quarter. "Under the head 
lay two black rounded stones, such as the Chukches use in 
housekeeping. Besides these there was no trace of anything 
underlying or covering the corpse. The clothes had been torn 
by beasts of prey from the body ; the back was quite untouched. 



;v 




BLAK^ OF A CHUECH GRAVS. 

(After a drawing by A. Stuxberg.) 

but the face and breast were much wasted, and the arms and 
legs almost wholly eaten up. On the knoll evident traces of 
the wolf, the fox, and the raven were visible. Close to the 
right side of the corpse had lain the weapons which Johnsen had 
brought home the day before. Near the feet was found a sledge 
completely broken in pieces, evidently new and smashed on the 
spot. Not far off, we found lying on the snow pieces of a peak 
and of foot-coverings, both new and of the finest quality. 
Beasts of prey had undoubtedly torn them ofiF and pulled them 
about. On the knoll there were found besides five or six other 
graves, distinguished by small stones or a wooden block lying on 
the even ground. Two of the graves were ornamented by a 
coUection of reindeer horns. The severe cold prevented me 
from ascertaining whether these stones concealed the remains 
of buried corpses. I considered that I might take the Chukch's 
head, as otherwise the wolves would doubtless have eaten it up. 
It was taken on board and skeletonised." 



90 _ THE VOYAGE OP THE VEGA. [crap. 

In the spring of 1879, after the anow waa melted, we had 
further opportunities of seeing a large number of burning- 
places, or more correctly of places where dead Chukches had 
been laid out. They were marked by stones placed in a peculiar 
way, and were measured and examined in detail by Dr. Stuxbei^, 
who gives the following description of them : — 

" The Chukch graves on the heights south of Pitlekaj and 
Yinretlen, which were examined by me on the 4th and 7th 
July, 1879, were nearly fifty in number. Every grave consisted 
of an oval formed of laige lying stones. At one end there was 



(Alter t drawing by O. Botc.) 

generally a large stone raised on its edge, and'trom the opposite 
end there went out one or two pieces of wood lying on the 
ground. The area within the stone circle was sometimes over- 
laid with small stones, sometimes free and oveigrown with grass. 
At all the graves, at a distance of four to seven paces from the 
stone standing on its edge in the longitudinal axis of the grave 
or a little to the side of it, there was another smaller circle of 
stones inclosing a heap of reindeer horns, commonly containing 
also broken seals' skulls and other fragments of bones. Only 
in one grave were found pieces of human bones. The graves 
were evidently very old, for the bits of wood at the ends were 
generally much decayed and almost wholly covered with earth. 



XII.] THE CHURCH TENT. 91 



and the stones were completely overgrown with lichens on the 
upper side. I estimate the age of these graves at about two 
hundred years." 

The Chukches do not dwell in snow huts, nor in wooden 
houses, because wood for building is not to be found in the 
country of the coast Chukches, and because wooden houses are 
unsuitable for the reindeer nomad. They live summer and 
winter in tents of a peculiar construction, not used by any other 
race. For in order to afford protection from the cold the tent is 
double ; the outer envelope inclosing an inner tent or sleeping 
chamber. This has the form of a parallelepiped, about 3 '5 
metres long, 2*2 metres broad, and IS metre high. It is sur- 
rounded by thick, warm, reindeer skins, and is further covered 
with a layer of grass. The floor consists of a walrus skin 
stretched over a foundation of twigs and straw. At night the 
floor is covered with a carpet of reindeer skins, which is taken 
away during the day. The rooms at the sides of the inner tent 
are also shut off by curtains, and serve as pantries. The inner tent 
is warmed by three train-oil lamps, which together with the heat 
given off by the numerous human beings packed together in the 
tent, raise the temperature to such a height that the inhabitants 
even during the severest winter cold may be completely naked. 
The work of the women and the cooking are carried on in winter in 
this tent-chamber, very often also the calls of nature are obeyed 
in it. All this conduces to make the atmosphere prevailing there 
unendurable. There are also, however, cleanlier families, in 
whose sleeping chamber the air is not so disgusting. 

In summer they Hve during the day, and cook and work, in 
the outer tent. This consists of seal and walrus skins sewed 
together, which however are generally so old, hairless, and full 
of holes, that they appear to have been used by several genera- 
tions. The skins of the outer tent are stretched over wooden 
ribs, which are carefully bound together by thongs of skin. 
The ribs rest partly on posts, partly on tripods of driftwood. 



92 THE VOYAGE OF THE VEGA. [chap. 



The posts are driven into the ground, and the tripods get the 
necessary steadiness by a heavy stone or a seal-skin sack filled 
with sand being suspended from the middle of them. In order 
further to steady the t^nt a yet heavier stone is in the same way 
suspended by a strap from the top of the tent-roof, or the summit 
of the roof is made fast to the ground by thick thongs. At 
one place a tackle from a wrecked vessel was used for this 
purpose, being tightened with a block between the top of the 
roof and an iron hook frozen into the ground. The ribs in, 
every tent are besides supported by T-formed cross stays. 

The entrance consists of a low door, which, when necessary, 
may be closed with a reindeer skin. The floor of the outer 
tent consi3ts of the bare ground. This is kept very clean, and 
the few household articles are hung up carefully and in. an 
orderly manner along the walls on the inner and outer sides of 
the tent. Near the tent are some posts, as high as a man, 
driven into the ground, with cross pieces on which skin boats, 
oars, javelins, &c., are laid, and from which fishing and seal nets 
are suspended. 

In the neighbourhood of the dwellings the storehouse is placed. 
It consists of a cellar excavated at some suitable place. The 
sites of old Onkilon dwellings are often used for this purpose. 
The descent is commonly covered with pieces of driftwood which 
are loaded with stones ; at one place the door, or rather the 
hatch, of the cellar consisted of a whale's shoulder-blade. In 
consequence of the unlimited confidence which otherwise was 
wont to prevail between the natives and us, we were surprised 
to find them unwilling to give the Vega men admittance to 
their storehouses. Possibly the report of our excavations for 
old implements at the sites of Onkilon dwellings at Irkaipij had 
spread to Kolyutschin, and been interpreted as attempts at 
plunder. 

The tents were always situated on the sea shore, generally on 
the small neck of land which separates the strand lagoons from 



III.] 



INVENTORY OF HOUSEHOLD FURNITURE. 



93 



the sea. They are erected and taken down in a few hours. A 
Chukch family can therefore easily change its place of residence, 
and does remove very often from one village to another. Some- 
times it appears to own the wooden frame of a tent at several 
places, and in such cases at removal there are 
taken along only the tent covering, the dogs, and 
the most necessary skin and household articles. 
The others are left without inclosure, lock, or 
watch, at the former dwelling-place, and one is 
certain to find all untouched on his return. 
During short stays at a place there are used, 
even when the temperature of the air is con- 
siderably under the freezing-point, exceedingly 
defective tents or huts made with the skin 
boats that may happen to be available. Thus a 
young couple who returned in spring to Pitlekaj 
lived happy and content in a single thin and 
ragged tent or conical skin hut which below where 
it was broadest was only two and a half metres 
across. An accurate inventory, which I took 
during the absence (rf the newly married pair, 
showed that their whole household furniture con- 
sisted of a bad lamp, a good American axe, some 
reindeer skins, a small piece of mirror, a great 
many empty preserve tins from the Vega, which 
among other things were used for cooking, a fire- 
drill, a comb, leather for a pair of moccassins, some 
sewing implements, and some very incomplete 
and defective tools. 

The boats are made of walrus skin, sewed together 
and stretched over a light frame-work of wood and pieces of bone. 
The different parts of the frame-work are bound together with 
thongs of skin or strings of whalebone. In form and size the 
Chukches' large boat, atkuat, called by the Russians baydar, 



CHCKCH OAR. 

One-sixteenth of 
the natural size. 



94 THE VOYAGE OF THE VEGA. [chap. 



corresponds completely with the Qreenlander's umiak or woman's 
boat.- It is so light that four men can take it upon their 
shoulders, and yet so roomy that thirty men can be conveyed 
in it. One seldom sees anatkuat, or boats intended for only one 
man ; they are much worse built and uglier than the Green- 
lander's kayak. The large boats are rowed with broad-bladed 
oars, of which every man or woman manages only one. By 
means of these oars a suflScient number of rowers can for a little 
raise the speed of the boat to ten kilometres per hour. Like 
the Greenlanders, however, they often cease rowing in order to 
rest, laugh, and chatter, then row furiously for some minutes 
rest themselves again, row rapidly, and so on. When the sea is 
covered with thin newly formed ice they put two men in the 
fore of the boat with one leg over in order to trample the ice 
in pieces. 

During winter the boats are laid up, and instead the dog- 
sledges are put in order. These are of a diflferent construction 
from the Greenland sledges, commonly very . light and narrow, 
made of some flexible kind of wood, and shod with plates of 
whales' jawbones, whales' ribs, or whalebone. In order to im- 
prove the running, the runners before the start are carefully 
covered with a layer of ice from two or three millimetres in 
thickness by repeatedly pouring water over them.^ The dif- 
ferent parts of the sledge are not fastened together by nails, but 
are bound together by strips of skin or strings of whalebone. 
On the low uncomfortable seat there commonly lies a piece of 
skin, generally of the Polar bear. The number of dogs that are 
harnessed to each sledge is variable. I have seen a Chukch 
riding behind two small lean dogs, who however appeared to 
draw their heavy load over even hard snow without any extra- 
ordinary exertion. At other sledges I have seen ten or twelve 

1 If the runners are not shod with ice in this way the friction between 
them and the hard snow is very great during severe cold, and the draugtxt 
accordingly exceedingly heavy. 



xjl] CHUKCH dogs. 97 

masters. A piece of a whale, with the skin and part of the 
flesh adhering, washed out of frozen sandy strata thus lay 
untouched some thousand paces from Pitlekaj ; and the neigh- 
bourhood of the tents, where the hungry dogs were constantly 
pandering about, formed, as has been already stated, a favourite 
haunt for ptarmigan and hares during winter. Young dogs 
some months old are already harnessed along with the team in 
order that they m^y in time become accustomed to the draught 
tackle. During the cold season the dogs are permitted to live 
in the outer tent, the females with their young even in the 
inner. We had two Scotch collies with us on the Vega. They 
at first frightened the natives very much with their bark. 
To the dogs of Chukches they soon took the same superior 
standing as the European claims for himself in relation to the 
savage. The dog was distinctly preferred by the female Chukch 
canine population, and that too without the fights to which 
such fevour on the part of the fair commonly gives rise. A 
numerous canine progeny of mixed Scotch-Chukch breed has 
thus arisen at Pitlekaj. The young dogs had a complete 
resemblance to their father, and the natives were quite charmed 
with them. 

W^ dog is to be killed the Chukch stabs it with his 

spear, and then lets it bleed to death. Even when the scarcity 
was so great that the natives at Pitlekaj and Yinretlen lived 
mainly on the food we gave them, they did not eat the dogs 
they killed. On the other hand they had no objection to eating 
a shot crow. 

When the Chukch goes out on the ice to hunt seals he takes 
his dogs with him, and it is these which take home the catch, 
commonly with the draught-line fastened directly to the head 
of the killed seal, which is then turned on its back and dragged 
over the ice without anything under it. One of the inhabi- 
tants of Yioretlen returned from the open water off the coast 
after a successful hunting expedition with five seals, of which 

VOL. II. H 



98 THE VOYAGE OF THE VEGA. [chap. 



the smallest was laid on the sledge, the others being fastened 
one behind the other in a long row. After the last was drawn 
a long pole, which was used in setting the net. 

The dress of the Chukches is made of reindeer or seal-skin. 
The former, because it is warmer, is preferred as material for 
the winter dress. The men in winter are clad in two pedes ; 
that which is worn next the body is of thin skin with the hair 
inwards, the outer is of thick skin with the hair outwards. 
Besides, they wear, when it rains or wet snow falls, a great coat 
of gut or of cotton cloth, which they call calico. On one oc- 
casion I saw such an overcoat made of a kind of reindeer- 
chamois leather, which was of excellent quality and evidently 
of home manufacture. It had been originally white, but was or- 
namented with broad brown painted borders. Some red and blue 
woollen shirts which we gave them were also worn above the 
skin clothes, and by their showy colours awakened great satisfac- 
tion in the owners. The Chukch pedc is shorter than the Lapp 
one. It does not reach quite to the knees, and is confined at 
the waist with a belt. Under the peak ai-e worn two pairs of 
trousers, the inner pair with the hair inwards, and the outer with 
the hair outwards. The trousers are well made, close fitting, and 
terminate above the foot. The foot-covering consists of reindeer 
or seal-skin moccassins, which above the foot are fastened to 
the trousers in the way common among the Lapps. The soles 
are of walrus-skin or bear-skin, and have the hair side inwards. 
On the other parts of the moccassin the hair is outwards. Within 
the shoes are seal-skin stockings and hay. The head covering 
consists of a hood embroidered with beads, over which in severe 
cold is drawn an outer hood bordered with dog-skin. The outer 
hood is often quite close under the chin, and extends in a very 
well-fitting way over the shoulders. To a complete dress there 
also belong a skin neckerchief or boa, and a neck covering of 
multiple reindeer-skins, or of diflFerent kinds of skins sewn 
together in chess-board-like squares. In summer and far into 



Ill J CHUKCH DRESS. 99 



the aatnmn the men go bareheaded, although they clip the hair 
(m the crown of the head close to the root. 

During the warm season of the year a number of the winter 
wraps are laid off in proportion to the increase of the heat, so 
that the dress finally consists merely of a pesk, an overcoat, and 
a pair of trousers. The summer moccassins are often as long in 
the leg as our sea-boots. In the tent the men wear only short 

■ 

trousers reaching to the hip, together with leather belts (health- 
belts) at the waist and on the arms. The man's dress is not 
much ornamented. On the other hand the men often wear 
strings of beads in the ears, or a skin band set with large, 
tastefully arranged beads or a leather band with some large 
beads on the brow. The leather band they will not willingly 
part with, and a woman told us that the beads in it indicate 
the number of enemies the wearer has killed. I am, however, 
quite certain that this was only an empty boast. Probably our 
informant referred to a tradition handed down from former war- 
like periods to the present time, and thus we have here only a 
Chukch form of the boasting about martial feats common even 
among civilised nations. 

To the dress of the men there belongs further a screen for the 
eyes, which is often beautifully oraamented with beads and 
silver mounting. This screen is worn especially in spring as a 
protection from the strong sunlight reflected from the snow- 
plains. At this season of the year snow-blindness is very 
common, but notwithstanding this snow-spectacles of the kind 
which the Eskimo and even the Samoyeds use are unknown 
here. 

The men are not tattooed, but have sometimes a black or red 
cross painted on the cheek. They wear the hair cut close to 
the root, with the exception of a short tuft right on the crown 
of the head and a short fringe above the brow. The women 
have long hair, parted right in the middle, and plaited along 
with strings of beads into plaits which hang down by the 

H 2 



100 THE VOYAGE OF THE VEGA. [chap. 

ears. They are generally tattooed on the face, sometimes also 
on the arms or other parts of the body. The tattooing ia done 
by degrees ; possibly certain lines are first made at marriage. 

The dress of the women, like that of the men, is douWe 
during winter. The outer peak, which is longer and wider than 
the man's, passes downwards into a sort of very wide trousers. 
The sleeves too are exceedingly wide, so that the arm may easily 
be drawn in Mid stuck out. Under the outer peik there is an 



(After m dnwlag bj JL. Stuxb«ig.> 

inner pesk, or skin-shirt, and under them a pair of very short 
trousers is worn. Where the outer pesk ends the moccassina 
begin. At the neck the pesk is much cut away, so that a part 
of the back is bare. I have seen girls go with the upper part 
of the back exposed in this way even in a cold of- 30° or —40°. 
The stockings have the hau- inwards, they are bordered with 
dog-skin, and go to the knees. The moccassins, chin-covers, 
hoods, and neckerchiefs differ httle from the corresponding 



ui.] DRESS OF CHDKCH WOMEN AND CHILDREN. 101 

articles of men's dress. The woman's dress is in general more 
(voamented than the man's, and the skins used for it appear to 
be more carefiilly chosen and prepared. In the inner tent the 
women go nearly naked, only with quite short under-trouaers of 
skin or calico or a. narrow eingulum pudicititx. On the naked 
body there are worn besides one or two leather bands on one 
ann, a leather band on the throat, another round the waist, and 



some braceleta of iron or less frequently of copper on the wrists. 
The younger women however do not like to show themselves in 
this dress to foreigners, and they therefore hasten at their 
eutt&nce to cover the lower part of the body with the pesk, or 
some other piece of dress that may be at hand. 

When the children are some years old they get the same 
ilreas as their parents, different for boys and girls. While small 



102 



THE VOYAGE OF THE VEGA. 



[chap. 



they are put into a wide skin covering with the legs and arms 
sewed together downwards. Behind there is a four-cornered 
opening through which moss (the white, dead part of 
Sphagnum), intended to absorb the excreta, is put in and 
changed. At the ends of the arms two loops are fastened, 
through which the child's legs are passed when the mother 
wishes to put it away in some comer of the tent. The dress 
itself appears not to be changed until it has become too small. 
In the inner tent the children go completely naked. 

Both men and women use snow-shoes during winter. With- 
out them they will not willingly undertake any long walk in 




SNOW-SHOES. 

a. T}ie common kind. h. Intended to be used In the way tihuwn in the drawing on th« 

opposite page. 

(One- thirteenth of the natural size.) 



loose snow. They consider such a walk so tiresome, that they 
loudly commiserated one of my crew, who had to walk without 
snow-shoes after drifting weather from the village Yinretlen to 
the vessel, about three kilometres distant. Finally a woman's 
compassion went so far that she presented him with a pair ; an 
instance of generosity on the part of our Chukch friends which 
otherwise was exceedingly rare. The frame of the snow-shoes 
is made of wood, the cross-pieces are of strong and well-stretched 
thongs. This snow-shoe corresponds completely with that of 
the Indians, and is exceedingly serviceable and easy to gel 



Bccustomed to. Another implemect for travelling over snow 
was offered by a Chukch who drove past the vessel in the 
beginning of February, It consisted of a pair of immensely 
wide skates of thin wood, covered with seal-skin, and raised at 
both ddes. I had difficulty in understanding how these broad 
shapeless articles could be used with advanti^ until I learned 
from the accompanying drawing that they may be employed as 
a sort of sledges. The drawing is taken from a Japanese work, 
vhose title when translated runs thus : A Journey to the 
north part of Japan (Yezo), 1804 (No 565 of the Japanese 
library I brought home with me). 



In coosequence of the difficulty which the Chukch has during 
winter in procuring water by melting snow over the train-oil 
lamp, there can be no washing of the body at that season of the 
year. Faces are however whipped clean by the drifting enow, 
but at the same time are generally swollen or sore from frost- 
bite. On the whole, the disposition of the Cbukches to clean- 
liness is shght, and above all, their ideas of what is clean or 
unclean differs considerably from ours. Thus the women use 
urine as a wash for the face. At a common meal the hand is 



104 



THE VOYAGE OF THE VEGA. 



[chap. XI r. 



often used as a spoon, and after it is finished, a bowl filled with 
newly-passed urine instead of water is handed round the 
company for washing the hands. Change of clothes takes place 
seldom, and even when the outer dress is dean, new and well 
cut, of carefuUy-chosen beautiful skins, the under-dress is very 
dirty, and vermin numerous enough, though less so than might 
have been expected. Food is often eaten in a way which we 

consider disgusting, a titbit, for instance, is 
passed from mouth to mouth. The vessels 
in which food is served are used in many 
ways and seldom cleaned. On the other 
hand it may be stated that, in order not to 
make a stay in the confined tent-chamber 
too uncomfortable, certain rules are strictly- 
observed. Thus, for instance, it is not per- 
mitted in the interior of the tent to spit on 
the floor, but this must be done into a vessel 
which in case of necessity is used as a night- 
utensil. In every outer tent there lies a 
specially carved reindeer horn, with which 
snow is removed from the clothes ; the outer 
pesk is usually put off before one goes into 
the inner tent and the shoes are carefully 
freed from snow. The carpet of walrus- 
skin, which covers the floor of the inner 
tent, is accordingly dry and clean. Even 
the outer tent is swept clean and free from 
loose snow, and the snow is daily shovelled 
away from the tent doors with a spade of whalebone. Every 
article both in the outer and inner tent is laid in its proper 
place, and so on. 

As ornaments glass beads are principally used, some of them 
being suspended from the neck and ears, others sewed upon 
the hood and other articles of dress, or plaited into the hair. 




a. HDMTiKO c(jp (sacking 
tube). (One-fourth of 
the natural size.) 

h. SNOW-8GKAPEB. (One- 
eighth of the natural 
size.) 



y M 



I. HirpoDD (one-flllMiitb ot the Mtnral dn), S. Bpcuronsd tit»gnTB(iin«'fnnrtIi). 3. BIH 
■ting <oDe-«ltliU>). *■ DarUwltb whip4l[nE(Iii cutlngttiam (oDr-Kvmth). 0. Btrd-Dirt 

irtlS wooden hiinille(lJrthroirlng(niw-ti'tlfth), S. UiHie--""— ' — ' — ■" ' ■ 

nat of mil (ona-ninth). 



(iHior of bone (on«-f<mrth). T. iTory 



THE VOYAGE OF THE VEGA. [chap. 

Embroidery of very pleaemg 
patterns is also employed. In 
order to embellish the peaks 
strips of skin or marmots' and 
squirrels' tails, &c., are sewed 
upon them. Often a variega- 
ted artificial tail of different 
skins is fixed to the hood be- 
hind, or the skin of the hood 
is so chosen that the ears of 
the animal project on both 
sides of the head. Along with 
the beads are fixed amulets, 
wooden tongs, small bone heads 
or bone figures, pieces of metal, 
coins, &c. One child had sus- 
pended from ita neck an old 
Chinese coin with a square 
hole in the middle, together 
with a new American five- 
cent piece. 

In former times beautiful 
and good weapons were pro- 
bably highly prized by so war- 
like a people as the Chukches, 
but now weapons are properly 
scarce antiquities, which, how- 
ever, are still regarded with a 
certain respect, and therefore 
are not readily parted with. 
The lance which was found 
beside the corpse (fig. 2 on 
p. 105) shows by its still par^ 
tially preserved gold decora- 
tions that it had been foiged 
Michth of tbe nutiini ■!».) by the hand of an artist. 



"-1 



IVORY COAT OP MAIL. 



IVobably it has formed part of the booty won long ago in the 
fights with the Cossacks. I procured by barter an ivory coat 
of mail (fig, 7 on p. 105), and remains of another. The ivory 
plates of the coat of mail are twelve centimetres in length, four 
in breadth, and nearly one in thickness, holes being bored at 




(One-niuCfaoruwnatiinl 



their edges for the leather thongs by which the plates are 
bound together. This bmding has been po arranged that the 
whole coat of mail, when not in use, may be rolled together. 

Along with the spear and the coat of mail the old Chukches 
used the bow for martial purposes. Now this weapon is 



108 THE VOYAGE OF THE VEGA. [chap. 



employed only for hunting, but it appears as if even for this 
purpose it would soon go out of use. Some of the natives, 
however, use the bow with great accuracy of aim. The bows 
which I procured commonly consisted of a badly worked, slightly 
bent, elastic piece of wood, with the ends drawn together by 
a skin thong. Only some old bows had a finer form. They 
were larger, and made with care ; for instance, they were covered 
with birch-bark, and strengthened by an artistic plaiting of 
sinews on the outer side. The arrows are of many kinds, 
partly with bone or wooden, and partly with iron, points. 
Feathers are generally wanting. The shaft is a clumsily worked 
piece of wood. Crossbows are occasionally used. We have 
even seen bows for playthings, with carefully made, iron-pointed 
arrows. At the encampments near the winter station we found 
a couple of percussion-lock guns, with caps, powder and lead. 
They were evidently little used, and my attempt to induce the 
Chukches to undertake long journeys by promises of a gun 
with the necessary supply of powder and lead completely 
failed. When the Chukch, who carried our letters to Nischni 
Kolymsk, was after his return rewarded with a red shirt, a 
gun, caps, powder and ball, he wished to exchange the gun and 
ammunition for an axe. 

The principal livelihood of the Chukches is derived from 
hunting and fishing. Both are very abundant at certain seasons 
of the year, but are less productive during the cold season, in 
which case, in consequence of the little forethought of the 
savage, there arises great scarcity both of food and fuel and 
the means of melting snow. Of their hunting and fishing 
implements I cannot give so complete accounts as I should 
wish, because they very carefully avoided taking any of the 
Vega's hunters with them on their hunting excursions. 

The rough seal is taken with nets, made of strong seal-skin 
thongs. The nets are set in- summer among the ground-ices 
along the shore. The animal gets entangled in the net and is 



III.] CATCHING SEALS. 109 



suffocated^ as it can no longer come to the surface to breathe. 
In winter the seal is taken partly with nets in " leads " among 
the ice, partly with the harpoon when it crawls out of its hole ; 
it is also taken by means of a noose of thongs placed over its 
hole. In order to avoid the loss of the valuable seal-blood, 
which is considered an extraordinary delicacy by the Chukches, 
the animal is never killed by an edged tool, if that can be 
avoided, but by repeated blows on the head. The bear is killed 
by the lance or knife, the latter, according to the statement of a 
Ghukch, being the surest weapon ; the walrus and the largest 
kind of seals with the harpoon (fig. 1, p. 105), or a lance 
resembling the Qreenlander's. Even the whale is harpooned, 
but with a harpoon considerably larger than the conmion, and 
to which as many as six inflated seal-skins are fastened. In 
order to kill a whale a great many such harpoons must be 
struck into it. Birds are taken in snares, or killed with bird- 
javelins, arrows, and slings. The last mentioned (fig. 3, p. 105) 
consist of a number of round balls of bone fastened to leather 
thongs, which are knotted together. Some feathers are often 
fixed to the knot in order to increase the resistance of the air to 
this part of the sling. When the sling is thrown the bone balls 
are thereby scattered in all directions, and the probability of 
hitting becomes greater. Every man and boy in summer caxries 
with him such a sling, often bound round his head, and is 
immediately prepared to cast it at flocks of birds flying past. 
Common slings are also used, consisting of two thongs and a 
piece of skin fastened to them. The bird-dart (fig. 5, p. 105) 
completely resembles that used by the Eskimo. A kind of 
snare was used by the boys at Yinretlen to catch small birds 
for our zoologist. They were made of whalebone fibres. 

Fish are caught partly with nets, partly with the hook or with 
a sort of leister (fig. 6, p. 105). The nets are made of sinew- 
thread. I procured several of these, and was surprised at the 
small value which the natives set upon them, notwithstanding 



no THK VOYAGE OF THE VEGA. [chap. 



the hard labour which must have b^en required for preparing 
the thread and making the net. The nets are also sometimes 
used as drift-nets. The fishing-rod consists of a shaft only 
thirty centimetres long, to which is fixed a short line miade of 
sinews. The extreme end of the line passes through a large 
sinker of ivory, to which are attached two or three tufts each 
with its hook of bone only, or of bone and copper, or bone and 
iron. The hook has three or four points projecting in difierent 
directions. I have before described how the hook is used in 
autumn in fishing for roach, also how the productive fishing 
goes on in the neighbourhood of Tjapka. 

Even for the coast Chukch reindeer flesh appears to form an 
important ailicle of food. He probably purchases his stock of 
it from the reindeer-Chukches for train-oil, skin straps, wah-us 
tusks, and perhaps fish. I suppose that part of the frozen 
reindeer blood, which the inhabitants of the villages at our 
winter station used for soup, had been obtained in the same 
way. Wild reindeer, or reindeer that had run wild, were 
hunted with the lasso. Such animals, however, do not appear 
now to be found in any large numbers on the Chukch peninsula. 

Besides fish and flesh the Chukches consume immense quanti- 
ties of herbs and other substances from the vegetable kingdom.^ 
The most important of these are the leaves and young branches 
of a great many difierent plants (for instance Salix, Bhodiola, 
&c.) which are collected and after being cleaned are preserved 
in seal-skin sacks. Intentionally or unintentionally the contents 
of the sacks sour during the course of the summer. In autumn 
they freeze together to a lump of the form of the stretched 
seal-skin. The frozen mass is cut in pieces and used with flesh, 
much in the same way as we eat bread. Occasionally a vegetable 

^ An exhaustive treatise on the food-substances which the Chukches 
gather from the vegetable kingdom, written by Dr. Kjellman, is to be 
found in The Scientific Work of the Vega Expedition. Popov already states 
that the Chukchc s eat many berries, roots, and herbs {MUller, iii. p. 59). 



xiu] VEGETABLE FOOD OF THE CHURCHES. HI 



soap is made from the pieces along with water, and is eaten 
irarm. In the same way the contents of the reindeer stomach 
is used. Algas and difrerent kinds of roots are also eaten, among 
the latter a kind of wrinkled tubers, which, as already stated 
(Vol. L, p. 450) have a very agreeable taste. 

In summer the Chukches eat cloud-berries, red bilberries, and 
odier berries^ which are said to be found in great abundance in 
the interior of the country. The quantity of vegetable matter 
which is collected for food at that season of the year is very 
considerable, and the natives do not appear to be very particular 
in their choice, if the leaves are only green, juicy, and free from 
any bitter taste. When the inhabitants, in consequence of 
scarcity of food, removed in the beginning of February from 
Pitlekaj, they carried with them several sacks of frozen veget- 
ables, and there were stiU some left in the cellars to be taken 
away as required. In the tents at St. Lawrence Bay there lay 
heaps of leaf-clad willow-twigs and sacks filled with leaves and 
stalks of Rhodiola. The writers who quote the Chukches as 
an example of a race living exclusively on substances derived 
from the animal kingdom thus conmiit a complete mistake. On 
the contrary, they appear at certain seasons of the year to be more 
''graminivorous " than any other people I know, and with respect 
to this their taste appears to me to give the anthropologist a hint 
of certain traits of the mode of life of the people of the Stone Age 
which have been completely overlooked. To judge from the 
Chukches our primitive ancestors by no means so much re- 
sembled beasts of prey as they are commonly imagined to have 
done, and it may, perhaps, have been the case that ''helium 
omnium inter omnes" was first brought in with the higher 
caltore of the Bronze or Iron* Age. 

The cooking of the Chukches, like that of most wild races, 
is very simple. After a successful catch all the dwellers in the 
tent gormandise on the killed animal, and appear to find a 
special pleasure in making their faces and hands as bloody as 



112 THE VOYAGE OF THE VEGA. [chap. 

possible. Alternately with the raw flesh are eaten pieces of 
blubber and marrow, and bite of the intestines which have been 
freed from their contents merely by pressing between the fingers. 
Fish is eaten not only in a raw state, but also frozen so hard 
that it can be broken in pieces. When opportunity oflfere the 
Chukches do not, however, neglect to boll their food, or to rcnst 
pieces of flesh over the train-oil lamp — the word roast ought 
however in this case to be exchanged for soot. At a visit which 
Lieutenant Hovgaard made at Najtskaj, the natives in the tent 



(OuHiith ot the nitnnl •!».) 

where he was a guest ate for supper first seal-flesh eoup, then 
boiled fish, and lastly, boiled seal-flesh. They thus observed 
completely the order of eating approved in Europe. The 
Chukches are unacquainted with other forks than their fingers, 
and even the use of the spoon is not common. Many carry 
about with them a spoon of copper, tinned iron, or bone (fig. 8, 
p. 117). The soup is often drunk directly out of the cooking 
vessel, or sucked up through hollow bones (see the figure on 
p. 104). These are used as drinking cups, and like the spoons 



III.] STONE HAMMERS. 113 

are worn in the belt. As examples of Chukch dishes I may 
further mention, vegetable soup, boiled seal-flesh, boiled fish, 
blood soup, soup of seal-blood and blubber. To these we may 
add soup from finely crushed bones, or from seal-flesh, blubber, 
and bones. For crushing the bones there is in every tent a 
hammer, consisting of an oval stone with a hollow round it for 
a skin thong, with which the stone is fastened to the short shaft 
of wood or bone. The bones which are used for food are finely 
crushed with this implement against a stone anvil or a 
whale's vertebra, and then boiled with water and blood, before 
being eaten. At first we believed that this dish was intended 
for the dogs, but afterwards I had an opportunity of convincing 
myself that the natives themselves ate it ; and that long before 
the time when they suffered from scarcity of provisions. The 
hammer is further of interest as forming one of the stone im- 
plements wliich are most frequently found in graves from the 
Stone Age. That the hammer was mainly intended for kitchen 
purposes appears from the circumstance that the women alone 
had it at their disposal, and were consulted when it was parted 
with. Along with such hammers there was to be foimd in every 
tent an anvil, consisting of a whale's vertebra or a large roimd 
stone with a bowl-formed depression worn or cut out in the 
middle of it. 

During winter a great portion of the inhabitants of Yim^etlen, 
Pitlekaj, and as far as from Irgunnuk, came daily on board to 
beg or buy themselves provisions, and during this period they 
were fed mainly by us. They soon accustomed themselves to 
our food. They appeared specially fond of pea-soup and por- 
ridge. The latter they generally laid out on a snow-drift to 
freeze, and then took it in the frozen form to the tents. 
€offee they did not care for unless it was well sugared. Salt 
they did not use, but with sugar they were all highly delighted. 
They also drank tea with pleasure. Otherwise water forms 
their principal drink. They were, however, often compelled in 

VOL. n. I 



114 THE VOYAGE OP THE VEGA. [chap. 



winter, in consequence of the diflficulty of melting over the 
train-oil lamps a sufficient quantity of snow, to quench their 
thirst with snow. On board they often asked for water, and 
drank at once large quantities of it. 

Spirits, to which they are exceedingly addicted, they call, 
as has been already stated, in conversation with Europeans, 
" ram," the pronouncing of the word being often accompanied 
by a hawking noise, a happy expression, and a distinctive ges- 
ture, which consisted in carrying the open right hand from the 
mouth to the waist, or in counterfeiting the unintelligible talk 
of a drunken man. Among themselves they call it fire-water 
{ahnmail). The promise of it was the most efficient means of 
getting an obstinate Chukch to comply with one's vrishes. In 
case they undertook to drive us with their dog-teams, they were 
never desirous of finding out whether any stock of provisions 
was taken along, but warned by our parsimony in dealing out 
spirituous liquor, they were unwilling to start until they had ex- 
amined the stock of " ram." That drunkenness, not the satisfying 
of the taste, was in this case the main object, is shown by the 
circumstance that they often fixed, as price for the articles they 
saw we were anxious to have, such a quantity of brandy as 
would make them completely intoxicated. When on one oc- 
casion I appeared very desirous of purchasing a fire-drill, which 
was found in a tent inhabited by a newly-wedded pair, the 
young and very pretty housewife undertook the negotiation, 
and inmiediately began by declaring that her husband could not 
part with the fire-producing implement unless I gave him the 
means of getting quite drunk, for which, according to her 
statement, which was illustrated by lively gesticulations repre- 
senting the different degrees of intoxication, eight glasses were 
required. Not until the man had got so many would he be 
content, that is, dead drunk. I have myself observed, however, 
on several occasions that two small glasses are sufficient to make 
them unsteady on the legs. Under the influence of liquor they 



in.] SPIRITS AN ARTICLE OF COMMERCE. 115 



are cheerful, merry, and friendly, but troublesome by their ex- 
ixsBLYe caressing. When in the company of intoxicated natives, 
one must take good care that he does not unexpectedly get a 
kiss from some old greasy seal-hunter. Even the women readily 
took a glass, though evidently less addicted to intoxicants than 
the men. They however got their share, as did even the 
youngest of the children. When, as happened twice in the 
course of the winter, an encampment was fortunate enough to 
get a large stock of brandy sent it from Behring's Straits, the 
intoxication was general, and, as I have already stated, the 
bluish-yellow eyes the next day showed that quarrelsomeness 
had been called forth even among this peace-loving people by 
their dear akmimil. During our stay at the villages nearer 
Behring's Straits two murders even took place, of which one at 
least was committed by an intoxicated man. 

However slight the contact the Chukches have with the 
world that has reached the standpoint of the brandy industry is, 
this means of enjoyment, however, appears to be the object of 
regular barter. Many of the Chukches who travelled past us 
were intoxicated, and shook with pride a not quite empty keg 
or seal-skin sack, to let us hear by the dashing that it con- 
tained liquid. One of the crew, whom I asked to ascertain 
what sort of spirit it was, made friends with the owner, and 
induced him at last to part with about a thimbleful of it ; more 
could not be given. According to the sailor's statement it was 
without colour and flavour, clear as crystal, but weak. It was 
thus probably Russian com brandy, not gin. 

During a visit which Lieutenants Hovgaard and Nordquist 
made in the autumn of 1878 to the reindeer-Chukches in the 
interior of the country, much diluted American gin was on the 
contrary presented, and the tent-owner showed his guests a 
tin drinking-cup with the inscription, " Capt. Ravens, Brig 
Timandra, 1878." Some of the natives stated distinctly that 
they could purchase brandy at Behring's Straits all the year 

I 2 



116 THE VOYAGE OP THE VEGA. [chap. xii. 

round. All the men in the tent village, and most of the 
women, but not the children, had at the time got completely 
intoxicated in order to celebrate the arrival of the foreigners, or 
perhaps rather that of the stock of brandy. As there are no 
Europeans settled at Behring's Straits, at least on the Asiatic 
side, we learn from the traffic in brandy that there are actually 
natives abstemious enough to be able to deal in it. 

Tobacco is in common use, both for smoking and chewing.* 
Every native carries with him a pipe resembling that of the 
Tunguse, and a tobacco-pouch (fig. 7, p. 117). The tobacco 
is of many kinds, both Russian and American, and when the 
stock of it is finished native substitutes are used. Preference 
is given to the sweet, strong chewing tobacco, which sailors 
generally use. In order to make the tobacco sweet which has 
not before been drenched with molasses, the men are accus- 
tomed, when they get a piece of sugar, to break it down and 
place it in the tobacco-pouch. The tobacco is often first chewed, 
then dried behind the ear, and kept in a separate pouch sus- 
pended from the neck, to be afterwards smoked. The pipes are 
so small that, like those of the Japanese, they may be smoked 
out with a few strong whiffs. The smoke is swallowed. 
Even the women and children smoke and chew, and they begin 
to do so at so tender an age that we have seen a child, who 
could indeed walk, but still sucked his mother, both chew 
tobacco, smoke, and take a " ram." 

Some bundles of Ukraine tobacco, which I took with me for 
barter with the natives, put it into my power to procure a large 
number of contributions to the ethnological collection, which 
in the absence of other wares for barter I would otherwise have 
been unable to obtain. For the Chukches do not understand 
money. This is so much the more remarkable as they carry on 

^ Already, in the beginning of the eighteenth century, all the Siberian 
tribes, men and women, old and young, smoked passionately {Hut, 
GhUalog, des TartareSf p. 66). 




it carr]iiig (one^ennth of thenitunl : 
I tot dnw^ng the tetl from \ti hole, will 
De-h«in. (, «. AmntcU of bone {™tiiT»l 
1. Metal ■ponn.n(oiie-lhlrdX 



118 THE VOYAGE OF THE VEGA. [chap. 



a very extensive trade, and evidently are good mercantile men. 
According to von Dittmar (loc, cit p. 129) there exists, or still 
existed in 1856, a steady, slow, but regular transport of goods 
along the whole north coast of Asia and America, by which 
Russian goods were conveyed to the innermost parts of Polar 
America, and furs instead found their way to the bazaars of 
Moscow and St. Petersburg. This traffic is carried on at five 
market places, of which three are situated in America, one on 
the islands at Behring's Straits, and one at Anjui near Kolyma. 
The last-mentioned is called by the Chukches " the fifth beaver 
market." * 

The Chukches' principal articles of commerce consist of seal- 
skin, train-oil, fox-skins and other furs, walrus tusks, whalebone, 
&c. Instead they purchase tobacco, articles of iron, reindeer 
skin and reindeer flesh, and, when it can be had, spirit. A 
bargain is concluded very cautiously after long-continued con- 
sultation in a whispering tone between those present. I 
employed spirit as an article for barter only in the last 
necessity, but they soon observed that the desire to become 
owner of an uncommon article of art or antiquity overcame my 
determination, and they soon learned to avail themselves of 
this, especially as in all cases I made full payment for the 
article and gave the fire-water into the bargain. 

The lamp (see the figures at pp. 22, 23), with which light is 
maintained in the tent, consists of a flat trough of wood, bone 

* Dr. John SimpBon gives good information regarding the American 
markets in his Observations on the Western Esquimaux. He enumerates 
three market places in Americn besides that at Behring's Straits. At the 
markets people are occupied also with dancing and games, -which are 
carried on in such a lively manner that the market people scarcelj' sleep 
during tlie \\ hole time. Matiuschin gives a very lively sketch of the 
market at Anjui, to wliich, in 1821, the Chukches still went fully armed 
with spears, bows, and arrows (WrangePs Reise^ i. p. 270), and a visit to it 
in 1868 is described by C. von Neumann, who took part as Astronomer in 
^•on Maydell's expedition to Chukch Land {Eine Messe %m Hochnorden ; 
Daff Ausland, 1880, p. 861). 



III.] LAMPS AND FUEL. 119 

of the whale, soap-stone or burned clay, broader behind than 
before, and divided by an isolated toothed comb into two 
divisions. In the firont division wicks of moss (Sphagnum sp.) 
are laid in a long thin row along the whole edge. Under the 
lamp there is always another vessel intended to receive the 
train-oil which may possibly be spilled. 

In summer the natives also cook with wood in the open air 
or in the outer tent, in winter only in the greatest necessity in 
the latter. For they find the smoke, which the wood gives off 
in the close tent, unendurable. Although driftwood is to be 
found in great abundance on the beach, scarcity of train-oil 
was evidently considered by the natives as great a misfortune 
as scarcity of food. Uinga eek, no fuel (properly, no fire), was 
the constant cry even of those who drew loads of driftwood 
on board to earn bread for themselves. The circumstance that 
their fuel does not give off any smoke has the advantage that 
the eyes of the Chukches are not usually nearly so much 
attacked as those of the Lapps. 

In the tent the women have always a watchful eye over the 
trimming of the lamp and the keeping up of the fire. The 
wooden pins she uses to trim the wick, and which naturally are 
drenched with train-oil, are used when required as a light 
or torch in the Quter tent, to light pipes, &c. In the same way 
other pins dipped in train-oil are used.* Clay lamps are made 
by the Chukches themselves, the clay being well kneaded and 
moistened with urine. The burning is incomplete, and is indeed 
often wholly omitted. 

Train-oil and other liquid wares are often kept in sacks of 
seal-skin, consisting of whole hides, out of which the body has 
been taken through the opening made by cutting off the head, 
and in which all holes, either natural or caused by the killing of 

* I have seen such pins, also oblong stones, sooty at one end, which, 
after having been dip(>ed in train-oil, have been used as torches, laid by the 
flide of corpses in old Eskimo graves in north-western Greenland. 



120 THE VOYAGE OF THE VEGA. [chap. 

the animal, have been firmly closed* In one of the forepaws 
there is then inserted with great skill a wooden air- and water- 
tight cock with spigot and faucet. In sacks intended for dry 
wares the paws are also cut oflf, and the opening through which 
the contents are put in and taken out is made right across the 
breast immediately below the forepaws. 

Fire is lighted partly in the way common in Sweden some 
decades ago by means of flint and steel, partly by means of a 
drill implement. In the former case the steel generally consists 
of a piece of a file or some other old steel tool, or of pieces of 
iron or steel which have been specially forged for the purpose. 
Commonly the form of this tool indicates a European or 
Eussian-Siberian origin, but I also acquired clumsily hammered 
pieces of iron, which appeared to form specimens of native skill 
in forging. A Chukch showed me a large fire-steel of the last 
mentioned kind, provided with a special handle of copper 
beautifully polished by long-continued use. He evidently 
regarded it as a very precious thing, and I could not persuade 
him to part with it. On the supposition that the metal of the 
clumsily hammered pieces of iron might possibly be of meteoric 
origin I purchased as many of them as I could. But the ex- 
amination, to which they were subjected after our return, 
showed that they contain no traces of nickel. The iron was 
thus not meteoric. 

The flint consists of a beautiful chalcedony or agate, which 
has been formed in cavities in the volcanic rocks which occur so 
abundantly in north-eastern Asia, and which probably are also 
found here and there as pebbles in the beds of the tundra 
rivers. As tinder, are used partly the woolly hair of various 
animals, partly dry fragments of diflferent kinds of plants. The 
steel and a large number of pieces of flint are kept in a skin 
pouch suspended from the neck. Within this pouch there is a 
smaller one, containing the tinder. It is thus kept warm by 
the heat of the body, and protected from wet by its double 



XII-] THE FIRE-DRILL. 121 

envelope. Along with it the men often caiTy on their persons 
a sort of match of white, well-dried, and crushed wiUows, which 
are plaited together and placed in even rolls. This match 
bums slowly, evenly, and well. 

The other sort of fire-implement consists of a dry wooden 
pin, which by a common bow-drill is made to rub against a 
block of dry half-blackened wood. The upper part of this pin 
runs in a drill block of wood or bone. In one of the tools 
which I purchased, the astragalus of a reindeer was used for 
this purpose. In the light-stock holes have been made to give 
support to the pin, and perhaps to facilitate the foimation of the 




VTBB-DRILLk 

One-elghih of the natural size. 

half-carbonised wood-meal which the drilling loosens from the 
light-stock and in which the red heat arises. When fire is to 
be lighted by means of this implement, the lower part of the 
drill pin is daubed over with a little train-oil, one foot holds 
the light-stock firm against the ground, the bowstring is put 
round the drill pin, the left hand presses the pin with the drill 
block against the light-stock, and the bow is carried backwards 
and forwards, not very rapidly, but evenly, steadily, and un- 
intenuptedly, until fire appears. A couple of minutes are 
generally required to complete the process. The women appear 
to be more accustomed than the men to the use of this 



122 THE VOYAGE OF THE VEGA. [chap. 

implement. An improved fonn of it consisted of a wooden pin 
on whose lower part a lense-formed and perforated block of wood 
was fixed. This block served as fly-wheel and weight. Across 
the wooden pin ran a perforated cross-bar which was fastened 
with two sinews to its upper end. By carrying this cross-bar 
backwards and forwards the pin could be turned round with 
great rapidity. The implement appears to me the more re- 
markable as it shows a new way of using the stone or brick 
lenses, which are often found in graves or old house-sites from 
the Stone Age. 

Among the Chukches, as among many other wild races, 
lucifer matches have obtained the honour of being the first 
of the inventions of the civilised races that have been recognised 
as indisputably superior to their own. A request for lucifer 
matches was therefore one of the most common of those with 
which our friends at Behring's Straits tormented us during 
winter, and they were willing for a single box to ofier things 
that in comparison were very valuable. Unfortunately we had 
no superfluous supply of this necessary article, or perhaps I 
ought to say fortunately, for if the Chukches for some years 
were able to get a couple of boxes of matches for a walrus tusk, 
I believe that with their usual carelessness they would soon 
completely forget the use of their own fire-implements. 

Among household articles I may further mention the 
following : — 

The hide-scraper (fig. 1, p. 117) is of stone or iron and fastened 
to a wooden handle. With this tool the moistened hide is 
cleaned very particularly, and is then rubbed, stretched, and 
kneaded so carefully that several days go to the preparation 
of a single reindeer skin. That this is hard work is also shown 
by the woman who is employed at it in the tent dripping with 
perspiration. While thus employed she sits on a part of the 
skin and stretches out the other part with the united help of 
the hands and the bare feet. When the skin has been 



XII.] 



TANNING REINDEER SKINS. 



123 



sufficiently worked, she fills a vessel with her own urine, mixes 
this with comminuted willow bark, which has been dried over 
the lamp, and rubs the blood-warm liquid into the reindeer 
skin. In order to give this a red colour on one side, the bark 
of a species of Pinus (?) is mixed with the tanning liquid. The 
skins are made very soft by this process, and on the inner side 




•-r^- \< 



lOE MATTOCKS. 

One-ninth of the natural Bfze. 



almost resemble chamois leather. Sometimes too the reindeer 
skin is tanned to real chamois of very excellent quality. 

Two sorts of ice mattocks ; the shaft is of wood, the blade of 
the spade-formed one of whalebone, of the others of a walrus 
tusk ; it is fixed to the "shaft by skin thongs with great skill. 



124 THE VOYAGE OF THE VEGA. [chap. 

Sometimes both the shaft and blade are of bone, fastened 
together in a somewhat different way. 

Hones of native clay-slate. These are often perforated at one 
end and carried along with the knife, the spoon, and the sucking- 
tube, fastened with an ivory tongs in the belt. 

Home-made vessels of wood, bone of the whole, whalebone, and 
skin of different kinds. 

Knives, boring tools, axes and pots of European, American, or 
Siberian origin, and in addition casks, pieces of cable, iron 
scrap, preserved-meat tins, glasses, bottles, &c., obtained from 
ships which have anchored along the coast. Vessels have 
regularly visited the sea north of Behring's Straits only during 
the latest decades, and the contact between the sailors and the 
Chukches has not yet exerted any considerable influence on the 
mode of life of the latter. The natives, however, complain that 
the whalers destroy the walrus-hunting, while on the other 
hand they see with pleasure trading vessels occasionally visiting 
their coasts. 

During our stay off the considerable encampment, Irkaipij, 
we believed, as I have already stated, that we had found a chief 
in a native named Chepurin, who, to judge by his dress, appeared 
to be somewhat better off than the others, had two wives and a 
stately exterior. He was accordingly entertained in the gun- 
room, got the finest presents, and was in many ways the object 
of special attention. Chepurin took his elevation easily, and 
showed himself worthy of it by a grave and serious, perhaps 
somewhat condescending behaviour, which further confirmed our 
supposition and naturally increased the number of our presents. 
Afterwards, however, we were quite convinced that we had 
in this case committed a complete mistake, and that now there 
are to be found among the Chukches living at the coast neither 
any recognised chiefs nor any trace of social organisation. 
During the former martial period of the history of the race the 
state of things here was perhaps different, but now the 



r 



xu.] ABSENCE OF GOVERNMENT. 126 



most complete anarchy prevails here, if by that word we 
may denote a state of society in which disputes, crimes, 
and pimishments are unknown, or at least exceedingly rare.^ 
A sort of chieftainship appears, at all events, to be found among 
the reindeer-Chukches living in the interior of the country. 
At least there are among them men who can show commissions 
from the Bussian authorities. Such a man was the starost 
Menka,of whose visit I have already given an account. Every- 
thing, however, indicated that his influence was exceedingly 
small He could neither read, write, nor speak Russian, and he 
had no idea of the existence of a Russian Czar. All the tribute 
he had delivered for several years, according to receipts which he 
showed to us, consisted of some few fox-skins, which he had 
probably received as market-tolls at Anjui and Markova. Menka 
was attended on his visit to the vessel by two ill-clad men with a 
^rpe of face diflFering considerably from that common among the 
Chukches. Their standing appeared to be so inferior that we 
took them for slaves, although mistakenly, at least with respect 
to one of them — Yettugin. He afterwards boasted that he 
owned a much larger reindeer-herd than Menka's, and talked 
readUy. with a certain scorn, of Menka's chieftain pretensions. 
According to Russian authors there are actual slaves, probably 
the descendants of former prisoners of war, among the Chukches 
in the interior of the country. Among the dwellers on the 

' In the accounts which were collected regarding the Chukches at 
Anadyrsk in the beginning of the eighteenth century, it is also stated that 
they lived without any government. On the contrary, in M. von Erusen- 
stem's Voycige autour du monde, 1803-1806 (Paris, 1821, ii. p. 151), a report 
of Governor KoschelefE is given on some negotiations which he had with 
a ** chief of the whole Chukch nation/' I take it for granted that the 
chiefship was of little account, and KoschelefTs whole sketch of his 
meeting with the supposed chief bears an altogether too lively European 
romantic stamp to be in any degree true to nature. At the same place it is 
also said that a brother of Governor KoschelefE, in the winter of 1805-1806, 
made a journey among the Chukches, on which, after his return, he sent a 
report, accompanied by a Chukch vocabulary, to von Krusenstem. 



126 THE VOYAGE OF THE VEGA. [chap. xii. 



coast, on the contrary, there is the most complete equality. We 
could never discover the smallest trace of any man exercising 
the least authority beyond his own family or his own tent. 

The coast Chukches are not only heathens, but are also, so 
far as we could observe, devoid of every conception of higher 
beings. There are, however, superstitions. Thus most of them 
wear round the neck leather straps, to which small wooden tongs, 
or wooden carvings, are fixed. These are not parted with, and 
are not readily shown to foreigners. A boy had a band of beads 
sewed to his hood, and in front there was fastened an ivory 
carving, probably intended to represent a bear's head (fig. 6, on 
p. 117). It was so small, and so inai"tistically cut, that a 
man could undoubtedly make a dozen of them in a day. I, how- 
ever, offered the father unsuccessfully a clasp-knife and tobacco 
for it, but the boy himself, having heard our bargaining, 
exchanged it soon after for a piece of sugar. VThen the father 
knew this he laughed good-naturedly, without making any 
attempt to get the bargain undone. 

To certain tools small wooden images are affixed, as to the 
scraper figured above (fig. 3, p. 117), and similar images are 
found in large numbers in the lumber-room of the tent, where 
pieces of ivory, bits of agate and scrap iron, are preserved. A 
selection from the large collection of such images which I made 
is here reproduced in woodcuts. If, also, these carvings may, in 
fact, be considered as representations of higher beings, the 
religious ideas which are connected with them, even judged 
from the Shaman standpoint, are exceedingly indistinct, less a 
consciousness, which still lives among the people, than a re- 
miniscence from former times. Most of the figures bear an 
evident stamp of the present dress and mode of life of the 
people. It appears to me to be remarkable, that in all the 
bone or wood carvings I have met with, the face has been cut 
flatter than it is in reality in this race of men. Some of the 
carvings appear to remind me of an ancient Buddhist image. 



128 THE VOYAGE OF THE VEGA. [chap. 



The drum, or more correctly, tambourine, so common among 
most of the Polar peoples, European, Asiatic, and American ; 
among the Lapps, the Samoyeds, the Tunguses, and the Eskimo 
(see drawing on p. 24), is found in every Chukch tent. A 
certain superstition is also attached to it. They did not willingly 
play it in our presence, and they were unwilling to part with it. 
If time permitted it was concealed on our entrance into the 
tent. The drum consists of the peritoneum of a seal, stretched 
over a narrow wooden ring fixed to a short handle. The drum- 
stick consists of a splinter of whalebone 300 to 400 millimetres 
long, which towards the end runs into 'a point so fine and flexible, 
that it forms a sort of whipcord. When the thicker part of the 
piece of whalebone is struck against the edge of the drum-skin, 
the other end whips against the middle, and the skin is thus struck 
twice at the same time. The drum is commonly played by the 
man, and the playing is accompanied by a very monotonous 
song. We have not seen it accompanied by dancing, twisting of 
the countenance, or any other Shaman trick. 

We did not see among the Chukches we met with any 
Shamans. They are described by Wrangel, Hooper, and other 
travellers. Wrangel states (vol. i. p. 284) that the Shamans in 
the year 1814, when a severe epidemic broke out among the 
Chukches and their reindeer at Anjui, declared that in order to 
propitiate the spirits they must sacrifice Kotschen, one of the 
most highly esteemed men of the tribe. He was so much 
respected tliat no one would execute the sentence, but attempts 
were made to get it altered, first by presents to the prophets, 
and then by flogging them. But when this did not succeed, 
as the disease continued to ravage, and no one would execute the 
doom, Kotschen ordered his own son to do it. He was thus 
compelled to stab his own father to death and give up the corpse 
to the Shamans. The whole narrative conflicts absolutely with 
the disposition and manners of the people with whom we 
made acquaintance at Behring's Straits sixty-five years after 



III.] CHUKCH SUPERSTITIONS. 129 



this occurrence, and I would be disposed to dispute entirely 
the truthfulness of the statement, had not the history of our 
own part of the world tau'ght us that blood has flowed in 
streams for dogmatic hair-splittings, which no one now troubles 
himself about. Perhaps the breath of indifferentism has reached 
even the ice-deserts of the Polar lands. 

The drum has besides also another use, which appears to have 
little connection with its property of Shaman psychograph or 
church bell. When the ladies unravel and comb their long 
black hair, this is done carefully over the drum, on whose 
bottom the numerous beings which the comb brings with it 
firom the warm hearth of home out into the cold wide world, are 
coUected and cracked — ^in case they are not eaten up. They 
taste well according to the Chukch opinion, and are exceedingly 
good for the breast. Even gorm (the large, fully developed, fat 
larva of the reindeer fly, Oestrus tarandi) is pi-essed out of 
the skin of the reindeer and eaten ; as well as the full-grown 
reindeer fly. 

Some more of the superstitious traits which we observed 
among the Chukches may here be stated. After the good 
hunting in February we endeavoured without success to induce 
the Chukches to give us a head or a skull of some of the seals 
they had killed. Even brandy was unsuccessfiilly oflfered for it, 
and it was only in the greatest secrecy that Notti, one of our best 
friends from Irgunnuk, dared to give us the foetus of a seal. A 
raven was once shot in the neighbourhood of the ice-house. 
The shot then went to the magnetical observatory, but before he 
entered, laid down the shot bird, the gun, and other articles in 
the before-mentioned implement chest placed in front of the 
observatory. A short time after there was great excitement 
before the tent. Some men, women, and children among the 
natives crowded round the chest screaming and shouting. For 
the Chukches had observed that the raven, having been only 
stunned by the shot, had begun to scream and flutter in the chest, 

VOL. II. K 



130 THE VOYAGE OP THE VEGA. [chap. 

and they now indicated by word and gesture that a great mis- 
fortune was about to happen. Pity is not, as ia well known, one 
of the good qualities of the savage, ' It was clear that in this case 
too it was not this feeling, but fear of the evil which the wounded 
crow could bring about, that caused this scene, and when a sailor 
immediately after twisted 
the neck of the bird, the 
Chukches had no objection 
to receive and eat it. 

The winter of 1878-1870 
appears to have been un- 
commonly severe, and hunt- 
ing less productive than 
usual. This was ascribed to 
«' a our presence. The Chukches 

asked ua anxiously several 
times, whether we intended 
to raise the water so higli 
that the sea would reach 
their tents. When on the 
11th February, after the 
bunting had failed for a long 
time, they succeeded at last 
in catching a number of 
seals, they threw water in 
HuniciL iBatRDMEBiB. tholr ffiouths bcfore they 

mem, ooe4ilghOi of n»tur»l stie : a mouth-hole, were caiTieU mtO 1116 leniS. 

This was done, they said, in 
order that the open " leads " in the ice should not close too soon. 
Besides the drum the Chukches abo use as a musical instru- 
ment a piece of wood, cloven into two halves, and again united 
after the crack has been somewhat widened in the middle, with 
a piece of whalebone inserted between the two halves. They 
also iiuriiij; the cnursp of the winU;r niiide s<'veral atterajits tji 



Ill] MUSIC, DANCING, AND ART. J31 



make violins after patterns seen on board, and actually 
succeeded in making a better sounding-box than could have 
been expected beforehand. On the draught-strap of the dog 
sledge there was often a small bell bought from the Russians, 
and the reindeer-Chukches are said sometimes to wear bells in 
the belt. 

The dance I saw consisted in two women or children taking 
each other by the shoulders, and then hopping now on the one 
foot now on the other. When many took part in the dance, they 
placed themselves in rows, sang a monotonous, meaningless song, 
hopped in time, turned the eyes out and in, and threw them- 
selves with spa£imodic movements, clearly denoting pleasure 
and pain, now to the right, now to the left. " La saison " for 
dance and song, the time of slaughtering reindeer, however, did 
not happen during our stay, on which account our experience of 
the Chukches' abilities in this way is exceedingly limited. 

All sport they entered into with special delight ; for instance, 
some trial shooting which Palander set on foot on New Year's Day 
afternoon, with a small rifled cannon on the Vega, At first the 
women sat aft with the children, far from the dreadful shooting 
weapon, and indicated their feelings by almost the same gestures 
as on such occasions are wont to distinguish the weaker and 
fidrer sex of European race. But soon curiosity took the upper 
hand. They pressed forward where they could see best, and 
broke out in a loud " Ho, ho, ho ! " when the shot was fired and 
the shells exploded in the air. 

Of what sort is the art-sense of the Chukches ? As they 
still almost belong to the Stone Age, and as their contact with 
Europeans has been so limited that it has not perhaps conduced to 
alter their taste and skill in art, this question appears to me to 
have a great interest both for the historian of art, who here 
obtains information as to the nature of the seed from which at last 
the skill of the master has been developed in the course of ages and 
millenniums, and for the archaeologist, who finds here a starting 

K 2 




rn A wises madk bv rHUKfnrs. 




k^^m 




134 THE VOYAGE OF THE VEGA. [chap. 



point for forming a judgment both of the Scandinavian rock- 
etchings and the palaeolithic drawings, which in recent times 
have played so great a part in enabling us to understand 
the oldest history of the human race. We have therefore 
zealously collected all that we could of Chukch carvings, 
drawings, and patterns. The most remarkable of these in one 
respect or another are to be found delineated in the woodcuts on 
the preceding pages.^ 

Many of the ivory carvings are old and worn, showing that 
they have been long in use, probably as amulets. Various 
of the animal images are the fruit of the imagination, and as 
such may be instructive. In general the carvings are clumsy, 
though showing a distinctive style. If we compare them with 
the Samoyed images we brought home with us, it appears that 
the genius of the Chukches for art has reached an incomparably 
higher development than that of the Polar race which inhabits 
the western portion of the north coast of Asia ; on the other hand, 
they are in this respect evidently inferior to the Eskimo at Port 
Clarence. The Chukch drawings too are roughly and clumsily 
executed, but many of them exhibit a certain power of hitting 
off the object. These figures appear to me to show that the 
objections which have been raised to the genuineness of various 
palaeolithic etchings, just on the ground of the artist's com- 
paratively sure hand, are not justified. Even patterns and ivory 
buckles show a certain taste. Embroidery is done commonly on 

^ The originals of the drawings reproduced in the woodcuts are made on 
paper, part with the lead pencil, part with red ochre. Tlie different groups 
represent on the first page — 1, a dog-team; 2, 3, whales; 4, hunting the 
I'olar hear and the walrus ; 5, bullhead and cod ; 6, man fishing ; 7, hare, 
hunting; 8, birds; 9, wood-chopper; 10, man leading a reindeer; 11, 
walrus hunt — 7 and 9 represent Europeans. On the secondpage — 1, a rein- 
deer train ; 2, a reindeer t^iken with a lasso by two men ; 3, a man throw- 
ing a harpoon ; 4, seal hunt from boat ; 5, bear hunt ; 6, tlie man in the 
moon ; 7, man leading a reindeer ; 8, reindeer ; 9, Chukch with staff and 
an archer; 10, reindeer with herd; 11, reindeer; 12, two tents, man riding 
on a dog sledge, &c. 



XII.] THE COLOUR-SENSE OP THE CHUKCHES 136 



red-coloured strips of skin partly with white reindeer hair, partly 
with red and black wool, obtained in small quantity by barter 
fiom Behring's Straits. The supply of colouring material is not 
particularly abundant. Tt is obtained partly from the mineral 
kingdom (limonite of different colours, and graphite), partly from 
the vegetable kingdom (bark of various trees). The mineral 
colours are ground with water between flat stones. Bark is 
probably treated with urine. Bed is the Chukches* favourite 
colour. 

In order to make a contribution towards an answer to the 
disputed question, in what degree is the colour-sense developed 
among savages. Dr. Almquist during the course of the winter 
instituted comprehensive researches according to the method 
worked out by Professor Fr. Holmgren. A detailed account 
of these is to be found in The Scientific Work of the Vega 
Expedition, and in various scientific journals. Here I shall only 
state that Dr. Almquist gives the following as the final result 
of his investigation : " That the Chukches in general possess as 
good an organ for distinguishing colours as we Swedes. On the 
other hand, they appear not to be accustomed to observe colours, 
and to distinguish sharply any other colour than red. They 
bring together all reds as something special, but consider that 
green of a moderate brightness corresponds less with a green of 
less brightness than with a blue of the same brightness. In 
order to bring all greens together the Chukches thus require to 
learn a new abstraction." Of 300 persons who were examined, 
273 had a fully developed colour-sense, nine were completely 
colour-blind, and eighteen incompletely colour-blind, or gave 
uncertain indications. 

From what has been stated above it appears that the coast 
Chukches are without noteworthy religion, social organisation, 
or government. Had not experience from the Polar races of 
America taught us differently we should have believed that with 



THE VOYAGE OF THE VEGA. 



[cHir. 



such a literally anarchic and godless crew there would be uo 
security for life and property, immorality would be boundless, 
and the weaker without any protection from the violence of the 
stronger sex. This, however, is so far from being the case that 
criminal statistics have been rendered impossible for want of 
crimes, if we except acts of violence committed under the 
influence of liquor. 



ja^i; 




During the winter the Vega was visited daily, as has been 
stated in the account of the wintering, by the people from the 
neighbouring villages, while our vessel at the same time formed 
a resting-place for all tbe equipages which travelled from the 
western tent-villages to the islands in Behring's Straits, and vice 
versd. Not only our neighbours, but people from a distance 
whom we had never seen before, and probably would not see 



111.] CHUKCH PECULIARITIES. 137 



again, came and went without hindrance among a great number 
of objects which in their hands would have been precious 
indeed. We had never any cause to regret the confidence we 
placed in them. Even during the very hard time, when hunt- 
ing completely failed, and when most of them lived on the food 
which was served out on board, the large cUpSt of provisions, 
which we had placed on land without special watch, in case any 
misfortune should befall our vessel, was untouched. On the 
other hand, there were two instances in which they secretly 
repossessed themselves of fish they had already sold, and which 
were kept in a place on deck accessible to them. And with 
the most innocent countenance in the world they then sold 
them over again. This sort of dishonesty they evidently did 
not regard as theft but as a permissible commercial trick. 

This was not the only proof that the Chukches consider 
deception in trade not only quite justifiable, but almost credit- 
able. While their own things were always made with the 
greatest care, all that they did specially for us was done with 
extreme carelessness, and they were seldom pleased with the 
price that was offered, until they became convinced that they 
could not get more. When they saw that we were anxious to 
get ptarmigan, they offered us from their winter stock under 
this name the young of Lams ehumeus, which is marked in the 
same way, but of little use as food. When I with delight pur- 
chased this bird, which in its youthful dress is rare, and there- 
fore valuable to the ornithologist, a self-satisfied smile passed 
over the countenance of the seller. He was evidently proud of 
his successful trick. Some prejudice, as has been already stated, 
prevented the Chukches from parting with the heads of the seal, 
[I ■- though, in order to ascertain the species existing here, we offered 
ti i a high price for them. " Irgatti " (to-morrow), or " Isgatti," if the 
I- promise was given by a woman, was the usual answer. But the 
aI^ promise was never kept. At last a boy came and gave us a 
t S' skull, which he said belonged to a seal. On a more minute 



t 



138 THE VOYAGE OF THE VEGA. [chap. xii. 



examination, however, it was found not to have belonged to a 
seal, but to an old dog, whose head it was evidently thought 
might, without any damage to the hunting, be handed over to 
the white magicians. This time it went worse with the counter- 
feitor than in the case of the ptarmigan bargain. For a couple 
of my comrades undertook to make the boy ashamed in the 
presence of the other Chukches, saying with a laugh " that he, 
a Chukch, must have been very stupid to commit such a mis- 
take,'' and it actually appeared as if the scoff had in this case 
fallen into good ground. Another time, while I was in my 
watch in the ice-house, there came a native to me and informed 
me that he had driven a man from Irgunnuk to the vessel, but 
that the man had not paid him, and asked me on that account 
to give him a box of matches. When I replied that he must 
have been already well paid on the vessel for his drive, he said 
in a whining tone, " only a very little piece of bread." He was 
not the least embarrassed when I only laughed at the, as I well 
knew, untruthful statement, and did not give him what he 
asked. 

The Chukches commonly live in monogamy; it is only 
exceptionally that they have two wives, as was the case with 
Chepurin, who has been already mentioned. It appeared as if 
the wives were faithful to their husbands. It was only seldom 
that cases occurred in which women, either in jest or earnest, 
gave out that they wished a white man as a lover. A woman 
not exactly eminent for beauty or cleanliness said, for instance, 
on one occasion, that she had had two children by Chukches, 
and now she wished to have a third by one of the ship's folk. 
The young women were modest, often very pretty, and evidently 
felt the same necessity of attracting attention by small 
coquettish artifices as Eve's daughters of European race. We 
may also understand their peculiar pronunciation of the lan- 
guage as an expression of feminine coquetry. For when they 
wish to be attractive they replace the man's r-sound with a soft 





tldrd*. t. IfoUDK'frDm the'inlund UkeifDnnchnms^ nitiin] i 



140 THE VOYAGE OF THE VEGA. [chap. 

8 ; thus, korang (reindeer) is pronounced by the women kasang, 
tirhir (the sun) tidds^ and so on. 

The women work very hard. Not only the management of 
the children, the cooking, the melting of the ice, the putting 
the tent in order, the sewing, and other " woman's work," lie to 
their hand, but they receive the catch, in winter in the tent, in 
summer at the beach, cut it in pieces, help with the fishing, at 
least when it is in the neighbourhood of the tent, and cany out 
the exceedingly laborious tanning of the hides, and prepare 
thread from sinews. In summer they collect green plants 
in the meadows and hill-slopes in the neighbourhood of the 
tents. They are therefore generally at home, and always busy. 
The men have it for their share to procure for their family food 
from the animal kingdom by hunting and fishing. With this pur- 
pose in view they are often out on long excursions. In the tent 
the man is for the most part without occupation, sleeps, eats, 
gossips, chats with his children, and so on, if he does not pass 
the time in putting his hunting implements in order in a quite 
leisurely manner. 

Within the family the most remarkable unanimity prevails, 
so that we never heard a hard word exchanged, either between 
man and wife, parents and children, or between the married 
pair who own the tent and the unmarried who ocasionally live in 
it. The power of the woman appears to be very great. In 
making the more important bargains, even about weapons and 
hunting implements, she is, as a rule, consulted, and her advice 
is taken. A number of things which form women's tools she 
can barter away on her own responsibility, or in any other 
way employ as she pleases. When the man has by barter pro- 
cured a piece of cloth, tobacco, sugar, or such like, he generally 
hands it over to his wife to keep. 

The children are neither chastised nor scolded ; they are, 
however, the best behaved I have ever seen. Their behaviour 
in the tent is equal to that of the best-brought-up European 



la] BEQQINa. 141 

ctiildreD in the parlour. They are not, perhaps, so wild aa ours, 
but are addicted to games vhich closely resemble those common 
among ns in the country. Fla3rtbing3 are also in use, for 
instance, dolls, bows, windmills with two sails, &c If the 
parents get any delicacy they always give each of their chil- 
dren a bit, and there is never any quarrel as t« the size of each 
child's portion. If a piece of sugar is given to one of the 
children in a crowd it goes from mouth to mouth round the 
whole company. In the same way the child offers its father and 
mother a taste of the bit of sugar or 
piece of bread it has got. Even in 
childhood the Chukcbes are exceed- 
ingly patient. A girl who fell down 
from the ship's stair, head foremost, 
and thus got so violent a blow that 
she was almost deprived of hearing, 
scarcely uttered a cry. A boy, three 
or four years of ^e, much rolled up 
in fiira, who fell down into a ditch 
cut in the ice on the ship's deck, 
and in consequence of his inconvenient 
dress could not get up, lay quietly still 

until he was observed and helped up onMigiitt"<rf'L'^rti™i >i«. 
by one of the crew. 

The Chukcbes' most troublesome fault is a disposition to 
begging that is limited by no feeling of self-respect. This is 
probably counterbalanced by their unbounded hospitality and 
great kindness to each other, and is, perhaps, often caused by 
actual necessity. But they thus became veritable torments, 
putting to a hard test the patience, not only of the scientific 
men and officers, but also of the crew. The good nature with 
which our sailors met their demands was above all praise. 

There was never any trace of disagreement between the 
imtives and us, and I have every reason to suppose that our 



r 




14 




la 



CHUKCH BONE CARVINOS. 

R»tet, larvn of flics (,gf>mi), molluscs, nnd whales. Nos. 1 to 9 and 14. natural size. Nos. 10 to 13, tw«»- 

thfrds of the natural aize. 



144 THE VOYAGE OP THE VEGA. L^hap. 



wintering will long be held in grateful remembrance by theiu, 
especially as, in order not to spoil their seal-hunting, I strictly 
forbade all unnecessary interference with it. 

It is probably impossible for a Chukch to take the place of a 
European workman. It has, however, happened that Chukches 
have gone with whalers to the Sandwich Islands, and have 
become serviceable seamen. During our wintering two young 
men got accustomed to come on board and there to take a hand, 
in quite a leisurely way, at work of various kinds, as sawing 
wood, shovelling snow, getting ice on board, &c. In return they 
got food that had been left over, and thus, for the most part, 
maintained not only themselves, but also their families, during 
the time we remained in their neighbourhood. 

If what I have here stated be compared with Sir Edward 
Parry's masterly sketches of the Eskimo at Winter Island and 
Iglolik, and Dr. Simpson's of the Eskimo in North-western 
America, or with the numerous accounts we possess of the 
Eskimo in Danish Greenland, a great resemblance will be 
found to exist between the natural disposition, mode of life, 
failings and good qualities of the Chukches, the savage Eskimo, 
and the Qreenlanders. This resemblance is so much more 
striking, as the Chukch and the Eskimo belong to diflferent 
races, and speak quite different languages, and, as the former, to 
judge by old accounts of this people, did not, until the most 
recent generations, sink to the un warlike, peace-loving, harmless, 
anarchic, and non-religious standpoint which they have now 
reached. It ought to be observed, however, that in the Eskimo 
of Danish Greenland no considerable alteration has been brought 
about by their all having learned to read and write and profess 
the Christian religion — although with an indifference to the 
consequences of original sin, the mysteries of redemption, and 
the punishments of hell, which all imaginable missionary zeal 
has not succeeded in overcoming. Their innocent natural state 
has not been altered in any considerable degree by being 



iil] comparison of THE CHDKCHES AND ESKIMO. 145 



tabjected to these conditioDS of culture. It is certain besides, 
that the blood which flows in the veins of the Greenlander is 
not pure EekiiDo blood, but is mingled with the blood of some of 
the i»Dndest martial races in the world. When we consider how 




Slu of the orlgEuali 



rapidly, even now, when Greenland is in constant communica- 
tion with the European mother-country, all descendants of 
mixed blood become complete Eskimo in language and mode of 
life, how difficult it often is, even for parents of pure European 
VOL. 11. I. 



U6 THE VOYAGE OF THE VEGA. [chap. 



descent, to get their children to speak any other language than 
that of the natives, and how they, on their part, seldom boirow 
a word from the Europeans, how common mixed marriages and 
natives of mixed blood are even now — in view of all this it 
appears to me much more probable that Erik the Red's 
colonists were quietly and peacefully converted into Eskimo, 
than that they were killed by the Eskimo. A single century's 
complete separation from Europe would be sufficient to 
carry out thoroughly this alteration of the present European 
population of Greenland, and by the end of that period the 
traditions of Danish rule would be very obscure in that land. 
Perhaps some trifling quarrel between a ruler of the colony and 
a native would take the foremost place among the surviving 
traditions, and be interpreted as a reminiscence from a war of 
extermination. 

Even the present Chukches form, without doubt, a mixture of 
several races, formerly savage and warlike, who have been 
driven by foreign invaders from south to north, where they have 
adopted a common language, and on whom the food-conditions 
of the shore of the Polar Sea, the cold, snow, and darkness of 
the Arctic night, the pure, light atmosphere of the Polar 
summer, have impressed their inefiaceable stamp, a stamp which 
meets us with little variation, not only among the people now 
in question, but also — with the necessary allowance for the 
changes, not always favourable, caused by constant intercourse 
with Europeans — among the Lapps of Scandinavia and the 
Samoyeds of Russia. 

It would be of great psychological interest to ascertain 
whether the change which has taken place in a peaceful 
direction is progress or decadence. Notwithstanding all the 
interest which the honesty, peaceableness, and innocent friend- 
liness of the Polar tribes have for us, it is my belief that the 
answer must be — decadence. For it strikes us as if we witness 
here the conversion of a savage, coarse, and cruel man into a 



sii.] PROGRESS OR DECADENCE. 147 



being, nobler, indeed, but one in whom just those qualities 
which distinguish man from the animals, and to which at once 
the great deeds and the crimes of humanity have been due, 
have been more and more effaced, and who, if special protection 
or specially favourable circumstances be absent, will not be able 
to maintain the struggle for existence with new races that may 
seek to force their way into the country. 




CHAPTER XIII. 

The development of our knowledge of the north coast of Asia — Hero- 
dotus — Strabo — Pliny — Marco Polo — Herberstein's map — The conquest 
of Siberia by the Russians — Deschnev's voyages — Coast navigation 
between the Lena and the Kolyma — Accounts of islands in the Polar 
Sea and old voyages to them — The discovery of Kamchatka — ^The 
navigation of the Sea of Okotsk is opened by Swedish prisoners-of- 
war — ^The Great Northern Expedition — Behring — Schalaurov — Andre- 
yev's Land — The New Siberian islands — Hedenstrom's expeditions — 
Anjou and Wrangel — Voyages from Behring's Straits westward — 
Fictitious Polar voyages. 

Now that the north-eastern promontory of Asia has been at last 
circumnavigated, and vessels have thus sailed along all the 
coasts of the old world, I shall, before proceeding farther in nay 
sketch of the voyage of the Vega, give a short account of the 
development of our knowledge of the north coast of Asia. 

Already in primitive times the Greeks assumed that all the 
countries of the earth were surrounded by the ocean. Stbabo, 
in the first century before Christ, after having shown that 
Homer favoured this view, brings together in the first chapter 
of the First Book of his geography reasons in support of it in the 
following terms : — 

" In all directions in which man has penetrated to the utter- 
most boundary of the earth, he has met the sea, that is, the 
ocean. He has sailed round the east coast towards India, the 
west coast towards Iberia and Mauritia, and a great part of the 
south and north coast. The remaining portion which has not 
yet been sailed round in consequence of the voyages which have 
been undertaken from both sides not having been connected, is 
inconsiderable. For those who have attempted to circumnavi- 



CHAP, xiiu] HERODOTUS. 149 



gate the earth and have turned, declare that their undertaking 
did not fail in consequence of their having met with land, but 
m consequence of want of provisions and of complete timidity 
.... At sea they could always have gone further. . . . Thw 
view (that the earth is surrounded by water) also accords better 
with the phenomena of the tides, for as the ebb and flow are 
eveiywhere the same, or at least do not vary much, the cause of 
this motion is to be sought for in a single ocean." ^ 

Bat if men were thus agreed that the north coast of Asia and 
Europe was bounded by the sea, there was for sixteen hundred 
jears after the birth of Christ no actual knowledge of the nature 
of the Asiatic portion of this line of coast. Obscure statements 
regarding it, however, were current at an early period. 

While Herodotus, in the forty-fifth chapter of his Fourth 
Book, expressly says that no man, so far as was then known, had 
discovered whether the eastern and northern countries of Europe 
are surrounded by the sea, he gives in the twenty-third and 
twenty-fourth chapters of the same book the following accoimt 
of the countries lying to the north-east : — 

" As far as the territory of the Scythians all the land which 
we have described is an uninterrupted plain, with cultivable 
soil, but beyond that the ground is stony and rugged. And on 
the other side of this extensive stone-bound tract there live at 
the foot of a high mountain-chain men who are bald from their 
birth, both men and women ; they are also flat-nosed and have 
laige chins. They speak a peculiar language, wear the Scythian 
dr^ and live on the fruit of a tree. The tree on which they 
live is called PorUicon, is about as large as the wild fig-tree, 
and bears fruit which resembles a bean, but has a kernel. 
When this fruit is ripe, they strain it through a cloth, and the 
juice which flows from it is thick and black and called aschy. 
This juice they suck or drink mixed with milk, and of the 
}ve8sed fruits they make cakes which they eat ; for they have 
not many cattle because the pasture is poor. . . . As far as to these 
bald people the land is now sufficiently well known, also the 

' I quote this because the movement of the tides is still, in our own time, 
made use of to determine whether certain parts of the Polar seas are con- 
nected with each other or not. 



150 THE VOYAGE OF THE VEGA. [chaf. 



races on this side of them, because they are visited by Scythians. 
From them it is not difficult to collect information, which is 
also to be had from the Greeks at the port of the Borysthenes 
and other ports in Pontus. The Scythians who travel thither 
do business with the assistance of seven interpreters in seven 
languages. So far our knowledge extends. But of the land on 
the other side of the bald men none can give any trustworthy 
account because it is shut off by a separating wall of lofty track- 
less mountains, which no man can cross. But these baJd men 
say — which, however, I do not believe — that men with goat's 
feet Hve on the mountains, and on the other side of them other 
men who sleep six months at a time. The latter statement, 
however, I cannot at all admit. On the other hand, the land east 
of the bald men, in which the Issedones live, is well known, but 
what is farther to the north, both on the other side of the bald 
men and of the Issedones, is only known by the statements of 
these tribes. . . . Above the Issedones live the one-eyed men, 
and the gold-guarding griffins. This information the Scythians 
have got from the Issedones and we from the Scythians, and we 
call the one-eyed race by the Scythian name Arimaspi, for in the 
Scythian language arima signifies one and s^pmh the eye. The 
whole of the country which I have been speaking of has so hard 
and severe a winter, that there prevails there for eight months 
an altogether insupportable cold, so that if you pour water on 
the ground you will not make mud, but if you light a fire you 
will make mud. Even the sea freezes, and the whole Cimmerian 
Bosphorus, and the Scythians who live within the trench travel 
on the ice and drive over it in waggons. . . . Again, with refer- 
ence to the feathers with which the Scythians say the air is filled, 
and which prevent the whole land lying beyond from being seen 
or travelled through, I entertain the following opinion. In the 
upper parts of this country it snows continually, but, as is natural, 
less in summer than in winter. And whoever has seen snow 
falling thick near him will know what I mean. For snow re* 
sembles feathers, and on account of the winter being so severe 
the northern parts of this continent cannot be inhabited. I 
believe then that the Scythians and their neighbours called 
snow feathers, on account of the resemblance between them. 
This is what is stated regarding the most remote regions." 

These and other similar, statements, nowithstanding the 
absurdities mixed up with them, are founded in the first 
instance on the accounts of eye-witnesses, which have passed 



irii.] STItABO. 151 

from mouth to mouth, ftom tribe to tribe, before they were 
noted down. Still several centuries after the time of Herodotus, 
when the Roman power had reached its highest point, little 
more was known of the more remote parts of north Asia. While 



Herodotus, in the two hundred and third chapter of hia First 
Book, says that " the Caspian is a sea by itself having no 
communication with any other sea," Strabo, induced by evidence 







91 

O « 



r 



CHAP, xiii.] PLINY THE ELDER. 163 



furnished by the commander of a Greek fleet in that sea, states 
(Book II. chapters i. and iv.) that the Caspian is a gulf of the 
Northern Ocean, from which it is possible to sail to India. 
Flint the Elder {Historia Naiuralis, Book VI. chapters xiii. 
and xvii.) states that the north part of Asia is occupied by 
extensive deserts bounded on the north by the Scythian 
Sea, that these deserts run out to a headland, JPromorUarium 
Sejfthicum, which is uninhabitable on account of snow. Then 
there is a land inhabited by man-eating Scythians, then deserts, 
then Scythians again, then deserts with wild animals to a 
mountain ridge rising out of the sea, which is called Tabin. The 
first people that are known beyond this are the Serf. Ptolemy 
and his successors again supposed, though perhaps not ignorant 
of the old statement that Africa had been circumnavigated 
under Pharaoh Necho, that the Indian Ocean was an inland 
sea, everywhere surrounded by land, which united southern 
Africa with the eastern part of Asia, an idea which was first 
completely abandoned by the chartographers of the fifteenth 
century after the circumnavigation of Africa by Vasco da 
Gama. 

The knowledge of the geography of north Asia remained at 
this point until Marco Polo,^ in the narrative of his remarkable 

^ Marco Polo, in 1271, at the age of seventeen or eighteen, accompanied 
his father Nicolo, and his uncle Maffeo Polo, to High Asia. He remained 
there until 1295, and during that time came into great favour with Kuhla 
Khan, who employed him, among other things, in a great number of 
important public commiaeions, whereby he became well acquainted with 
the widely extended lands which lay under the sceptre of that ruler. After 
his return home he caused a great sensation by the riches he brought with 
him, which procured him the name il MilUone, a name however which, 
according to others, was an expression of the doubts that were long enter- 
tained regarding the truthfulness of his, as we now know, mainly true 
accounts of the number of the people and the abundance of wealth in 
Knblai Khan's lands. " II Millione,'' in the meantime, became a popular 
carnival character, whose cue was to relate as many and as wonderful 
" yams *' as possible, and in his narratives to deal preferably with millions. 
It is possible that the predecessor of Columbus might have descended to 



154 THE VOYAGE OF THE VEGA. [chap. 



journeys among the peoples of Middle Asia, gave some in- 
formation regarding the most northerly lands of this quarter 
of the world also. The chapters which treat of this subject 
beai" the distinctive titles : " On the land of the Tartars living 
in the north," "On another region to which merchants only- 
travel in waggons drawn by dogs," and " On the region where 
darkness prevails" (De regione tenebrarum). From the state- 
ments in these chapters it follows that hunters and traders 
already inhabited or wandered about in the present Siberia, and 
brought thence valuable furs of the black fox, sable, beaver, &c. 
The northernmost living men were said to be handsome, tall and 
stout, but very pale for want of the sun. They obeyed no king 
or chief, but were coarse and uncivilised and lived as beasts.^ 
Among the products of the northern countries white bears arc 
mentioned, from which it appears that at that time the hunters 
had already reached the coast of the Polar Sea. But Marco 
Polo nowhere says expressly that Asia is bounded on the north 
by the sea. 

All the maps of North Asia which have been published down 
to the middle of the sixteenth century, are based to a greater or 
less extent on interpretations of the accounts of Herodotus, 
Pliny, and Marco Polo. When they do not surround the whole 
Indian Ocean with land, they give to Asia a much less extent 

posterity merely as the original of this character if he had not, soon after 
his return home, taken part in a war against Genoa, in Uie course of which 
he was taken prisoner, and, during his imprisonment, related his recol- 
lections of his travels to a fellow-prisoner, who committed them to writing, 
in what language is still uncertain. The work attracted great attention and 
was soon spread, first in written copies, then by the press in a large number 
of different languages. It has not been translated into Swedish, but in the 
Royal Library in Stockholm there is a very important and hitherto little 
known manuscript of it from the middle of the fourteenth century, of 
which an edition is in course of publication in photo-lithographic facsimile. 
^ Homines illius regionis sunt pulchri, magni, et corpulenti, sed sunt mul- 
tum pallidi . . . . et sunt homines inculti, et immorigerati et beetialiter 
viventep. 



nil.] OLD MAPS OF ASIA. 155 

in the Dorth and east than it actually possesses, make the land 
in this direction completely bounded by sea, and delineate two 
headlands projecting towards the north from the mainland. To 
these they give the names Promontoriwm, Scythteum, and Tahin, 



(Fron II miippunoiido ai Fn Mbutd CammldolrH dBBciitto ed LIluatntQ d> D. Pluddo Znik, 
Veneila, ISM.) 

and they besides place in the neighbourhood of the north coast 
a large island to which they give the name that already occurs 
in Pliny, Insula Tazaia, which reminds us, perhaps by an 



166 THE VOYAGE OF THE VEGA. [chap. 



accidental resemblance of sound, of the name of the river and 
bay, Tas, between the Ob and the Yenisej. Finally, the borders 
of the maps are often adorned with pictures of wonderfully 
formed men, whose dwellings the hunters placed in those 
regions, the names being at the same time given of a larger 
or smaller number of peoples and cities mentioned by Marco 
Polo. 

On the whole, the voyages of the Portuguese to India and 
the Eastern archipelago, the discovery of America and the 
first circumnavigation of the globe, exerted little influence on the 
current ideas regarding the geography of North Asia. A new 
period in respect of our knowledge of this part of the old world 
first began with the publication of Herberstein's Berum 
Mo8(X)vUimr^cm Commentarii, Yindohonse 1549.^ This work has 
annexed to it a map with the title "Moscovia Sigismundi 
liberi baronis in Herberstein Neiperg et Gutnhag. Anno 
MDXLix. Hanc tabulam absolvit Aug. Hirsfogel ViennaB 
AustTMe cum gra. et privi. imp.," ^ which indeed embraces only 
a small part of Siberia, but shows that a knowledge of North 
Russia now began to be based on actual observations. A large 
gulf, marked with the name Mare Glaciale (the present White 

^ See note at page 54, vol. i., for an account of von Herberstein and his 
works. 

'As the copy of the original map to which I have had access, being 
coloured, is unsuitable for photo-lithographing, I give here instead a photo- 
Hthographic reproduction of the map in the Italian edition printed in 1550. 
The map itself is unchanged in any essential paifticular, but the drawing 
and engraving are better. There is, besides, a still older map of Russia in 
the first editio n of Se bastian Miinster's Cosmographhi Universalis, I have 
not had acc^OTwt^keHitioiTjIGruI; have hadto ^fHeUidrd edition of the same 
work printed at Dase^n 1550. A very incomplete map of Russia engraved 
on wood, on which, however, the Obi and the " Sybir ** are to be found, is 
inserted in this work at page 910. The Dwina here falls not into the White 
Sea but into the Gulf of Finland, through a lake to which the name Ladoga 
is now given ; places like Astracan, Asof , Viborg, Calmahori (Kolmogor), 
Solowki (Solovets), &c., are indicated pretty correctly, and in the White Sea 
there is to be seen a very faithful representation of a walrus swimming. 



^ 



MAP or RUSSl 



THE VOYAGE OF THE VEGA. 




v- ^ 



»* * 



d 



xiii.] HERBERSTEIN'S MAP OF RUSSIA. 167 



Sea) here projects into the north coast of Russia; from the 
south there falls into it a large river, called the Dwina. On 
the banks of the Dwina there are forts or towns with the 
names Solovoka (Solovets), Pinega, Colmogor, &c. There are 
to be found on the map besides, the names Mesen, Peczora, 
Oby,^ Tumen, &c. Oby runs out of a large lake named Kythay 
lacus. In the text, mention is made of Irtisch and Papingorod, 
of walruses and white bears ^ by the coast of the Polar Sea> of 
the Siberian cedar-tree, of the word Samoyed signifying self- 
eaters, &c.^ The walrus is described in great detail. It is 
mentioned further that the Russian Grand Duke sent out two 
men, Simeon Theodorovitsch Kurbski and Knes Pietro 
UcHATOi, to explore the lands east of the Petchora, &c. 

Herberstein's work, where the narrative of Istoma's circum- 
navigation of the northern extremity of Europe, which has been 
already quoted, is to be found, was published only a few years 
before the first north-east voyages of the English and the Dutch, 
of which I have before given a detailed account. Through 
these the northernmost part of European Russia and the 
westernmost part of the Asiatic Polar Sea were mapped, but an 
actual knowledge of the north coast of Asia in its entirety 
was obtained through the conquest of Siberia by the Russians. 
It is impossible here to give an account of the campaigns, by 
which the whole of this enormous territory was brought under 
the sceptre of the Czar of Moscow, or of the private journeys for 
sport, trade, and the collecting of tribute, by which this conquest 
was facilitated. But as nearly every step which the Russian 

1 The river Ob is mentioned the first time in 1492, in the negotiations 
which the 4uBtnan ambassador, Michael Snups, carried on in Moscow in 
order to obtain permission to travel in the interior of Russia (Adelung, 
JJ^herticht der Reisenden in EusBland, p. 1/^7). 

i As before stated, Marco Polo mentions Polar bears but not walruses. 

' Henodotus places Andropagi in nearly the same regions which are 
now inhabited by the Samoyeds. Pliny also speaks of man-eating 
Scythian?, 



[CHAP- 

l^^ THE VOYAGE OE THKJTEGA^^ _ 

^ re of 




, \ \ t>te know] 

i.v.:.x. . .A f.-*rl ^^-t Z^o. the years » 
n.^. .s ie.^1 -:y^--^;^ J_ ^^^^, o«uneoces in a 
^t-v^ ^^"-^ ti^is ci>,. -«. - y - ^ti^er more 

c^o*x--: pcint ..f -- ^^ ' I-^- ^^expediticms which 
*i^^i *ccv:-^x ■: '^^ *^^^' ^^1'^ .-;^ ertension of our 



kx, ,r>i,^ t '^ ^=^^ ". V .7--5 .^ Siberia through 
T:k ^iT »^is Trexifc^i I * '-' <^ -'' . T>„^ian peasant 



• , - " ,_-'► - - * * *% -1; I»«.*3C'*^aa» ^ 

j^jKvr:: c.;c^r:^i--iJ- ir^i^-*' - - *. ...^^i into with 
.iX3J. *=>->e?^ - %^ - ^V-i..*- - '« ^^«» partiaUy 

i^r.v-v.i -.. T*T & yr*r.T tr.:-.«r - -«^ .^ sixteenth 

jr..->.c: T---.1 -/:ii i« *=<■. -^ * =^- 7- '_ -^ ^ ^^^^^ Kama and 
--r;:rr. .::cA^:«-i lv-^£ rrki.->^ -= ^'T'' ^ _^-_ .... \,S^.\ towns 
C: ^ vf > *=• - *--■ '- ^'-•-"•^•' -: ^- ~ "^^ „*.-:^ ^^^ fti-n^i-ierahle, 

-.r: t:^-' i =»;^-^*"- *-*' **-^-' '■ ■ - , ,.V ^b^n a host of 
^ .«• -«-..-^ -r^rtA*-''-'^ ^ .*••-.* ^ - T.-. ♦he 



._^T- Xi -T^** -■ " ■ - . 

«.» -■«- ♦•«» ^ f^ 1— . . i -, . ■-•» •"* *^ ^ 















rt^ -.-»« ^ -jjfcC iV •>» - •»•» **^ ""^^ 



"» 



._..» ^ r*'"« '^»:^.'»i'*v'i"it 



.^ 



XU!.] RUSSIAN CX)NQUEST OF SIBERIA. 159 

the necessary sustenance, but supported in every way the bold 
adventurer's plan of entering on a campaign for the conquest of 
Siberia. This was begun in 1579. In 1580 Yermak passed the 
Ural, and after several engagements marched in particular 
sf[ainst the Tartars living in Western Siberia, along the rivers 
Tagil and Tura to Tjumen, and thence in 1581 farther along 
the Tobol and Irtisch to Kutschum Khan's residence Sibir, 
situated in the neighbourhood of the present Tobolsk. It was 
this fortress, long since destroyed, which gave its name to the 
whole north part of Asia. 

From this point the Russians, mainly following the great 
rivers, and passing from one river territory to another at the 
places where the tributaries almost met, spread out rapidly in 
aU directions. Yermak himself indeed was drowned on the ^th 
August, 1584, in the river Irtisch, but the adventurers who 
accompanied him overran in a few decades the whole of the 
enormous territory lying north of the deserts of Central Asia 
from Ural to the Pacific, everywhere strengthening their 
dominion by building Ostrogs, or small fortresses, at suitable 
places. It was the noble fiir-yielding animals of the extensive 
foreste of Siberia which played the same part with the Russian 
promyschleni, as gold with the Spanish adventurers in South 
America. 

At the close of the sixteenth century the Cossacks had 
aheady possessed themselves of the greater part of the river 
territory of the Irtisch-Ob, and sable-hunters had already gone 
as far north-east^ as the river Tas, where the sable-hunting 

' It is a peculiar circumstance that the vanguard of the Russian stream 
of emigration which spread over Siberia, advanced along the northernmost 
part of the country by the Tas, Turuchansk^ Yakutsk, Kolyma, and Ana- 
dyrsk. This depended in the first place upon the races living there 
having less power of resistance against the invaders, who were often very 
few in number, than the tribes in the south, but also on the fact that the most 
precious and most transportable treasures of Siberia — sable, beaver, andfoz- 
fikins — were obtained in greatest quantity from these northern regions. 



160 THE VOYAGE OF THE VEGA. [chaf. 



was at one time very productive and occasioned the founding of 
a town, Mangasej, which however was soon abandoned. In 1610 
the Russian fur-hunters went from the river territory of the 
Tas to the Yenisej, where the town Turuchansk was soon after 
founded on the Turuchan, a tributary of the Yenisej. The 
attempt to row down in boats from this point to the Polar Sea, 
with the view of penetrating farther along the sea coast, failed 
in consequence of ice obstacles, but led to the discovery of the 
river Fjasina and to the levying of tribute from the Samoyeds 
living there. To get farther eastward the tributaries of 
the Yenisej were made use of instead of the sea route. 
Following these the Eussians on the upper course of the 
Tunguska met with the mountain ridge which separates the 
river territory of the Yenisej from that of the Lena. This ridge 
was crossed, and on the other side of it a new stream was met 
with, which in the year 1627 led the adventurers to the Lena, 
over whose river territory the Cossacks and fiir-hunters, faithful to 
their customs, immediately spread themselves in order to hunt, 
purchase furs, and above all to impose '' jassak " upon the tribes 
living thereabouts. But they were not satisfied with this. 
Already in 1636 the Cossack Elisej Busa was sent out with an 
express commission to explore the rivers beyond, falling into the 
Polar Sea, and to render tributary the natives living on their 
banks. He was accompanied by ten Cossacks, to whose 
company forty fur-hunters afterwards attached themselves. In 
1637 he came to the western mouth-arm of the Lena, from 
which he went along the coast to the river Olenek, where he 
passed the winter. Next year he returned by land to the Lena, 
and built there two " kotsches," ^ in which he descended the 



^ Flat-bottomed, half-decked boats, twelve fathoms in length. The 
planks were fastened by wooden pins, the anchors were pieces of wood 
with large stones bound to them, the rigging of thongs, and the sails often 
of tanned reindeer hides (J. E. Fischer, Sibirische GeschichtSt St Peters- 
burg, 1768, i. p. 517). 



XUL] THE COSSACKS PENETRATE TO THE KOLYMA. 161 

river to the Polar Sea. After five days' successful rowing along 
the coast to the eastward he discovered the mouth of the Yana. 
After three days' march up the river he fell in with a Yakut 
tribe, fix)m whom he got a rich booty of sable and other furs. 
Here he passed the winter of 1638-39, here too he built 
himself a new craft, and again starting for the Polar Sea, he 
came to another river falling into the eastern mouth-arm of the 
Yana^ where he found a Yukagir tribe, living in earth huts, with 
whom he passed two years more, collecting tribute from the 
tribes living in the neighbourhood. 

At the same time IVANOV PosTNiK discovered by land the 
river Indigirka. As usual, tribute was collected from the 
neighbouring Yukagir tribes, yet not without fights, in which 
the natives at first directed their weapons against the horses 
the Cossacks had along with them, thinking that the horses 
were more dangerous than the men. They had not seen 
horses before. A simovie was established, at which sixteen 
Cossacks were left behind. They built boats, sailed down the 
river to the Polar Sea to collect tribute, and discovered the 
river Alasej. 

Some years after the river Kolyma appears to have been 
discovered, and in 1644 the Cossack, Michailo Staduchin, 
founded on that river a simovie, which afterwards increased to 
a small town, Nischni Kolymsk. Here Staduchin got three 
pieces of information which exerted considerable influence on 
later exploratory expeditions, for he acquired knowledge of the 
Chukches, at that time a military race, who possessed the part 
of North Asia which lay a little further to the east. Further, 
the natives and the Sussian hunters, who swarmed in the 
region before Staduchin, informed him that in the Polar Sea 
off the mouths of the Yana and the Indigirka there was a large 
island, which in clear weather could be seen from land, and 
which the Chukches reached in winter with reindeer sledges in 
one day from Chukotska, a river debouching in the Polar Sea 

YOL. II. M 



162 THE VOYAGE OF THE VEGA. [cha.p. 



east of the Kolyma. They brought home walrus tusks from 
the island, which was of considerable size, and the hunters 
supposed " that it was a continuation of Novaya Zemlya, whicH 
is visited by people from Mesen." Wrangel is of opinion th^it 
this account refers to no other than Krestovski Island, one of 
the Bear Islands. This, however, appears to me to be im- 
probable. It is much more likely that it refers partly to the 
New Siberian Islands, partly to Wrangel Land, and perhaps 
even to America. That the Russians themselves had not then 
discovered LjachofiTs, or as it was then also called, Blischni 
Island, which lies so near the mainland, and is so high that it 
is impossible to avoid seeing it when one in clear weather sails 
past Svjatoinos, which lies east of the Tana, is a proof that at 
that time they had not sailed along the coast between the 
mouths of the Yana and the Indigirka. Finally, a great river, 
the Pogytscha, was spoken of, which could be reached in three 
or four days' sailing eastward from the mouth of the Kolyma. 
This was the first account which reached the conquerors of 
Siberia of the great river Anadyr which falls into the Pacific. 

These acccounts were sufficient to. incite the Cossacks and 
hunters to new expeditions. The beginning was made by IsAl 
Ignatiev from Mesen, who, along with several hunters, tra- 
velled down the Kolyma in 1646 to the Polar Sea, and then 
along the coast eastwards. The sea was full of ice, but next 
the land there was an open channel, in which the explorers 
sailed two days. They then came to a bay, near whose shore 
they anchored. Here the Bussians had their first meeting with 
the Chukches, to which reference has already been made. 
Hence Ignatiev returned to the Kolyma; and the booty was 
considered so rich and his account of his journey so promising, 
that preparations were immediately made in order next year 
to send off a new maritime expedition fitted out on a larger 
scale to the coast of the Polar Sea. 

This time Feodot Alexejev from Kolmogor was chief of 



i 



XUL] ATTEMPT TO REACH THE ANAUYB. 163 

the expedition, but along with him was sent, at the request of 
the hunters, a Cossack in the Russian service in order to guard 
the rights of the crown. His name was Simeon Ivanov Sin 
Deschnev; in geographical writings he is commonly known 
under the name of Deschnev. It was intended to search for 
the mouth of the great river lying towards the east, regarding 
which some information had been obtained from the natives, 
and which was behoved to fall into the Polar Sea. The first 
voyage in 1647, with four vessels, was unsuccessfiil, it is said, 
because the sea was blocked with ice. But that this was not 
the real reason is shown by the fact that a new and larger 
expedition was fitted out the following year with fiill expecta- 
tion of success. The crews of the four boats had more probably 
been considered too weak a force to venture among the 
Chukches, and the ice had to bear the blame of the retreat. 
What man could not reproach the conquerors of Siberia with, 
was pusillanimity and want of perseverance in carrying out a 
plan which had once been sketched. Besistance always in- 
creased their power of action ; so also now. Seven boats were 
fitted out the following year, 1648, all which were to sail down 
to the Polar Sea, and then along the coast eastwards. The 
object was to examine closely the unknown land and people 
there, and to their own advantage and the extension of the 
Russian power, to collect tribute from the tribes met with 
during the expedition. Mtiller states that every boat was 
manned with about thirty men — a number which appears to 
me somewhat exaggerated, if we consider the nature of the 
Siberian craft and the difficulty of feeding so large a number 
either with provisions carried along with them or obtained 
by hunting. 

Four of the boats are not mentioned further in the narrative ; 
they appear to have returned at an early period. The three 
others, on the contrary, made a highly remarkable journey. 
The commanders of them were the Cossacks, Gerasim 

M 2 



164 THE VOYAGE OF THE VEGA. [chaf. 

Ankudinov and Simeon Deschnev, and the hunter Feodot 
Alexejev. Deschnev entertained such hopes of success that 
before his departure he promised to collect a tribute of seven 
times forty sable skins. The Siberian archives, according to 
Miller, contain the following details.^ 

On |th June, 1648, a start was made from the Kolyma. The 
sea was open ; at least the boats came without any adventure 
which Deschnev thought worth the trouble of noting in his 
narrative to Great Chukotskojnos. Of this cape Deschnev 
says that it is quite different from the cape at the river 
Chukotskaja. For it lies between north and north-east, and 
bends with a rounding towards the Anadyr. On the Russian 
side a rivulet runs into the sea, at which the Chukches had 
raised a heap of whales' bones. Right off the cape lie two 
islands, on which people of Chukch race with perforated lips 
were seen. From this cape it is possible with a favourable 
wind to sail to the Anadyr in three days, and the way is not 
longer by land, because the Anadyr falls into a gulf of the sea. 
At Chukotskojnos or, according to Wrangel at a "holy 
promontory," Svjatoinos (Serdze Kamen?) previously reached, 
Ankudinov's craft was shipwrecked. The crew were saved, 
and distributed on Deschnev's and Alexejev's boats. On the 
^th September the Russians had a fight with the Chukches 

^ G.P. MxMeTjSammlungRussischei'^ Geschichte^ St Petersburg, 1758. Miiller 
asserts in this work that it was he who, in 1736, first drew from the repositories 
of the Yakutsk archives the account of Deschnev' s voyage, which before 
that time was known neither at the court of the Czar nor in the remotest 
parts of Siberia. This, however, is not quite correct, for long before 
Miiller, the Swedish prisoner-of-war, Strahlenberg, knew that the Russians 
travelled by sea from the Kolyma to Kamchatka, which appears from his 
map of Asia, constructed during his stay in Siberia, and published in Z><u 
Nord' und Ostliche Theil von Europa und Asia, Stockholm, 1730. On this 
map there is the following inscription in the sea north of the Kolyma : — 
" Hie Rutheni ab initio per Moles glaciales, quae flante Borea ad Littora, 
flanteque Austro versus Mare iternm pnlsantur, magno Lahore et Yit«B 
Discrimine trans vecti sunt ad Regionem Kamtszatkam." 



r 



xia] DESCHNEV'S VOYAGES. 166 

firing on the coast, in which fight Alexejev was wounded. 
Soon after Deschnev's and Alexejev's " kotsches " were parted 
never to meet again. 

Deschnev was driven about by storms and head-winds until 
past the beginning of October. Finally his vessel stranded near 
the mouth of the river Olutorsk, in 61'' N.L. Hence he marched 
with his twenty-five men to the Anadyr. He had expected 
to meet with some natives in its lower course, but the region 
was uninhabited, which caused the invaders much trouble^ 
because they suflfered from want of provisions. Although 
Deschnev could not obtain from the natives any augmentation 
of the certainly very small supply of food which he carried 
with him, he succeeded nevertheless in passing the winter in 
that region. First in the. course of the following summer did 
he fall in with natives, from whom a large tribute was collected, 
but not without fierce conflicts. A simovie was built at the 
place where afterwards Anadyrski Ostrog was founded. While 
Deschnev remained here, at a loss as to how, when the boats 
were broken up, he would be able to return to the Kolyma, 
or find a way thither by land, there came suddenly on the 
^^^ 1650, a new party of hunters to his winter hut. 

For the accounts of islands in the Polar Sea, and of the river 
Pogytscha, which was said to fall into the sea three or four days* 
journey beyond the Kolyma, had led to the sending out of another 
expedition under the Cossack Staduchin. He started from 
Yakutsk in boats on the "th June, 1647, wintered on the Yana, 
travelled thence in sledges to Indigirka, and there again built 
boats in which he rowed to the Kolyma. It is to be observed 
that Stadtichin, just because he preferred the land-route to the 
sea-route between the Yana and the Indigirka, missed discover- 
ing the large island in the Polar Sea, of which so much has 
been said. Next summer (1649) Staduchin again sailed down 
the river Kolyma to the sea, and then for seven days along its 
coast eastwards, without finding the mouth of the river sought for 



166 THE VOYAGE OF THE VEGA. [chap. 

by him. He therefore returned with his object unaccomplished, 
carrying with him a heap of walrus-tusks, which were sent 
to Yakutsk as an appendix to a proposal to send out hunters 
to the Polar Sea to hunt for these animals. In the mean- 
time a true idea of the course of the Anadyr had been obtained 
through statements collected from the natives, and a land-route 
had become known between its territory and that of the Kolyma. 
Several Cossacks and hunters now petitioned for the right to 
settle on the Anadyr, and collect tribute from the tribes in that 
neighbourhood. This was granted. Some natives were forced 
to act as guides. The party started under the command of 
Simeon Motora, and came finally to Deschnev's simovte on the 
Anadyr. Staduchin followed, and traversed the way in seven 
weeks. He however soon quarrelled with Deschnev and Motora, 
and parting from them on that account, betook himself to the 
river Penschina. Deschnev and Motora built themselves boats 
on the Anadyr in order to prosecute exploratory voyages, but 
the latter was killed in 1651 in a fight with natives called 
Anauls. They had been the first of all the natives of the 
Pacific coast of North Asia to pay " jassak " to Deschnev, and 
he had already at that time come into collision with them 
and extirpated one of their tribes. 

In 1652 Deschnev travelled down the Anadyr to the river 
mouth, where he discovered a walrus-bank, whence he brought 
home walrus-tusks. There afterwards arose a dispute between 
Deschnev and Selivestrov * regarding the rights founded on the 
discovery of this walrus bank, which came before the authorities 
at Yakutsk, and it was from the documents relating to it that 
Miiller obtained the information that enabled him to give a 
narrative of Deschnev's expedition. Only in this way have 



1 Selivestrov had accompanied Staduchin during his Polar Sea voyage, 
and had, at his instance, been sent out to collect walrus-tusks on account of 
the State. He appears to have come to the Anadyr by land. 



xiii.] FATE OF ANKUDINOTS PARTY. 167 



the particulars of this remarkable voyage been rescued from 
complete oblivion.^ 

In 1653 Deschnev gave orders to collect wood to build craft 
in which he intended to carry home by sea the tribute he 
had collected to the Ejolyma, but he was compelled to desist 
from want of the necessary materials for the building and equip- 
ment of the boats, comforting himself with the statement of 
the natives that the sea was not always so open as during 
his first voyage. Compelled by necessity, he remained a year 
longer at the Anadyr, and in 1654 undertook a new hunting 
voyage to the walrus-bank, where he met with the before- 
mentioned Selivestrov. He here came in contact with the 
natives (Koryaks), and found among them a Yakut woman, who 
had belonged to Ankudinov. On asking her where her master 
had gone to, she answered that Feodot and Gerasim (Ankudinov) 
had died of scurvy, and that their companions had been killed 
with the exception of some few, who had saved themselves in 
boats. It appears as if the latter had penetrated along the 
coast as far as to the river Kamchatka. For when Kamchatka 
was conquered by Atlassov in 1697 the natives stated that a 
long time before one Feodotoy (probably a son of Feodot 
Alexejev) had lived among them along with some companions, 
and had married their women. They were venerated almost 
as gods. They were believed to be invulnerable until they 
struck another, when the Kamchadals saw their mistake and 
killed them.^ 

By the expeditions of Deschnev, Staduchin, and their 

' StrahleDberg roust have collected the main details of this voyage by 
oral coroiDunications from Russian hunters and traders. 

* According to Miiller. Krascheninnikov {Histoire et description du 
Kamtxhatka, Amsterdam, 1770, ii. p. 292) states, evidently from infor- 
mation obtained in Kamchatka, thai the river Nikul is called Feodot- 
oTcbina after Feodot Alexejev, who not only penetrated thither, but also 
sailed round the southern promontory of Kamchatka to tlie River Tigil 
where he and his followers perished in the way described by Miiller. 



168 . THE VOYAGE OF THE VEGA. [chap. 

companions, the Hussions had by degrees become acquainted 
with the course of the Anadyr and with the tribes living on 
its banks. But it still remained for them to acquire a more 
complete knowledge of the islands which were said to be situated 
in the Polar Sea, and one must be surprised at the extreme 
difficulties which were encountered in attempting the solution 
of this apparently very simple geographical problem. The 
reason indeed was that the Siberian seamen never ventured 
to leave the immediate neighbourhood of the coast, a precaution 
which besides is very easily explained when the bad construction 
of their craft is considered. Along the shore of the Polar Sea 
on the other hand, a very active communication appears to have 
taken place between the Lena and the Kolyma, though of those 
voyages we only know such as in one way or another gave rise 
to actions before the courts or were characterised by specially 
remarkable dangers or losses. 

In 1650 Andrej Goreloj was sent by sea from Yakutsk 
to impose tribute on the tribes that lived at the sources of 
the Indigirka, and on the Moma, a tributary of the Indigirka. 
He passed Svjatoinos successfully, and reached the mouth of 
the Kroma, but was there beset by ice, with which he drifted 
out to sea. After drifting about ten days he was compelled 
to abandon the vessel, which was soon after nipped, and 
go on foot over the ice to land. On the •*^ November he 
came to the simovie Ujandino, where famine prevailed during 
the winter, hecavse the vessels, thai should have hrotight pro- 
visions to tlie place^ had either been lost or been compelled to 
turn; a statement which proves that at that time a regular 
navigation took place between certain parts of the coast of the 
Polar Sea. 

The same year, the Cossack, TiMOFEJ Buldakov travelled 
by sea from the Lena to the Kolyma to take oyer the command 
of the neighbouring region. He reached the Kroma success- 
fully, but was beset there and drifted out to sea. He then 



ML] NAVIGATION IN THE SEVENTEENTH CENTURY. 160 

detennined to endeavour to get to land over the ice. But this 
was no easy matter. The ice, which already was three feet 
ildck, went suddenly into a thousand pieces, while the vessel 
drove before a furious gale farther and farther from the shore. 
This was repeated several times. When the sea at last froze 
over, the vessel was abandoned, and the party finally succeeded, 
worn out as they were by hunger, scurvy, work, and cold, in 
reaching land at the mouth of the Indigirka. The narrative of 
Buldakov's voyage is, besides, exceedingly remarkable, because a 
meeting is there spoken of with twelve " kotsches," filled with 
Cossacks, traders, and hunters, bound partly from the Lena to 
the rivers lying to the eastward, partly from the Kolyma and 
Indigirka to the Lena, a circumstance which shows how active 
the communication then was in the part of the Siberian Polar 
Sea in question. This is further confirmed by a narrative of 
NiKiFOR Malgin. While Knes Ivan Petrovitsch Barjatin- 
SKY was vqjvode at Yakutsk (1667-75), Malgin travelled along 
with a trader, Andrej Woripajev, by sea from the Lena to the 
Kolyn^a. During this voyage the pilot directed the attention of 
all on board to an island, lying far out at sea, west of the mouth 
of the Kolyma. In course of a conversation regarding it, after 
Malgin had succeeded in reaching the Kolyma, another trader,. 
Jakob WiAtka, stated that on one occasion when he was sailing 
with nine " kotsches " between the Lena and the Kolyma, three 
of them had been driven by wind to this island, and that 
the men who had been sent ashore there, found traces of 
unknown animals, but no inhabitants. 

All these narratives, however, do not appear to have met with 
full credence. In the beginning of the eighteenth century, 
accordingly, new explorations and new expeditions were under- 
taken. A Cossack, Jakob Permakov, stated that during a 
voyage between the Lena and the Kolyma, he had seen off 
Svjatoinos an island, of which hf knew not whether it was 
inhabited or not, and likewise, that off the mouth of the Kolyma 



170 THE VOYAGE OF THE VEGA. [chap.- 

there waa an island which could be seen from land. In order to 
make sure of the correctness of this statement, a Cossack, 
Merourej Wagin, was sent out. He travelled along with 
Permakov, in the month of May, in dog-sledges over the 
ice from Svjatoinos to the island lying ofiF it, that Permakov 
had seen. They landed there, found it uninhabited and treeless, 
and fixed its circumference at nine to twelve days' journey. 
Beyond this island Wagin saw another, which, however, he could 
not reach for want of provisions. He therefore determined to 
turn, in order to undertake the journey the following year in a 
better state of preparation. During the return journey the 
party suffered severely from hunger, and in order to avoid 
a renewal of the dangerous and difficult journey of exploration, 
the men at last murdered Permakov, Wagin, and his son. The 
crime was discovered, and the knowledge we possess of this 
expedition is founded on the confused information obtained 
during the examination of the murderers. Miiller even throws 
doubts on the truth of the whole narrative. 

The attempts which were afterwards made to reach those 
islands, partly by sea in 1712, by Wasilej Staduchin, partly 
by dog-sledges in 1714 by Alexej Markov and Grioorej 
Kusakov, yielded no result. Ten years afterwards, " the old 
saga " of the islands in the Polar Sea, induced one SiN Bajorski 
Feodot Amossov to undertake an expedition with a view to 
impose tribute on their inhabitants, but he was prevented by 
ice from reaching his goal. On the way he met with a hunter, 
Ivan Willegin, who said, that along with another hunter, 
Grigorej Sankin, he had travelled over the ice to these islands 
from the mouth of the river Chukotskaja. He had seen neither 
men nor trees, but some abandoned huts. " Probably this land ex- 
tends all the way from the mouth of the Tana, past the Indigirka 
and Kolyma to the region which is inhabited by the Schelags, a 
Chukch tribe." He had learned this from a Schelag named 
Kopai, at whose home he had been the preceding year. In 



XIII.] ISLANDS IN THE SIBERIAN POLAR SEA. 171 



order to reach this land by sea it was necessary to start from 
the coast which the Schelags inhabited, because the sea was less 
covered by ice there. 

As Amossov could not reach his goal by sea he travelled 
thither the same year, in November, 1724, over the ice, but his 
description of the land differs widely from that of his prede- 
cessor, and Miiller appears to entertain great doubts of the 
truthfulness of the narrative.^ On the ground of a map con- 
structed by the Cossack, Colonel Schestakov, who, however, ac- 
cording to Miiller, could neither read nor write, this new land was 
introduced into Delislb and Buache's map, with the addition 
that the Schelag Kopai lived there, and had there been taken 
prisoner by the Russians. This is so far incorrect, as Kopai did 
not live on any island, but on the mainland, and never was 
prisoner with the Russians, although after having paid tribute 
to them, he tired of doing so, and killed some of Amossov*s 
people, after which no more was heard of him. Miiller com- 
plains loudly of the incorrect statement regarding Kopai, but 
the learned academician commits a much greater mistake, inas- 
much as he considers that he ought to leave the numerous 
accounts of hunters and Cossacks about land and islands in the 
Siberian Polar Sea completely out of account. All these lands 
are therefore left out of the map published by the Petersburg 
Academy in the year 1758.* It is in this respect much more 

^ But we ought to remember that the oldest accounts of islands in the 
Polar Sea relate to no fewer than four different lands, viz., 1. The New 
Siberian Islands lying off the mouth of the Lena and Svjatoinos; 2. 
The Bear Islands; 3. Wrangel Land; 4. The north-western part of 
America. Contradictions in accounts of the islands in the Polar Sea 
probably depend on the uninhabited and treeless New Siberian islands 
being confused with America, which, in comparison with North Siberia, is 
thickly peopled and well wooded, with the small Bear Islands, with 
Wrangel Land, &c, 

* Nouvelle carte des dicouvertes faites par des vaistteaux ruttsiens aux 
cdtes xnconnuen de VAmirique Septentrionah aver les pais adiace?ites, dressee 
sur des memoiree avthentiqves des cevx qvi ont assxste a res decouvertes 



172 THE VOYAGE OF THE VEGA. [chap. 



incomplete than the map which accompanies Strahlenberg's 
book.^ 

Before I begin to sketch the explorations of the great 
northern expedition, some account remains to be given of the 
discovery of Kamchatka. It appears from the preceding that 
Kamchatka was already reached by some of Deschnev's fol- 
lowers, but their important discovery was completely unknown 
in Moscow. Kamchatka is, however, already mentioned in the 
narrative of Evert Ysbrants Ides' embassy to China in 1693-95 ; * 
accounts of it had probably been obtained from the Siberian 
natives, who are accustomed to wander far and near. These 
accounts, however, are exceedingly incomplete, and therefore, 
VOLODOMIR Atlassov, picUidesdtuik {i.e., commander of fifty 
men) at Anadyrsk, is considered the proper discoverer of 
Kamchatka. 

While Atlassov was commander at Anadyrsk, he sent out in 
1696, the Cossack Lucas Semenov Sin Morosko with sixteen 
men to bring the tribe living to the south under tribute. The 
commission was executed, and on his return Morosko stated that 
he not only was among the Koryaks, but had also penetrated to 
the neighbourhood of the river Kamchatka, and that he took 
a Kamchadal "ostrog," and found in it some manuscripts in an 
unknown language, which, according to information afterwards 
obtained, had belonged to some Japanese who had stranded on 
the coast of ICamchatka.^ It was the first hint the conquerors 



et 8ur d*autres cannoissanees dont on rend raison dans un memoire separ^ 
St. Petersbourg, I'Acad^mie ImpiSriale des Sciences, 1758. 

^ In this sketch of the discovery and conquest of Siberia I have followed 
J. E. Fischer, SiHrische Geschichte, St. Petersburg, 1768, and G. P. Muller, 
Samndung Russischer Oenchichte^ St. Petersburg, 1768. 

' In the twentieth chapter of Dreyjdhrige Reise nock China, &c., Prank- 
fort, 1707. The first edition came out at Hamburg in 1698. 

^ Muller, iii. p. 19. An account of Atlassov's conquest of Kamchatka 
{Bericht gedaen door zeher Moskovisch hrygs-hediende Wolodimer Otlasofd, 
hoqft-man over vyftlg, &c.) is besides to be found in Witsen (1705, Nieuwe 



JUL] THE DISCOVERY OF KAMCHATKA. 173 



of Siberia obtained of their being in the neighbourhood of 
Japan. 

The year after Atlassov, with a larger force, followed the way 
which Morosko had opened up, and penetrated to the river 
Kamchatka, where as a sign that he had taken possession of the 
land, he erected a cross with an inscription, which when trans* 
lated runs thus : In the year 7205 (Le. 1697) an the ISth July 
this cross was erected by the pidtidesdtnik Volodamir AtUissov and 
his foUofW^rs^ 55 m&n, Atlassov then built on the Kamchatka 
river a simovie, which was afterwards fortified and named Verchni 
Kamtschatskoj Ostrog. Hence the Russians extended their 
power over the land, yet not without resistance, which was 
fiijt completely broken by the cruel suppression of the rebellion 
of 1730. 

In 1700 Atlassov travelled to Moscow, carrying with him 
a Japanese, who had been taken prisoner after being ship- 
wrecked on the coast of Kamchatka, and the collected tribute 
which consisted of the skins of 3,200 sables, 10 sea-otters, 
7 beavers, 4 otters, 10 grey foxes and 191 red foxes. He was 
received graciously, and sent back as commander of the Cossacks 
in Yakutsk with orders to complete the conquest of Kamchatka. 
An interruption however happened for some time in the path 
of Atlassov as a warrior and discoverer, in consequence of his 
having during his return journey to Yakutsk plundered a 
Russian vessel laden with Chinese goods, an accessory circum- 
stance which deserves to be mentioned for the light which it 
throws on the character of this Pizarro of Kamchatka. He 
was not set free until the year 1706, and then recovered his 

uitguafy 1785, p. 670). An account, written from oral communication by 
Atlassov himself, is to be found inserted in Strahlenberg's Travels ^ p. 431. 
Strahlenberg considers Kamchatka and Yezo to be the same land. A 
history of the conquest of Kamchatka, evidently written according to 
traditions current in the country, is to be found in Krascheninnikov (French 
edition of 1770, ii. p. 291). In this account 1698 and 1699 are given as the 
years of Morosko's and Atlassov^s expeditions. 



174 THE VOYAGE OF THE VEGA. [chap. 



command in Kamchatka, with strict orders to desist from all 
arbitrary proceedings and acts of violence, and to do his best 
for the discovery of new lands. The first part of this order he 
however complied with only to a limited extent, which gave 
occasion to repeated complaints ^ and revolts among the already 
unbridled Cossacks. Finally, in 1711, Atlassov and several 
other officers were murdered by their own countrymen. In 
order to atone for this crime, and perhaps to get a little farther 
from the arm of justice, their murderers, Anziphorov and Ivan 
KosiREVSKOJ,* undertook to subdue the not yet conquered part 
of Kamchatka, and the two northernmost of the Kurile 
Islands. I^urther information about the countries lying farther 
south was obtained from some Japanese who were shipwrecked 
in 1710 on Kamchatka. 

At first in order to get to Kamchatka the difficult detour by 
Anadyrsk was taken. But in the year 1711 the commander at 
Okotsk, Sin BoJaRski I^eteA QuturoV, was ordered, by the 
energetic promoter of exploratory eitpeditions in Eastern Siberia, 
the Yakutsk voivode, DoROf EJ TRaueRnIcht, to proceed by sea 
from Okotsk to Kamchatka. But this Voyage could not come 



^ Complaints were made, among other things, that in order to obtain 
metal for making a still, he ordered all the copper belonging to the crown 
which he carried with him, to be melted down. When the Cossacks first 
came to Kamchatka and were, almost without a contest, acknowledged as 
masters of the country, they found life there singularly agreeable, with one 
drawback — there were no means of getting drunk. Finally, necessity 
compelled the wild adventurers to betake themselves to what we should 
now call cheniico-technical experiments, which are described in con- 
siderable detail by Krascheninnikov {loc. cit, ii. p. 369). After many 
failures they finally succeeded in distilling spirits from a sugar-bearing 
plant growing in the country, and from that time this drink, or rahoj 
as they themselves call it, has been found in g^eat abundance in that 
country. 

' He afterwards became a monk under the name of Ignatiev, came to 
St. Petersburg in 1730, and himself wrote a narrative of his adveiituresy 
discoveries, and services, which was printed first in the St Petersburg 
journals of the 26th March, 1730, and likewise abroad {MuUer, iii. p. 82). 



XIII.] THE SEA OP OKOTSK OPENED TO NAVIGATION. 175 



off because at that time there were at Okotsk neither seagoing 
boats, seamen^ nor even men accustomed to the use of the com- 
pass. Some years after the governor Prince Gagakin sent to 
that town IvAN SoROKAUHOV with twelve Cossacks to make 
arrangements for this voyage. For want of ships and seamen 
however, this could not now be undertaken, and after Sorokau- 
mov had created great confusion he was imprisoned by the 
authorities of the place, and sent back to the Governor. 
Peter I. now commanded thai men acquainted with navigation 
should he sought for among the Swedish prisoners of war 
and sent to Okotsk; that they should huHd a boat there and, 
provided wUh a compass, go hy sea along with some Cossacks 
to Kamchatka and return} Thus navigation began on. the 
Sea of Okotsk. Among the Swedes who opened it, is men- 
tioned Henry Busch,* according to Strahlenberg a Swedish 
corporal, who had previously been a ship-carpenter. According to 
Mfiller, who met with him at Yakutsk as late as 1736, he 
was bom at Hoom in Holland, had served at several places 
as a seaman, and finally among the Swedes as a trooper, until 
he was taken prisoner at Viborg in 1706. He gave Miiller 
the following account of his first voyage across the Sea of 
Okotsk. 

After arriving at Okotsk they had built a vessel, resembling 
the lodjas used at Archangel and Mesen for sailing on the White 
Sea and to Novaya Zemlya. The vessel was strong ; its length 
was eight and a half fathoms, its breadth three fathoms, the 

^ Yon Baer, Beiirage zur Kentniss des Russischen Belches, xvi. p. 33. 

> Ainbjom Molin, lieutenant in the Scanian cavalry regiment, who was 
taken prisoner at the Dnieper in 1709, also took part in these journeys. 
Compare BtratteUe oni de % Stora Tartariet boende tartarer, som trdffaU 
langst nordost i Agien, pa drkebiskop E. Bemelii hegdran upsatt of Amhj'&m 
Molin (Account of the Tartars dwelling in Great Tartary who were met with 
at the north-east extremity of Asia^ written at the request of Archbishop 
E. Benzelius hy Ambj'om Molin), pubh'shed in Stockholm in 1880 by Aug, 
Strindberg, after a manuscript in the Linkoping library. 



176 THE VOYAGE OF THE VEGA. [chap. 

freeboard, when the vessel was loaded, three and a half feet. 
The first voyage took place in June 1716. The voyagers 
began to sail along the coast towards the north-east,, but 
an unfavourable wind drove the vessel, almost against the 
will of the seafarers, right across the sea to Kamchatka. 
The first land sighted was a cape which juts out north 
of the river Tigil. Being unacquainted with the coast 
the seafarers hesitated to land. During the delay a change 
of wind took place, whereby the vessel was driven back 
towards the coast of Okotsk. The wind again becoming 
favourable, the vessel was put about and anchored successfully 
in the Tigil. The men who were sent ashore found the 
houses deserted. For the Eamchadales being terrified at the 
large ship had made their escape to the woods. The seafarers 
sailed on along the coast and landed at several places in order 
that they might meet with the inhabitants, but for a long time 
without success, until at last they fell in with a KamchadaJ 
girl, who was ^ collecting edible roots. With her as a guide they 
soon found dwellings, and even Cossacks, who had been sent out 
to collect tribute. They wintered at the river Eompakova. 
During the winter the sea cast up a whale, which had in its 
carcase a harpoon of European manufacture and with Latin 
letters. The vessel left the winter haven in the middle of 
May (new style) 1717, but meeting with ice-fields was beset 
in them for five and a half weeks. This occasioned great 
scarcity of provisions. In the end of July the seafarers were 
again back at Okotsk. From this time there has been regular 
communication by sea between this town and Kamchatka. 
The master of the vessel during the first voyage across the 
Sea of Okotsk was the Cossack SoKOLOV,^ 

1 Muller, iii. p. 102. According to an oral communication by Busch, 
Strahlenberg's account (p. 17) of this voyage appears to contain several 
mistakes. The year is stated as 1713, the return voyage is said to have 
occupied six days. 



XUI.1 SUPPOSED CONNECTION OF AMERICA WITH ASIA. 177 

from what I have stated it follows that, thanks to the 
fondness of the hunters and Cossacks for adventurous explor- 
atoiy expeditions, the current ideas regarding the distribution 
of the land and the courses of the rivers in north-eastern Asia 
were in the main correct. But, in consequence of want of 
knowledge of, or of doubts regarding, Deschnev's discoveries, 




iKAFHE)Rt ) \fz^ ^^^^ i 'WD|l8K0iE 






Ha ■ I md-. 



MAP OF ASIA. 

Fivm an Atlas published by the Russian Academy of Sciences In 1737. 



..jU- 



■± 



there prevailed an uncertainty whether Asia at its north-east 
extremity was connected with America by a small neck of land, 
in the same way as it is with Africa, or as North and South 
America are connected with each other, a view which, in 
consequence of the unscientific necessity of generalising 
inherent in man, and the wish to have an explanation of 
VOL. ir. N 



178 THE VOYAGE OF THE VEGA. [chap 

how the population extended from the old to the new world, 
was long zealously defended.^ No one, either European or 
native, had yet, so far as we know, extended his hunting 
journeys to the northernmost promontory of Asia, in conse- 
quence of which the position which it was assumed to occupy 
only depended on loose suppositions. It was possible for 
instance that Asia stretched with a cape as far as to the 
neighbourhood of the Pole, or that a broad isthmus between the 
Fjasina and the Olenek connected the known portion . of this 
quarter of the world with an Asiatic Polar continent. Nor had 
geographers a single actual determination of position or 
geographical measurement from the whole of the immense 
stretch between the mouth of the Ob and Japan, and thei'e was 
complete uncertainty as to the relative position of the eastern- 
most possessions of the Russians on the one side and of Japan 
on the other.^ It was difficult to get the maps of the Russians 
to correspond with those of the Portuguese and the Dutch, at 
the point where the discoveries of the different nations touched 
each other ; which also was exceedingly natural, as at that time 
too limited an extent east and west by 1700 kilometres was 
commonly assigned to Siberia. In order to investigate this 
point, in order to fill up the great blank which still existed in 
the knowledge of the quarter of the world first inhabited by 



^ As late as 1819, James Bumey, first lieutenant on one of Captain 
Gook^s vessels during his voyage north of Behring's Straits, afterwards 
captain and member of the Royal Society, considered it not proved that 
Asia and America are separated by a sound. For he doubted the correct- 
ness of the accounts of Deschnev's voyage. Compare James Bumey, A 
Chronological History of North-eastern Voyages of Discovery, London, 1819, 
p. 298 ; and a paper by Bumey in the Transactions of the Royal Society, 
1817. Bumey was violently attacked for the views there expressed by 
Captain John Dundas Cochrane. Narrative of a Pedestrian Journey through 
Russia and Siberian Tartary, 2nd ed. London, 1824, Appendix. 

' The first astronomical determinations of position in Siberia were, per- 
haps, made by Swedish prisoners of war ; the first in China by Jesuits 
(Of. Strahlenhergj p. 14). 



xni.] BEHRING'S FIRST VOYAGE. 179 

man, and perhaps above all for the purpose of forming new 

commercial treaties and of discovering new commercial routes, 

Peter the Great during the latest years of his life arranged one 

aC the greatest geographical expeditions which the history of 

the world can show. It was not until after his death, however, 

that it was carried out, and then it went on for a series of years 

on so large a scale that whole tiibes are said to have been 

impoverished through the severe exactions of transport that 

were on its account imposed on the inhabitants of the Siberian 

deserts. Its many different divisions are now comprehended 

nnder the name — the GrecU Northern Expedition. Through the 

writings of Behring, Miiller, Gmelin, Steller, Erascheninnikov 

and others, this expedition has acquired an important place for 

all time in the history not only of geography but also of 

ethnography, zoology, and botany ; and even now the inquirer, 

when the natural conditions of North Asia are in question, 

must return to these works. I shall therefore, before drawing 

this chapter to a close, give a brief account of its principal 

features. 

The Great Northern Expedition was ushered in by " the first 
expedition to Eamchatka." The commander of this expedition 
was the Dane Vitus Behrino, who was accompanied by 
Lieutenant Morton Spangberg, also a Dane by birth, and 
Alexei Chirikov. They left St. Petersburg in February 1725, 
and took the land route across Siberia, carrying vdth them the 
necessary materials with which in Eamchatka to build and 
equip the vessel with which they should make their voyage of 
exploration. More than three years were required for this 
voyage, or rather for this geographico-scientific campaign; in 
which for the transport of the stores and the shipbuilding material 
that had to be taken from Europe the rivers Irtisch, Ob, Ket, 
Yenisej, Tunguska, Ilim, Aldan, Maja, Yudoma, and Urak were 
taken advantage of. It was not until the ^|th April that a be- 
ginning could be made at Nischni Eamchatskoj Ostrog of the 

N 2 



180 THE VOYAGR OF THE VEGA. [ciiAP* 

building of the vessel, which was launched on the ^ July ; 
and on the ^ of the same month Behring began his voyage. 

He sailed in a north-easterly direction along the coast of 
Kamchatka, which he surveyed. On the ^th August in 64"* 30' 
N.L. he fell in with Chukches, who had still a reputation among 
the Russians for invincible courage and ferocity. First one of 
them came to the vessel, swimming on two inflated seal-skins, 
" to inquire what was intended by the vessel's coming thither/' 
after which their skin-boat lay to* Conversation was carried on 
with them by means of a Kory&k interpreter. On the ^ 
August St. Lawrence Island was discovered, and on the ^th c^ 
the same month the explorers sailed past the north-eastem 
promontory of Asia in 67'' 18' and observed that the coast trends 
to the west from that point, as the Chukches had before informed 
them. Behring on this account considered that he had fulfilled 
his commission to ascertain whether Asia and America were 
separated, and he now determined to turn, " partly because if the 
voyage were continued along the coast ice might be met with, 
from which it might not be so easy to get clear, partly on account 
of the fogs, which had already begun to prevail, and partly 
because it would be impossible, if a longer stay were made 
in these regions, to get back the same summer to Kamchatka. 
There could be no question of passing the winter off the coast 
of the Chukch Peninsula, because that would have been to expose 
the expedition to certain destruction, either by being wrecked on 
the jagged rocks of the open unknown coast, or by perishing firom 
want of fuel, or finally by dying under the hands of the fierce 
unconquered Chukches." On the ^^ the vessel returned to 
Kischni Kamchatskoj Ostrog.^ It was during this voyage that 

^ A short, but instructive account of Behring's first voyage, based on an 
official communication from the Bussian Government to the King of Poland^ 
is inserted in t. iv. p. 561 of Description giographique de F Empire de la 
Chine, par le P, J. B, Du Halde^ La Haye, 1736. The same official report 
was probably the source of Muller's brief sketch of the voyage (Jfu/ier, 



xiiL] BEHRING'S SECX)ND VOYAGE. 181 

the sound, which has since obtained the name of Behring's 

Straits, is considered to have been discovered. But it is 

now known that this discovery properly belongs to the gallant 

hunter Deschnev, who sailed through these straits eighty years 

before. I suppose therefore that the geographical world will 

with pleasure embrace the proposal to attach the name of 

Deschnev along with that of Behring to this part of our globe ; 

which may be done by substituting Gape Deschnev, as the name 

of the easternmost promontory of Asia, for that of East Gape, an 

appellation which is misleading and unsuitable in many respects. 

Several statements by Kamchadales regarding a great country 

towards the east on the other side of the sea, induced Behring 

the following year to sail away in order to ascertain whether this 

was the case. In consequence of unfavourable weather he did not 

succeed in reaching the coast of America, but returned with his 

object unaccomplished, after which he sailed to Okotsk, where 

he arrived on the ^^^ 1729. Hence he betook himself 

immediately to St. Petersburg, which he reached after a journey 

of six months and nine days. 

In maps published during Behring's absence, partly by Swedish 
officers who had returned from imprisonment in Siberia,^ Kam- 
chatka had been delineated with so long an extension towards 
the south that this peninsula was connected with Yezo, the 
northernmost of the large Japanese islands. The distance 
between Kamchatka and Japan, rich in wares, would thus have 
been quite inconsiderable. This nearness was believed to be 
further confirmed by another Japanese ship, manned by seven- 
teen men and laden with silk, rice, and paper, having stranded 
in July 1729 on Kamchatka, south of Avatscha Bay. In this 
neighbourhood there was, along with a number of natives, a 

ill. p. 112). A map of it is inserted in the 1735 Paris edition of Du Halde*s 
work, and in Nouvel Atlas de la Chine, par M. jyAnvilley La Haye, 1737. 

^ Histoire genSalogique des Tartares (note, p. 107), and Strahlenberg's Oft- 
quoted work (map, text, pp. 31 and 384). 



182 THE VOYAGE OF THE VEGA. [chap. 

small party of Cossacks under the command of Andreas 
ScHTiNNiKOV. He at first accepted several presents from the 
shipwrecked men, but afterwards withdrew from the place where 
the wreck took place. When the Japanese on this account 
rowed on in their boats along the coast, Schtinnikov gave orders 
to follow them in a haydar and kill them all but two. The cruel 
deed was carried into execution, on which the malefactors took 
possession of the goods, and broke in pieces the boats in order to 
obtain the iron with which the boards were fastened together. 
The two Japanese who were saved were carried to Nischni 
Kamchatskoj Ostrog. Here Schtinnikov was imprisoned and 
hanged for his crime. The Japanese were sent to St. Petersburg, 
where they learned the Russian language and were converted to 
Christianity, while some Russians in their turn learned Japanese. 
The Japanese died between 1736 and 1739. Both were from 
Satsuma ; the elder, SosA, had been a merchant, and the younger, 
GoNSA, was a pilot's son. Their vessel had been bound for 
Osaka, but having been carried out of its course by a storm, had 
drifted about at sea for six months, stranding at last with so 
unfortunate a result for the greater part of the crew. 

This sad occurrence further reminds us that much still 
remained unaccomplished with respect to the geography of 
north-eastern Asia. Behring's Kamchatka expedition had 
besides yielded no information regarding the position of the 
northern extremity of Asia, or of the part of America lying 
opposite to Kamchatka. A number of grave doubts appear 
besides to .have been started as to the correctness of the 
observations during Behring's first voyage. All this induced 
him to make proposals for a continuation of his explorations, 
offering, along with his former companions, Spangberg and 
Chirikov, to take the command of the maritime expedition 
which was to start from Kamchatka to solve the questions 
proposed, both eastward^ to ascertain the position of the east 
coast of Asia in relation to the west coast of America, and 



xiu] THE GREAT NORTHERN EXPEDITION. 183 

southwards to connect the axeas which the West-Europeans and 
the Russians were exploring. 

The Russian senate, the Board of Admiralty, and the Academy 
of Sciences were commissioned to develop this plan and to carry 
it into execution. With respect to the way in which the com- 
mission was executed I may be allowed to refer to MiiUer's oft- 
quoted work, and to a paper by VoN Baer : Peters des Grossen 
Verdiensfe um die Erweiterung der geographischen KenrUnisse 
(Beitrdge zur Kenntniss des Btissischen Reiches, B. 16, St. Peters- 
burg, 1872). Here I can only mention that it was principaUy 
through the untiring interest which KiRiLOV, the secretary of 
the senate, took in the undertaking, that it attained such a 
development that it may be said to have been perhaps the 
greatest scientific expedition which has ever been sent out by 
any country. It was determined at the same time not only to 
ascertain the extent of Siberia to the north and east, but also to 
examine its hitherto almost unknown ethnographical and natural 
conditions. For this purpose the Great Northern Expedition was 
divided into the following divisions : — 

1. An expedition to start from Archangel for the Ob} — For this 
expedition two kotsches were employed, the Ob and the Expedition, 
52 J feet long, 14 feet broad, and 8 feet deep, each manned with 
20 men. The vessels, which were under the command of 
Lieutenants Paitlov and Muravjev, left Archangel on the */th 
July, 1734. The first summer they only reached Mutnoi Saliv 
in the Kara Sea, whence they returned to the Petchora and 

I wintered at Pustosersk. The following year they broke up in 

I 

i 1 This expedition was under the command of the Admiralty ; the others 

: under that of Behring. In my account I have followed partly Mliller and 

partly Wrangel, of whom the latter, in his book of travels, gives a his- 
torical review of previous voyages along the coasts of the Asiatic Polar 
Sea. The accounts of the voyages between the White Sea and the Yenisej 
properly belong to a foregoing chapter in this work, but I quote them first 
here in order that I may treat of the different divisions of the Great 
Northern Expedition in the same connection. 



184 THE VOYAGE OF THE VEGA. [chap. 



June, but did not penetrate farther than in 1734. The unfavour- 
able issue was ascribed to the vessels' unserviceableness for 
voyages in the Polar Sea, in consequence of which the Board 
of Admiralty ordered two other boats, 50 to 60 feet long, to be 
•built for the expedition, which were placed under the command 
of Skuratov and Suchotin, Muravjev being besides replaced 
by Malygin who sailed with the old vessels on the ^^^J^ 1736, 
down the Petchora river, at whose mouth the Expedition was 
wrecked. Without permitting himself to be frightened by this, 
Malygin ordered his men to go on board the other vessel, in 
wliich with great dangers and difficulties they penetrated through 
the drift-ice to Dolgoj Island. Here on the '^h August they 
fell in with the new vessels sent from Archangel. Suchotin was 
now sent back to Archangel on board the Oh; Malygin and 
Skuratov sailed in the new vessels to the Kara river and 
wintered there. During the winter 1736-1737 the men suffered 
only slightly from scurvy, which was cured by anti-scorbutic 
plants growing in the region. The ice in the Kara river did not 
break up until the ^ June, but so much ice still drifted about 
in the sea that a start could not be made until the ~ July. 
On the *~^: the vessels* anchored in the sound which I have 

34ih July 

named Malygin Sound. Here they were detained by head 
winds 25 days. Then they sailed on round a cape, which the 
Samoyeds call Yalmal, up the Gulf of Ob to the mouth of the 
river, which was reached on the ^ September, 1737, and then 
up the river to Soswa, where the vessels were laid up in winter 
quarters. The crews were taken to Beresov. Malygin returned 
to Petersburg, after having given Lieut. Skuratov and the second 
mate Golovin a commission to carry the vessels back to the 
Dwina the following year. They did not get back until August 
1739. The return voyage thus also occupied two years, and was 
attended with much difficulty and danger. 

' Six years in all had thus gone to the voyage from Archangel 
to the Ob and back, which now can be accomplished without 



liiL] OWZYN'S VOYAGES ON THE OB. 185 



difficulty, in a single summer. By means of Malygin's and 
Sraiatov's voyages, and of a land journey which the land- 
measurer Selifontov undertook during July and August 1736 
with reindeer along the west coast of Yalmal and then by boat 
to Beli Ostrov, Yalmal and the south coast of this large island 
were mapped, it would appear in the mam correctly.^ 

2. An expedition to sail froin the Ob to the Yenisej. — For 
this Behring ordered a double sloop, the Tobol, 70 feet long, 15 
feet broad, and 8 feet deep, to be built at Tobolsk. The vessel 
had two masts, was armed with two small cannon, and was 
mamied with 53 men, among ^om were a land-measurer and a 
priest. The commander was Lieut. OwzTN. They sailed in 
company with some small craft carrying provisions from Tobolsk 
on the y^th May, 1734, and came to the Gulf of Ob through the 
easternmost mouth-arm of the river on the y^th June. There a 
storm damaged . the tender-vessels. Of the timber of those 
which had sustained most damage, a storehouse was erected in 
66° 36' N.L., in which the provisions landed from the unservice- 
able craft were placed. When this was done they sailed on, but 
slowly in consequence of unfavourable winds and shallow water, 
so that it was not until the V*^ August that they reached 70** 4' 
N.L. Hence they returned to Obdorsk, arriving there on the 
yth September. Seven days afterwards the Ob was covered 
with ice. 

The following spring the voyage was resumed. On the V^^ 
June they came to the depot formed the preceding year. At 
first ice formed an obstacle, but on the JJ^ July it broke up, and 
the navigable water became clear. The crew had now begun to 
suffer so severely from scurvy, that of 53 only 17 were in good 
health; Owzyn therefore turned, that he might bring his sick 
men to Tobolsk. He reached this town on the y th October, and 
the river froze over soon after. Owzyn now travelled to St. 
Petersburg in order to give in, in person, reports of his unsuc- 

* Wrangel, i. p. 36. 



186 THE VOYAGE OF THE VEGA. [cbap. 

cessful voyages and to make suggestions as to the measures 
that ought to be taken to ensure better success to next year's 
undertaking. His proposals on this point were mainly in the 
direction of building at Tobolsk a new vessel, which should 
accompany the Tdbol during the dangerous voyage, and confer 
upon it greater safety. This was approved by the Board of 
Admiralty, but the vessel could not be got ready till the summer 
of 1736, on which account that year's voyage was undertaken in 
the same way as that of the preceding year, and with the same 
success. The new vessel was not ready until 1737. It came 
with the shipbuilder KoscHELEV and the mate MiNiN on the 
Yth June to Obdorsk, where Owzyn took command of it, handing 
over the old one to Koschelev, and beginning his fourth voyage 
down the Gulf of Ob. This time he had better success. After 
sailing past Gyda Bay, he came, without meeting with any 
serious obstacles from ice, on the fj^th August to Cape Mattesol, 
and on the '^ September to a storehouse erected for the expe- 
dition by the care of the authorities on the bank of the Yenisej 
in IV 33' N.L. The Yenisej froze over on the ^ October. 

Four years had thus gone to the accomplishment of Owzyn's 
purpose, but it can scarcely be doubted that if he had not turned 
so early in the season, and if he had had steam, or a sailing 
vessel of the present day at his disposal he would have been able 
to sail from the Ob to the Yenisej in a few. weeks. It is at all 
events Owzyn's perseverance to which we are in great measure 
indebted for the mapping of the Qulf of Ob, and the Bays of Tas 
and Qyda.^ 

3. Voyages from the Yenisej towards Cape Taimur, — In the 
winter of 1738 Owzyn and Koschelev were called to St. Peters- 
burg to answer for themselves with reference to a complaint 
lodged against them by the men under their command.' In 

* Wrangel, i. p. 38. 

* According to P. von Haven (Nye og forhedrede Efterretningar am del 
Eusnske Rigej Kjobenhavn, 1747, ii. p. 20), ** it was the custom in Peters- 



xm.] MININ'S VOYAGES. 187 

their room Minin got the command of the expedition which was 
to endeavour to penetrate farther eastwards along the coast of 
the Polar Sea. The two first summers, 1738 and 1739, Minin 
could not get further than to the northernmost simovies on the 
Tenisej. But in 1740 he succeeded, as it appears in pretty open 
water, in reaching on the west coast of the Taimur Peninsula the 
latitude of 75° 1 5', Here he turned on the i'\^*" on account of 
" impenetrable " ice, but mainly in consequence of the late season 
of the year. The preceding winter Minin had sent his mate 
Steklbgov in sledges to examine the coast. On the flth April 
he reached 75^ 26' N.L., and there erected a stone cairn on a rock 
jutting out into the sea. Many open places appear to have been 
seen in the offing. Minin and his party returned on account of 
snow-blindness, and during the return voyage rested for a time 
at a simovie on the river Pjasina, whose existence there shows 
how £Eur the Russian hunters had extended their journeys.^ 

4. Voyage from the Lena Westward. — On the ^/°^' 1735, two 
expeditions started from Yakutsk, each with its double sloop, 
accompanied by a number of boats canying provisions. One of 
these double sloops was to go in an easterly direction under the 
command of lieut. Lassinius. I shall give an account of his 
voyage farther on. The other was commanded by Lieut. 

burg to Bend away those whose presence was inconvenient to help Behring 
to make new discoveries/' It also went very ill with many of the gallant 
Russian Polar travellers, and many of them were repaid with ingratitude. 
Behring was received on bis return from his first voyage, so rich in results, 
with unjustified mistrust. Steller was exposed to continual trouble, was 
long prevented from returning from Siberia, and finally perished during 
his journey home, broken down in body and soul. Prontschischev and 
Lassinius succumbed to hardships and sufferings during their voyages in 
the Polar Sea. Owzyn was degraded, among other things, because he used 
to be too intimate at Obdorsk with exiles formerly of distinction. A few 
years before the voyage of the Vega, Chelyuskin's trustworthiness was still 
doubted. All the accounts of discoveries of islands and land in the Polar 
Sea by persons connected with Siberia, have till the most recent times, been 
considered more or less fictitious ; yet they are clearly in the main true. 
* Wrangel, i. p. 46. 



188 THE VOYAGE OF THE VEGA. [chap. 

Prontschischev, whose object was to go from the Lena west- 
wards, if possible, to the Yenisej. The voyage down the river 
was successful and pleasant. The river was from four to nine 
fathoms deep, and on its banks, overgrown with birch and pine, 
there were numerous tents and dwelling-houses whose in- 
habitants were engaged in fishing, which gave the neighbour- 
hood of the river a lively and pleasant appearance.^ On the 
^^5 August the explorers came to the moiith of the river, which 
here divides into five arms, of which the easternmost was chosen 
for sailing down to the Polar Sea. Here the two seafarers 
were to part. Prontschischev staid at the river-mouth till 
the |4^h August. He then sailed in 1^ to 2^ fathoms water 
along the shore of the islands which are formed by the mouth- 
arms of the Lena. On the ^^; he anchored in the mouth 
of the Olenek. A little way up the river some dwelling- 
houses were met with, which hunters had built for use during 
summer. These were put in order for winter, which passed 
happily. On the ^^ the ice broke up at the winter quar- 
ters, but in the sea it lay still until the ^ August, and it 
was only then that Prontschischev could go to sea. The course 
was shaped for the north-east. The Chatanga was reached on 
the l^th August. On the beach, in 74** 48' N. L., a hut was 
met with in which were found newly baked bread and some 
dogs, and which therefore appeared to belong to some Russian 
hunters absent at the time. While sailing on along the coast 
the explorers, after having passed two bays projecting into 
the land, came to an inlet which they erroneously took for 
the mouth of the Taimur river. Among the reasons for 
this supposition is mentioned the immense number of gulls 

^ According to Wrangel (i.. note at p. 38 and 48), probably after a quota- 
tion from Prontschischev's journal. The Lena muHt be a splendid river, for 
. it has since made the same powerful impression, as on the seamen of the 
Great Northern Expedition^ on all others who have traversed its forest* 
crowned river channel. 



xiiL] PRONTSCHISCHEV'S VOYAGR. 189 

which swarmed round the vessel in that region. The bay was 
covered with fast ice, " which probably never breaks up," and 
broad ice-fields stretched out to sea from the coast, on which 
Polar bears were seen. 

On the ^ August, in 77" 29' N.L., the vessel was suddenly 
suzrounded with so large masses of ice that it could make no 
further progress, and was every instant in danger of being 
nipped. Prontschischev therefore determined to turn, but this 
at first was rendered impossible by a complete calm, a crust of 
ice being formed at the same time in open places between the 
pieces of drift-ice. If the latitude stated is correct, the turning 
point lay quite close to the northernmost promontory of Asia. 
With a better vessel, and above all with the help of steam, 
Prontschischev would certainly have rounded it. The unbroken 
ice which he mentioned several times in his narrative, ought 
probably to be interpreted as belts of pretty closely packed 
drift-ice. Many times during my Arctic voyages have I sailed 
through belts of ice which, when observed from a boat some 
hundred yards from their borders, have been reported as 
immense unbroken ice-fields. On the ^^, a high north wind 
b^an to blow which drove the vessel, with the surrounding 
ice-fields, towards the south. The voyagers had doubts as to 
their being saved, but the gusts of wind broke up the ice so 
that the vessel got free and could sail to the mouth of the 
Ghatanga, which, however, was already frozen over. The ex- 
plorers were therefore compelled to continue their voyage 
towards the Olenek, whose mouth was reached on the ^^ 
In the neighbourhood of the haven which they intended to 
make, they were driven about by contrary winds and drift-ice 
about six days more, exposed to cold and wet, and worn out by 
exertions and privations of every description. Prontschischev, 
who before had been sick, died of his illness on the ^^^^ 
to the great sorrow of his men, by whom he was held in great 
regard. The mate, Chelyuskin, now took the command. On 



190 THE VOYAGE OF THE VEGA. [cdap. 



the ^ Sept. he succeeded in carrying his vessel into the river 
Olenek. On its bank Prontschischev was buried with all the 
solemnities which circumstances permitted. To ProntschisneVs 
melancholy fate there attaches an interest which is quite unique 
in the history of the Arctic exploratory voyages. He was 
newly married when he started. His young wife accompanied 
him on his journey, took part in his dangers and sufferings, 
survived him only two days, and now rests by his side in the 
grave on the desolate shore of the Polar Sea. 

On the ~^ the Olenek was frozen over and the wintev 

28th 8ept. ^ 

became very severe for Chelyuskin and his companions. The 
following summer they returned to Yakutsk convinced of the 
impossibility of sailing round the north point of Asia, and as 
Behring was no longer to be found in that town, Chelyuskin 
started for St. Petersburg in order to give an oral account of 
Prontschischev's voyages. The Board of Admiralty, however, 
did not favour Chelyuskin's views, but considered that another 
attempt ought to be made by land, but if this, too, was un- 
successful, that the coast should be surveyed by land journeys. 
Lieut. Chariton Laptev was appointed to carry out this last 
attempt to reach the Yenisej by sea from the Lena. 

Laptev, accompanied by a number of small craft carrying pro- 
visions, left Yakutsk on the %Hh July, 1739, and on the ^ of the 
same month reached the mouth-arm of the Lena called Kies- 
tovskoj, on which he built, on a point jutting out into the sea, a 
high signal tower, one of the few monuments that are to be 
found on the north coast of Asia, and which is on that account 
mentioned by succeeding travellers in those regions. He sailed 
hence along the coast past the mouth of the Olenek and past a 
large bay to which, for what reason I know not, he gave the 
purely Swedish name of Nordvik. This bay was still covered 
with unbroken ice. After having been beset for several days in 
Chatanga Bay, the voyagers on the .^ August reached Cape 
Thaddeus, where the vessel was anchored the following day in 



xiiL] LAPTEV'S FIRST VOYAGE. 191 



76° 47' N. L. A signal tower was built on the extremity of the 
cape, and the land-measurer Guekin was sent to examine the 
neighbouring territory, and Chelyuskin to search for the mouth 
of the river Taimur. Chekin could carry out no geodetic work 
on account of mist. Chelyuskin again reported that the whole 
bay and the sea in the offing were, as far as the eye could reach, 
covered with unbroken ice. This induced Laptev to turn. After 
many difficulties among the ice, he came, on the ^^^ to the 
confluence of the river Bludnaya with the Chatanga. Here the 
winter was passed among a tribe of Tunguses living on the spot, 
who owned no reindeer, and were therefore settled. They used 
dogs as draught animals, and appear to have carried on a mode 
of life resembling that of the coast Chukches. 

In spring Chekin was sent to map the coast between the 
Taimur and the Pjasina. With thirty dog-sledges and accompanied 
by a nomad Tunguse with eighteen reindeer,^ he travelled over 
land to the Taimur river, followed its course to the sea, and then 
the coast towards the west of a distance of 100 versts. Scarcity 
of provisions and food for his dogs compelled him to turn. 
Laptev himself, convinced as he was of the impossibility of 
rounding the north point of Asia, now wished to carry back his 
vessel and the most of his stores to the Lena. After having with 
great danger and difficulty sailed down the river to the Polar Sea, 
reaching it on the ^ J^ the vessel on the ^Jth was beset and 
nipped between pieces of ice, according to a statement on a 
Russian map published in 1876 by the Hydrographical Depart- 
ment in St Petersburg, on the east coast of the Taimur Peninsula 
in 75° 30' N.L. Six days after there was a strong frost, so that 
thin ice was formed between the blocks of drift-ice. Some 

^ These all perished "for want of fodder." This, however, is impro- 
bable. For, in 1878, we saw Dumerous traces of these animals as far to 
the northward as Cape Chelyuskin, and very fat reindeer were shot both in 
1861 and 1873, on the Seven Islands, the northernmost of all the islands of 
the Old World, where vegetation is much poorer than in the regions now 
in question. 



192 THE VOYAGE OF THE VEGA. [chap. 

foolhardy fellows went over the weakly frozen together pieces of 
ice to land. Three days after Laptev himself and the rest of the 
men could leave the vessel. Several streams, still unfrozen, lying 
between them and their old winter station, however, prevented 
them from going further. They endeavoured to get protection 
from the cold by digging pits in the frozen earth and lying down 
in them by turns one after the other. The men were sent daily 
to the vessel to fetch as much as passible of the provisions left 
behind, but on the ^^ the ice again broke up, and carried the 
abandoned vessel out to sea. 

By the ^ ^^ the streams at last had frozen so much that the 
return journey could be begun to the former year's winter 
station distant more than 500 kilometres. The journey through 
the desolate tundra, perhaps never before trodden by the foot 
of man, was attended with extreme difficulties, and it was 
twenty-five days before Laptev and his men could again rest 
in a warmed hut and get hot food. Twelve men perished 
of cold and exhaustion. Laptev now determined to remain here 
during the winter and to go the following spring over the tundra 
to the Yenisej, where he hoped to find depdts with provisions and 
ammunition. Nor did he now remain inactive. For he did not 
wish to return until the siu^veys were complete. For want of 
vessels these were to be made by land* Such of the men as 
were not required were therefore sent in spring over the tundra 
to the Yenisej and the rest divided into three parties under 
Laptev himself, Chekin, and Chelyuskin, who were to survey 
each his portion of the coast between the Chatanga and the 
Fjasina and then meet at the Yenisej. These journeys were 
successfully accomplished ; the explorers travelled several times 
without, it would appear, excessive difficulty, over the desolate 
tundra between the Chatanga and the Taimur rivers, discovered 
Lake Taimur, and surveyed considerable stretches of the coast. 
But when they were all again assembled at Dudino, it was found 
that the north point of Asia had not yet been traveller! round and 



xni.] LASSINIUS* VOYAGE. 193 



sarreyed. This was done in 1742 by Chelyuskin in the 

course of a new sledge journey, of which the particulars 

are only incompletely known, evidently because Chelyuskin's 

statement, that he had reached the northernmost point of 

Asia, was doubted down to the most recent times. After the 

voyage of the Vega, however, there can be no more doubt on 

this point.^ 

5. Voyages froni the Lena Eastward, — During these Lieutenant 

Lassinius and after his death Lieutenant Dmitri Laptev had the 

eominaiid. A double sloop was built at Yakutsk for the voyage 

of T/assinius. As I have already mentioned, he left this town, 

accompanied by several cargo-boats, at the same time as Pron- 

tschischev, and both sailed together down the Lena to its mouth. 

Lassinius was able to sail to the eastward as early as the V^^ 
August. Four days after he came upon so much drift-ice that 

he was compelled to lie to at the mouth of the river, 120 versts 
to the east of the easternmost mouth-arm of the Lena. Here 
abundance of driftwood was met with, and the stock of pro- 
visions appears also to have been large, but notwithstanding this, 
scurvy broke out during the winter. Lassinius himself and most 
of his men died. On being informed of this, Behring sent a 
relieving party, consisting of Lieutenant Chebbinin and fourteen 
men to Lassinius' winter quarters. On their arrival on the y th 
June they found only the priest, the mate, and seven sailors 
alive of the fifty-three men who had started with Lassinius the 
forgoing year from Yakutsk. These too were so ill that some 
of them died during the return journey to Yakut-sk. Dmitri 
Laptev and a sufficient number of men, were sent at the same 

* Wrangel, i. pp. 48 and 72. Of the journey round the northernmost 
(loint of Asia, Wrangel eaye : — "Von der Tajmur-Miindung bis an das Kap 
des heiligen Faddej konnte die Kiiste nicht beschifft werden, und die 
Anfnahnie, die der Steuermann Tschemokssin (Chelyuskin) auf dem £ise 
in Nartcn vomahm, ist so oberflScblich und unbestimmt, dass die eigent- 
liche Lage dee nordostlichen oder Tajmiir-Kaps, welches die nordlichste 
S^itse Asiens ausmacht, noch gar nicht ausigemittelt ist." 

VOL. 11. 



194 THE VOYAGE OF THE VEGA. [chap. 

time to take possession of the ship and renew the attempt to sail 
eastwards. He went to sea on the |^^; At first he had to 
contend with serious obstacles from ice, and when at last he 
reached open water he thought himself compelled to turn on 
account of the advanced season of the year. On the ^|5S ^® 
came again to the Bychov mouth-arm of the Lena, up which he 
found it diflScult to make his way on account of the many 
unknown shoals. On the y th September the river was frozen 
over. He wintered a little distance from the mouth ; and now 
again scurvy made its appearance, but was cured by constant 
exercise in the open air and by a decoction of cedar cones. In 
a report sent from this place, Dmitri Laptev declared that it was 
quite impossible to round the two projecting promontories 
between the Lena and the Indigirka, Capes Borchaja and 
Svjatoinos, because, according to the unanimous statement of 
several Yakuts living in the region, the ice there never melts or 
even loosens from the beach. With Behring's permission he 
travelled to St. Petersburg to lay the necessary information 
before the Board of Admiralty. The Board determined that 
another attempt should be made by sea, and, if that was 
unsuccessful, that the coast should be isurveyed by means of 
land journeys. 

It is now easy to see what was the cause of the unfortunate 
issue of these two attempts to sail to the eastward. The explorers 
had vessels which were unsuitable for cruising, they turned too 
early in the season, and in consequence of their unwillingness to 
go far from land they sailed into the great bays east of the Lena, 
from which no large river carries away the majsses of ice that 
have been formed there during the winter, or that have been 
drifted thither from the sea. Dmitri Laptev and his companions 
besides appear to have had a certain dislike to the commission 
intrusted to them, and, diflFering from Deschnev, they thus 
wanted the first condition of success — the fixed conviction of 
the possibility of attaining their object. 



xm.] LAPTEV'S SECOND AND THIRD VOYAGES. 196 

By order of the Board of Admiralty Dmitri Laptev at all 
events began his second voyage, and .now falsified his own 
prediction, by rounding the two capes which he believed to be 
always surrounded by unbroken ice. After he had passed them 
his vessel was frozen in on the V^l^ September. Laptev had no 
idea at what point of the coast he was, or how far he was from 
laud. He remained in this unpleasant state for eleven days, at 
the dose of which one of the mates who had been sent out from 
the vessel in a boat on the "^f^' returned on foot over the ice 

sin Aug. 

and reported that they were not far from the mouth of the 
Lidigirka. Several Yakuts had settled on the neighbouring 
coast, where was also a Russian simovie. Laptev and his men 
wintered there, and examined the surrounding country. The 
surveyor Kindakov was sent out to map the coast to the Kolyma. 
Among other things he observed that the sea here was very 
shallow near the shore, and that driftwood was wanting at the 
mouth of the Indigirka, but was found in large masses in the 
interior, 30 versts from the coast. 

The following year, 1740, Laptev repaired as well as he could 
his vessel, which had been injured during the voyage of the 
preceding year, and then went again to sea on the ^J^^'. On 
the ^^ August he passed one of the Bear Islands, fixing its 
latitude at 71° 0'. On the f|th August, when Great Cape 
Baranov was reached, the progress of the vessel was arrested by 
masses of ice that extended as far as the eye could reach. 
Laptev now turned and sought for winter quarters on the 
Kolyma. On the y th July, 1741, this river became open, and 
Laptev went to sea to continue his voyage eastwards, but did 
not now succeed in rounding Great Cape Baranov. He was now 
folly convinced of the impossibility of reaching the Anadyr by 
sea, on which account he determined to penetrate to that river 
by land in order to survey it. This he did in the years 1741 
and 1742. Thus ended the voyages of Dmitri Laptev, giving evi- 
dence if not of distinguished seamanship, of great perseverance, 

2 



196 THE VOYAGE OF THE VEQA. [chap. 



undaunted resolution, and fidelity to the trust committed to 
liim.^ 

6. Voyage for the purpose of exploring and surveying the coast 
of America, — For this purpose Behring fitted out at Okotsk two 
vessels, of which he himself took the command of one, St. Paul, 
while the other, St, Peter, was placed under Chibikov. They 
left Okotsk in 1740, and being prevented by shoal water firom 
entering Bolschaja Beka, they both wintered in Avatscha Bay, 
whose excellent haven was called, from the names of the ships, 
Port Peter-Paul. On the ^^ June they left this haven, the 
naturalist Qeorg WiLHELM Steller having first gone on board 
Behring's and the astronomer Louis DE L'ISLE de la Croyere 
Chirikov's vessel. The course was shaped at first for the S.S.E., 
but ajpberwards, when no land could be discovered in this 
direction, for the N.E. and E. During a storm on the ^^/^ the 
vessels were separated. On the y|th July Behring reached the 
coast of America in 58® to 59* N.L. A short distance from the 
shore Steller discovered here a splendid volcano, which was 
named St. Elias. The coast was inhabited, but the inhabitants 
fled when the vessel approached. From this point Behring 
wished to sail in a north-westerly direction to that promontory 
of Asia which formed the turning-point of his first voyage. It 
was however only with diflficulty that in the almost constant fog 
the peninsula of Alaska could be rounded and the vessel could 
sail forward among the Aleutian island groups. Scurvy now 
broke out among the crew, and the commander himself suffered 

^ Wrangel, i. p. 62. I have sketched the voyages between the White Sea 
and the Kolyma, principally after Engelhardf s German translation of Wran- 
gePs Travels. It is, unfortunately, in many respects defective and confused, 
especially with respect to the sketch of Chariton Laptev and his followers, 
sledge journeys, undertaken in order to survey the coast between the 
Chatanga and the Pjasina. Miiller mentions these journeys only ia passing. 
Wrangel gives as sources for his sketch (i. note at p. 38) Memoirs of the 
Russian Admiralty ^ also the original journals of the journeys. Chelyuskin 
he calls Chemokssin. 



XI1I.J DEATH OF BEHRING. 197 



severely from it, on which account the command was mainly in 
the hands of Lieut. Waxel. At an island the explorers came 
mto contact with the natives, who at first were quite friendly, 
until one of them w^ offered brandy. He tasted the liquor, and 
was thereby so terrified that no gifts could calm his uneasiness. 
On this account those of the crew who were on land were 
ordered to come on board, but the savages wished to detain 
their guests. At last the Russians were set free, but a Koryak 
whom they had taken with them as an interpreter was kept 
behind. In order to get him set at liberty, Waxel ordered two 
musket salvos to be fired over the heads of the natives, with the 
result that they all fell flat down from fright, and the Koryak 
had an opportunity of making his escape. Now the fire-water 
is a liquor in great request among these savages, and they are 
not frightened at the firing of salvos of musketry. 

During the following months Behring's vessel diifted about 
without any distinct plan, in the sea between Alaska and Kam- 
chatka, in nearly constant fog, and in danger of stranding on 
some of the many unknown rocks and islands which were passed. 
On the 5th November the vessel was anchored at an island 
afterwards called Behring Island. Soon however a great wave 
arose which threw the vessel on land and crushed it against the 
rocky coast of the island. Of the wintering there, which, through 
Steller's taking part in it, became of so great importance for 
natural history, I shall give an account further on in connection 
with the narrative of our visit to Behring Island. Here I shall 
only remind the reader that Behring died of scurvy on the ^ th 
December, and that in the course of the voyage great part of his 
crew fell a sacrifice to the same disease. In spring the survivors 
built a new vessel out of the fragments of the old, and on the 
l^th of August they sailed away from the island where they had 
undergone so many sufferings, and came eleven days after to a 
haven on Kamchatka. 

After parting from Behring, Chirikov on the J4*h July sighted 



198 THE VOYAGE OF THE VEGA. [chap. 

the coast of America in 5ff* N.L. The mate Abraham Demen- 
TIEV was then sent ashore in the longboat, which was armed with 
a cannon and manned by ten well-armed men. When he did not 
return, another boat was sent after him. But this boat too did 
not come back. Probably the boats' crews were taken prisoners 
and killed by the Indians. After making another attempt to 
find his lost men, Chiiikov determined to return to Kamchatka. 
He first sailed some distance northwards along the coast of 
America without being able to land, as both the vessel's boats 
were lost. Great scarcity of drinking-water was thus occasioned, 
which was felt the more severely as the return voyage was very 
protracted on account of head-winds and fog. During the voyage 
twenty-one men perished, among them de Tlsle de la Croyfere, 
who died, as is said often to be the case with scurvy patients on 
board ship, while he was being carried fi-om his bed up on deck 
to be put on land.^ 

The voyages of Behring and Chirikov, attended as they were by 
the sacrifice of so many human lives, gave us a knowledge of the 
position of North-western America in relation to that of North- 
eastern Asia, and led to the discovery of the long volcanic chain 
of islands between the Alaska peninsula and Kamchatka. 

7. Voyages to Japan, — For these Captain Spangberg ordered 
a hucker, the Erkeengeln Michael, and a double sloop, the 
NadescMa, to be built at Okotsk, the old vessel Gabriel being 
at the same time repaired for the same purpose. Spangberg 
himself took command of the Michael, that of the double sloop 
was given to Lieutenant Walton, and of the Gabriel to Midship- 
man Cheltinga. Drift-ice prevented a start until midsummer, 
and on that account nothing more could be done the first year 
(1738) than to examine the Kurile Islands to the 46th degree 
of latitude. From this point the vessels returned to Kamchatka, 

^ In this account of Behring's and Chirikov* s voyages, I have followed 
Muller (iii. pp. 187-268). More complete original accounts of Behring's 
voyage are quoted further on in the sketch of our visit to Behring Island. 



xiii.] SPANGBERG'S VOYAGE TO JAPAN. 199 



where they wmtered at Bolschaja Reka. On the ^r^, 173 9, 
Spangherg with his little fleet again left this haven. All the 
vessels kept together at first, until in a violent storm attended 
with fog Spangherg and Cheltinga were parted from Walton. 
Both made a successful voyage to Japan and landed at several 
places, being always well received by the natives, who appeared 
to be very willing to have dealings with the foreigners. During 
the return voyage Spangherg landed in 43° 50' N.L. on a large 
island north of Nippon. Here he saw the Aino race, enigmatical 
as to its origin, distinguished by an exceedingly abundant growth 
of hair and beard which sometimes extends over the greater part 
of the body. Spangherg returned to Okotsk on the ^^J^\ 
Walton sailed along the coast in a southerly direction to 33° 48' 
N-L. Here was a town with 1,500 houses, where the Russian sea- 
farers were received in a very friendly way even in private houses. 
Walton subsequently landed at two other places on the coast, 
returning afterwards to Okotsk,where he anchored on the ^|tI^~^'.^ 
The very splendid results of Spangberg's and Walton's voyages 
by no means corresponded with the maps of Asia constructed 
by the men who were at that time leaders of the Petersburg 
Academy. Spangherg therefore during his return journey through 
Siberia got orders to travel again to the same regions in order 
to settle the doubts that had arisen. A new vessel had to 
be built, and with this he started in 1741 from Okotsk to 
his former winter haven in Kamchatka. Hence he sailed in 
1742 in a southerly direction, but he had scarcely passed the 
first of the Kurile Islands when the vessel became so leaky 
that he was compelled to turn. The second expedition of 
Spangherg to Japan was thus completely without result, a 
circumstance evidently brought about by the unjustified and 
offensive doubts which led to it, and the arbitrary way in 
which it was arranged at St. Petersburg. 

8. Journeys in the interior of Siberia by Gmelin, Miiller, 

1 Miiller, in. p. 164. 



200 THE VOYAGE OF THE VEGA. [chap. 



Steller, Kraacheninnikov, de Tlsle de la Croy&re, &c. — The 
voyages of these savwrUs have indeed formed an epoch in our 
knowledge of the ethnography and natural history of North Asia, 
but the north coast itself they did not touch. Ajx account of 
them therefore lies beyond the limits of the history which I 
have undertaken to relate here. 

The Great Northern Expedition by these journeys both by 
sea and land had gained a knowledge of the natural conditions 
of North Asia based on actual researches, had yielded pretty 
complete information regarding the boundary of that quarter 
of the globe towards the north, and of the relative position 
of the east coast of Asia and the west coast of America, had 
discovered the Aleutian Islands, and had connected the Russian 
discoveries in the east with those of the West-Europeans in 
Japan and China.^ The results were thus very grand and 
epoch-making. But these undertakings had also required very 
considerable sacrifices, and long before they were finished they 
were looked upon in no favourable light by the Siberian 
authorities, on account of the heavy burden which the transport 
of provisions and other equipment through desolate regions 
imposed upon the country. Nearly twenty years now elapsed 
before there was a new exploratory expedition in the Siberian 
Polar Sea worthy of being registered in the history of geography. 
This time it was a private person, a Yakutsk merchant, 
ScHALAUROV, who proposed to repeat Deschnev's famous voyage 
and to gain this end sacrificed the whole of his means and 
his life itself. Accompanied by an exiled midshipman, Ivan 
Bachoff, and with a crew of deserters and deported men, he 

^ It deserves to be noted as a literary curiosity that the famous French 
savant and geographer, Vivien de Saint Martin, in his work, Hiatoire de la 
Gdographie et des Decouvertes gdograpkiquesy Paris, 1873, does not say a single 
word regarding all those expeditions which form an epoch in our knowledge 
of the Old World. 



XIII. J SCHALAUROVS VOYAGE. 201 



sailed in 1760 from the Lena out into the Polar Sea, but 
came the first year only to the Yana, where he wintered. 
On the ^^^5S' ^*^^^y ^® continued his voyage towards the east, 
always keeping near the coast. On the yth September he 
rounded the dreaded Svjatoinos, sighting on the other side of 
the sound a high-lying land, LjachofiTs Island. At the Bear 
Islands, whither he was carried by a favourable wind over an 
open sea, he first met with drifb-ice, although, it appears, not 
in any considerable quantity. But the season was already £bu* 
advanced, and he therefore considered it most advisable to 
seek winter quarters at the mouth of the neigbouring Kolyma 
river. Here he built a spacious winter dwelling, which was 
surrounded by snow ramparts armed with cannon from the 
vessel; probably the whole house was not so large as a peasant's 
cabin at home, but it was at all events the grandest palace 
on the north coast of Asia, often spoken of by later travellers, 
and regarded by the natives with amazed admiration. In the 
neighbourhood there was good reindeer hunting and abundant 
fishing, on which account the winter passed so happily, that 
only one man died of scurvy, an exceedingly favourable state 
of things for that period. 

The following year Schalaurov started on the -l}^^, but 
calms and constant head-winds prevented him from passing 
Cape Schelagskoj, until he was compelled by the late season 
of the year to seek for winter quarters. For this he considered 
the neighbouring coast unsuitable on account of the scarcity 
of forests and driftwood : he therefore sailed back to the west- 
ward until after a great many mishaps he came again at last 
on the ^ September to the house which he had built the 
year before on the Kolyma. 

He proposed immediately to make a renewed attempt the 
following spring to reach his goal. But now his stores were 
exhausted, and the wearied crew refused to accompany him. 
In order to obtain funds for a new voyage he travelled to 



202 THE VOYAGE OF THE VEGA. [chap. 



Moscow, and by means of the assistance he succeeded in 
procuring there, he commenced in 1766 a voyage from which 
neither he nor any of his followers returned. CoXE mentions 
several things which tell in favour of his having actually rounded 
Cape Deschnev and reached the Anadyr. But Wrangel believes 
that he perished in the neighbourhood of Cape Schelagskoj. 
For in 1823 the inhabitants of that cape showed Wrangel's 
companion Matiuschkin a little ruinous house, built east of the 
river Werkon on the coast of the Polar Sea. For many years 
back the Ghukches travelling past had found there human bones 
gnawed by beasts of prey, and various household articles, which 
indicated that shipwrecked men had wintered there, and Wrangel 
accordingly supposes that it was there that Schalaurov perished 
a sacrifice to the determination with which he prosecuted his 
self-imposed task of sailing round the north-eastern promontory 
of Asia.i 

In order to ascertain whether any truth lay at the bottom 
of the view, generally adopted in Siberia, that the continent of 
America extended along the north coast of Asia to the neigh- 
bourhood of the islands situated there, Chicherin, Governor of 
Siberia, in the winter of 1763 sent a sergeant, Andrejev with 
dog-sledges on an ice journey towards the north. He succeeded 
in reaching some islands of considerable extent, which Wrangel, 
who always shows himself very sceptical with respect to the 
existence of new lands and islands in the Polar Sea, considers to 
have been the Bear Islands. Now it appears to be pretty certain 
that Andrejev visited a south-westerly continuation of the land 
named on recent maps " Wrangel Land,*' which in that case, like 
the corresponding part of America, forms a collection of mainy 

1 An account of Schalaurov is given by Coxe (Russian Discoveries, &c., 
1780, p. 323) and Wrangel (i. p. 73). That the hut seen by Matiusebkin 
actually belonged to Schalaurov appears to me highly improbable, for 
the traditions of the Siberian savages seldom extend sixty years back. 



mij ANDREJEV. 203 

iaige and small islands. Andrejev found everywhere numerous 
proofs that the islands which he visited had been formerly 
inhabited. Among other things he saw a large hut built of 
wood without the help of iron tools. The logs were as it were 
gnawed with teeth (hewed with stone axes), and bound together 
with thongs.^ Its position and construction indicated that the 
house had been built for defence ; it had thus been found im- 
possible in the desolate regions of the Polar Sea to avoid the 
discord and the strife which prevail in more southerly lands. 
To the east and north-east Andrejev thought he saw a distant 
land ; he is also clearly the true European discoverer of Wrangel 
Land, provided we do not consider that even he had a pre- 
decessor in the Cossack, Feodor Tatarinov, who according to 
the concluding words of Andrejev's journal appears to have 
previously visited the same islands. It is highly desirable that 
this journal, if still in existence, be published in a completely 
unaUered form-. How important this is appears from the fol- 
lowing paragraph in the instructions given to Billings : — " One 
Sergeant Andrejev saw from the last of the Bear Islands a large 
island to which they (Andrejev and his companions) travelled in 
dog-sledges. But they turned when they had gone twenty 
versts from the coast, because they saw fresh traces of a large 
number of men, who had travelled in sledges drawn by rein- 
deer." 2 

In order to visit the large land in the north-east seen by 
Andrejev, there was sent out in the years 1769, 1770, and 1771 
another expedition, consisting of the three surveyors, Leontiev, 
Lussov, and Puschkarev, with dog-sledges over the ice to the 
north-east, but they succeeded neither in reaching the land in 
question, nor even ascertaining with certainty whether it actually 
existed or not. Among the natives, however, the belief in it 



* Wrangel, i. p. 79. 

'^ Sauer, An Account^ &c., Appendix, p. 48. 



204 THE VOYAGE OF THE VEGA. . [chap. 

was maintained very persistently, and they even knew how to 
give names to the tribes inhabiting it. 

The New Siberian Islands, which previously had often been 
seen by travellers along the coast, were visited the first time in 
1770 by Ljachoff, who besides LjachofiTs island lying nearest 
the coast, also discovered the islands Maloj and Kotelnoj. On 
this account he obtained an exclusive right to collect mammoth 
tusks there, a branch of industry which since that time appears 
to have been carried on in these remote regions with no in- 
considerable profit. The importance of the discovery led the 
government some years after to send thither a land surveyor, 
Chvoinov,^ by whom the islands were surveyed, and some 
further information obtained regarding the remarkable natural 
conditions in that region. According to Chvoinov the ground 
there consists at many places of a mixture of ice and sand 
with mammoth tusks, bones of a fossil species of ox, of the 
rhinoceros, &c. At many places one can literally roll oflF the 
carpet-like bed of moss from the ground, when it is found that 
the close, green vegetable covering has clear ice underlying 
it, a circumstance which I have also observed at several places 
in the Polar regions. The new islands were rich not only in 
ivory, but also in foxes with valuable skins, and other spoils of 
the chase of various kinds. They therefore formed for a time 
the goal of various hunters' expeditions. Among these hunters 
may be named Sannikov, who in 1805 discovered the islands 
Stolbovoj and Faddejev, SiROVATSKOJ, who in 1806 discovered 
Novaya Sibir, and BjELKOV, who in 1808 discovered the small 
islands named after him. In the meantime disputes arose about 
the hunting monopoly, especially after Bjelkov and others 
petitioned for permission to establish on Kotelnoj Island a 
hunting and iradivg station, (?) ^ This induced RoMANZOV, then 

^ Sauer, loc, cit. p. 103, Recording to an oral communication by Ljachoff's 
follower Protodiakonov. 
"^ Compare Wrangel, i. p. 93. 



xul] HEDENSTROM'S expeditions. 205 



Chancellor of Russia, to order once more these distant territories 
to be explored by HedenstbOm,* a Siberian exile, who had 
fonnerly been secretary to some eminent man in St. Petersburg. 
He started in dog-sledges on the ^th March, 1809, from Ustjansk 
goii^ over the ice to Ljachoff's Island, and thence to Faddejev 
Island, where the expedition was divided into two parts. 
Hedenstrom continued his course to Novaya Sibir, the south 
coast of which he surveyed. Here he discovered among other 
things the remarkable " tree mountain,*' which I have before 
mentioned. His companions KoscHEViN and Sannikov ex- 
plored Faddejev, Maloj and LjachofiTs Islands. On Faddejev, 
Sannikov found a Yukagir sledge, stone skin-scrapers, and an 
axe made of mammoth ivory, whence he drew the conclusion 
that the island was inhabited before the Russians introduced 
iron among the savage tribes of Siberia. 

The explorations thus commenced were continued in 1810. 
The explorers started on the ^^ March from the mouth of the 
Indigirka, and affcer eleven days' journey came to Novaya Sibir. 
It had been Hedenstrom's original intention to employ reindeer 
and horses in exploring the islands, but he afterwards abandoned 
this plan, fearing that he would not find pasture for his draught 
animals. Both Hedenstrom and Sannikov believed that they 
saw from the north coast of the island bluish mountains on the 
horizon in the north-east. In order to reach this new land the 
former undertook a journey over the ice. It was so uneven, 
however, that in four days he could only penetrate about seventy 
versts. Here on the ^S^^h ^^ ^®^ ^^^'^ quite open water, 
which appeared to extend to the Bear Islands, i.e, for a distance 

^ Matthias Hedenstrom, Aulic Ck)uncillor, whose' name indicates that he 
was of Swedish bii'th, died at the village Hajdukovo, seven verets from 
Tomsk, on the 2nd October (20t!i September), 1845, at the age of sixty-five. 
Biographical notes regarding Hedenstrom are to be found in the Calendar 
for the Irkutsh government for the year 1865, pp. 57-60 ; I have not, 
however, succeeded in procuring this work, or in finding any other notices 
(f Hedenstrom's birthplace and life. 



206 THE VOYAGE OF THE VEGA. [chap. 

of about 500 versts. He therefore turned southward, and 
reached the mainland after forty-three days' very difficult 
travelling over the ice. During the journey Hedenstrom was 
saved from famine by his success in killing eleven Polar bears. 
A new attempt, which he made the same spring to reach with 
dog-sledges the unknown land in the north-east, was also without 
result in consequence of his meeting with broad, impassable 
" leads *' and openings in the ice, but even on this occasion he 
beUeved that he found many indications of the existence of 
an extensive land in the direction named. It was only with 
great difficulty that on the ^h May he succeeded in reach- 
ing the mainland at Cape Baranov over very weak ice. 

The same year Sannikov explored Kotelnoj Island, where he 
fell in with Bjelkov and several hunters, who had settled for the 
summer on the west coast of the island to collect mammoth tusks 
and hunt foxes there. He found also a Greek cross erected on 
the beach and the remains of a vessel, which, to judge from its 
construction and the hunting implements scattered about in the 
neighbourhood, appeared to have belonged to an Archangel 
hunter, who had been driven by wind or ice from Spitzbergen 
or Novaya Zemlya. 

Next stmimer " the Hedenstrom expeditions " were concluded 
with the survey of the north coast of Novaya Sibir by Chenizyn, 
and by a repetition of the attempt to penetrate from Cape 
Eamennoj over the ice in a north-easterly direction, this time 
carried out by the Cossack Tatarinov, and finally by a renewed 
exploration of Faddejev Island by Sannikov. Tatarinov found 
the ice, probably in the end of March, so thin, that he did not 
dare to proceed farther, and beyond the thin ice the sea was seen 
to be quite open. Sannikov first explored Faddejev Island. He 
thought he saw from the hills of the island a high land in the 
north-east, but when he attempted to reach it over the ice, he 
came upon open water twenty-five versts Irom land. He there- 
fore returned the same spring to XJstjansk in order there to 



nil.) SANNIKOV BEACHES EOTBLNOJ IBLAND. 207 

equip a caraTan consisting of twenty-three reindeer, irhich 
started on the ^ May to go over the ice to Eotelnoj Island, 
which could be reached only with great difficulty in consequence 
of " leads " in the ice and the large quantity of salt water which 
luul accumulated upon it. The reindeer were exceedingly 
enfeebled, but recovered rapidly on reaching land, so that 



Bon In IT0S In Busia, died In ISM in SI. Fsknbnrs. 

Saonikov was able under specially favourable circumstances to 
Diake a large number of interesting excursions, among others one 
across the island. He stated that on the heights in the interior 
of it there were found skulls and bones of horses, oxen, 
"buffaloes" (Ovibost) and sheep in so large numbers, that 



20ft THE VOYAQE OF THB VEGA. [chap. 

it vas evident that whole herds of gramiiuTora had lived there 
ia former times. Mammoth bones were also found eveiywhere 
on the island, whence Sannikov drew the concluaons, that all 
these animals had Uved at the same time, and that since then the 
climate had considerably deteriorated. These suppositions he 



considered to be further confirmed by the fact that large, 
partially petrified tree-stems were found scattered about on the 
island in still greater numbers than on Novaya Sibir.^ Besides 

' A very remarkable geological fact ia the number of troe-etenie in «ll 
etages of decay and pelrifoction, which are embedded in tlie rockfi and 



xiil] ANJOU and WRANGEL. 209 

he found here everywhere remains of old " Yukagir dwellings " ; 
the island had thus once heen inhabited. After Sannikov had 
fetched Chenitzyn from Faddejev Island, where he had passed 
the summer in great want of provisions, and ordered him, who 
was probably a greater adept at the pen, to draw up a report of 
his own interesting researches, he commenced his return journey 
on the ^^' ; and arrived at XJstjansk on the ^th November. 

It may be said that through Hedenstrom's and Sannikov's 
exceedingly remarkable Polar journeys, the titles have been 
written of many important chapters in the history of the 
former and recent condition of our globe. But the inquirer 
has hitherto waited in vain for these chapters being completed 
through new researches carried out with improved appliances- 
For since then the New Siberian Islands have not been visited 
by any scientific expedition. Only in 1823 Anjou, lieutenant 
in the Russian Navy, with the surgeon FlGURlN, and the mate 
Ilgin, made a new attempt to penetrate over the ice to the 
supposed lands in the north and north-east, but without success. 
Similar attempts were made at the same time from the Siberian 
mainland by another Bussian naval officer, Ferdinand von 
Whangel, accompanied by Dr. KC^er, midshipman Matiuschkin, 
and mate KOSMIN. They too were unsuccessful in penetrating 
over the ice far from the coast. Wrangel returned fully convinced 
that aU the accounts which were current in Siberia of the land 
he wished to visit, and which now bears the name of Wrangel 
Land, were based on legends, mistake, and intentional untruths. 
But Anjou and Wrangel did an important service to Polai* 

earthy strata of Siberia, having their origin all along from the Jurassic 
age till now. It appears as if Siberia, during the whole of this immense 
period of time, has not been subjected to any great changes in a purely 
geographical respect, whereas in Europe there have been innumerable 
alternations of sea and land, and alps have been formed and disappeared. 
The Siberians call the tree-stems found on the tundra far from the sea 
and rivers AdanCs loood^ to distinguish them from more recent sub-fossil 
trees, which they call Noah's toood, 
VOL. n. P 



J 



210 THE VOYAGE OF THE VEGA. [chap. 

research by showing that the sea, even in the neighbourhood of 
the Pole of cold, is not covered with any strong and continuous 
sheet of ice, even at that season of the year when cold reaches 
its maximum. By the attempts made nearly at the same time 
by Wrangel and Parry to penetrate farther northwards, the one 
from the north coasts of Siberia, and the other from those of 
Spitzbergen, Polar travellers for the first time got a correct idea 
how uneven and impassable ice is on a frozen sea, how little the 
way over such a sea resembles the even polished surface of a 
frozen lake, over which we dwellers in the north are accustomed 
to speed along almost with the velocity of the wind. Wrangels 
narrative at the same time forms an important source of know- 
ledge both of preceding journeys and of the recent natural 
conditions on the north coast of Asia, as is only too evident from 
the frequent occasions on which I have quoted his work in my 
sketch of the voyage of the Vega, 

It remains for me now to enumerate some voyages from 
Behring's Straits westward into the Siberian Polar Sea. 

1778 and 1779. — During the third of his famous circum- 
navigations of thie globe James Cook penetrated through 
Behring's Straits into the Polar Sea, and then along the north- 
east coast of Asia westwards to Irkaipij, called by him Cape 
North. Thus the honour of having carried the first seagoing 
vessel to this sea also belongs to. the great navigator. He 
besides confirmed Behring's determination of the position of 
the East Cape of Asia, and himself determined the. position 
of the opposite coast of America.^ The same voyage was 

^ The first European who visited the part of America lying right opposite 
to Asia was Schestakov^s companion, the surveyor Gvosdev. He crossed 
Behring^s Straits to the American side as early as 1730 {Mullerj iii. p. 131)^ 
and therefore ought properly to be considered as the discoverer of this 
sound. The north-westernmost part of America, Behring's Straits and the 
islands situated in it, are besides shown in Strahlenberg's map, which was 
made at least a decade before Gvosdev's voyage. There north-western 
America is delineated as a large island, inhabited by a tribe, the Pucho- 



XIII.] BILLINGS' EXPEDITION. 211 



approximately repeated the year aft^r Cook's death by his 
successor Charles Clarke, but without any new discoveries 
being made in the region in question. 

1785-94. — The success which attended Cook in his exploratory 
voyages and the information, unlooked for even by the Russian 
government, which Coxe's work gave concerning the voyages of 
the Russian hunters in the North Pacific, led to the equipment 
of a grand new expedition, having for its object the further 
exploration of the sea which bounds the great Russian Empire 
on the north and e€ist. The plan was drawn up by Pallas and 
Coxe, and the carrying out of it was entrusted to an English 
naval officer in the Russian service, J. Billings, who had taken 
part in Cook's last voyage. Among the many others who were 
members of the expedition, may be mentioned Dr. Mere, 
Dr. RoBECE, the secretary Martin Sauer, and the Captains 
Hall, Sarytchev, and Behring the younger, in all more 
than a hundred persons. The expedition was fitted out on a 
very large scale, but in consequence of Billings' unfitness for 
having the command of such an expedition the result by no 
means corresponded to what might reasonably have been expected. 
The expedition made an inconsiderable excursion into the Polar 

ekotskij who lived in a constant state of warfare with the Gitickieghi, who 
inhabited the islands in the sound. Wrangel Land is also shown in this 
remarkable map. In 1767, eleven years before Cook's voyage in the Polar 
Sea, the American side of Behring's Straits wns also visited by Lieut. Synd 
with a Buasian expedition, that started from Okotsk in 1764. In the short 
account of the voyage which is to be found in William Coxe*s Account of 
the Ru$8ian DUcoverieSy &c., London, 1780, p. 300, it is said expressly that 
Synd considered the coast on which he landed to belong to America. On 
Spd^s map, published by Ck>xe, the north part of the Behring Sea is 
enriched with a number of fictitious islands (St. Agaphonis, St. Myronis, 
St Titi, St Samnelis, and St. Andreae). As Synd, according to Sarytchev 
in the work quoted below, p. 11, made the voyage in a boat, it is probable 
that by these names islands were indicated which lay quite close to the 
coast and were not so far from land as shown in the map ; besides, the 
mountain-summits on St. Lawrence Island, which are separated by extensive 
low lands, may perhaps have been taken for separate islands. 

P 2 



212 THE VOYAGE OF THE VEGA. [chap 

Sea from the gth June to the ^2^; 1787, and in 1791 Billings 
sailed up to St. Lawrence Bay, from which he went over land 
with eleven men to Yakutsk. The rest of this lengthened 
expedition does not concern the regions now in question.* 

Among voyages during the century it remains to give account 
of those which have been made by Otto von Kotzebue, who 
during his famous circumnavigation of the globe in 1815—18, 
among other things also passed through Behring's Straits and 
discovered the strata, remarkable in a geological point of view, 
at Eschscholz Bay ; LCtke, who during his circumnavigation of 
the globe in 1826—29, visited the islands and sound in the 
neighbourhood of Chukotskoj-nos ; MoORE, who wintered at 
Chukotskoj-nos in 1848—49, and gave us much interesting 
information as to the mode of life of the NamoUos and 
Chukches; Kellet, who in 1849 discovered Kellet Land and 
Herald Island on the coast of Wrangel Land ; John Kodqebs, 
who in 1855 carried out for the American government much 
important hydrographical work in the seas on both sides of 
Behring's Straits ; Dallmann, who during a trading voyage in 
the Behring Sea landed at various points on Wrangel Land; Long, 
who in 1867, as captain of the whaling barque Nile, discovered the 
sound between Wrangel Land and the mainland (Long Sound) 
and penetrated from Behring's Straits westwards farther than 

^ Billings' voyage is described in Martin Sauer*s Account of a Geogra- 
phical and Astronomical Expedition to the Northern Parts of Asia, d:c^ by 
Commodore Joseph Billings, London, 1802, and Gavrila Saiychev's 
Acktjahrige Reise im nordlichen Siherien, auf dem Eismeere und dem nord- 
ostlicTien Ocean, Aus dem Eussischen Uhersetzt von J. JET. Busse, Leipzig, 
1805-1806. As interesting to our Swedish readers it may be mentioned 
that the Russian hunter Prybilov informed Sauer that a Swedish brigantine, 
Merkury coppered, carrying sixteen cannon, commanded by J. H. Ck>xe, in 
1788, cruised in the Behring Sea in order to destroy the Russian settlements 
there. They however, according to Prybilov's statement to Sauer, "did 
no damage, because they saw that we had nothing worth taking away. 
They instead gave us gifts, because they wore ashamed to offer violence 
to such poor fellows as we'* (Sauer, p. 213). 



xiil] voyages from BEHRING'S STRAITS WESTWARD. 213 

any of his predecessors ; Dall, who, at the same time that we 
are indebted to him for many important contributions to the 
knowledge of the natural conditions of the Behring Sea, also 
anew examined the ice-strata at Eschscholz Bay, and many 
others — but as the historical part of the sketch of the voyage of 
the Vega has already occupied more space than was calculated 
upon, I consider myself compelled with respect to the voyages 
of these explorers to refer to the numerous and for the most 
part accessible writings which have already been published 
regarding them.^ 

Was the Vega actually the first, and is she at the moment 
when this is being written, the only vessel fthat has sailed from 
the Atlantic by the north to the Pacific ? As follows from the 
above narrative, this question may perhaps be answered with 
considerable certainty in the affirmative, as it may also with 
truth be maintained that no vessel has gone the opposite way 

^ Otto von Kotzebue, EntdecJeungs-Eeise in die Sud-See und nach der 
Behrings Strasse^ Weimar, 1821 (Part III., ContributioDs in Natural 
History, by Adelbert von Chamisso). — Louis Choris, Voyage pittoresqtte 
autourdu mcnde, Paris, 1822. 

FrM^rik Liitk^, Voyage autour du monde, Paris, 1835-36. — F. H. von 
Kittlitz, Denkwurdigheiien einer Reise nock dem rtissischen Amerika^ nach 
Mikronesien und durch KamUchatha^ Gotha, 1858. 

Kellet, Voyage of H.M.S. '^Herald;' 1845-51, London, 1853 (Discovery 
of Herald Island and the east coast of Wrangel Land). 

W. H. Hooper, Ten Months among the Tents of the Tuski, London, 1853 
(Moore's wintering at Chukotskoj-nos). 

John Rodgers, Behring's Sea and Arctic Ocean, from Surveys of the 
North Pacific Surveying Expedition, 1855 (only charts). — W. Heine, Die 
Expedition in die Seen von China, Japan und Ochotsk, unter Commando von 
Commodore Colin Ringgold und Commodore John Rodgers, Leipzig, 1858 
(the expedition arrived at the result that Wrangel Land did not exist). 

(Lindemann) Wrangels Land im Jahre 1866, durch Kapiten Dallmann 
huacht (Deutsche Geograph. Bl&tter, B. iv. p. 54, 1881). 

Petermann, Entdeckung eines neuen Polar-Landes durch den amerikan, 
Cbpt Long, 1867 (Mittheil. 1868, p. 1).—Das neu-entdeckte Polar-Land, 
&c. (Mittheil. 1869, p. 26). 



214 THE VOYAGE OF THE VEGA. [chap. 



from the Pacific to the Atlantic.^ But the fictitious literature 
of geography at all events comprehends accounts of various 
voyages between those seas by the north passage, and I consider 
myself obliged briefly to enumerate them. 

The first is said to have been made as early as 1555 by a 
Portuguese, Mabtin Chacke, who affirmed that he had been 
parted from his companions f>y a west wind, and had been driven 
forward between various islands to the entrance of a aound 
which ran north of America in 59° N.L. ; finally that he had 
come S.W. of Iceland, and thence sailed to Lisbon, arriving 
there before his companions, who took the " common way," ix. 
south of Africa. In 1579 an English pilot certified that he had 
read in Lisbon in 1567 a printed account of this voyage, which 
however he could not procure afterwards because all the copies 
had been destroyed by order of the king, who considered that 
such a discovery would have an injurious effect on the Indian 
trade of Portugal (Purchas, iii. p. 849). We now know that 
there is land where Chacke's channel was said to be situated, 
and it is also certain that the sound between the continent of 
America and the Franklin archipelago lying much farther to the 
north was already in the sixteenth century too much filled with 
ice for its being possible that an account of meeting with ice 
could be omitted from a true sketch of a voyage along the north 
coast of America. 

In 1588 a still more remarkable voyage was said to have been 
made by the Portuguese, Lorenzo Ferrer Maldonado. He is 
believed to have been a cosmographer who among other things 
concerned himself with the still unsolved problem of making a 

* It ought to be remembered that the voyage of the distinguished Arctic 
explorer, McCliire, carried out with so much gallantry and admirable per- 
severance, from the Pacific to the Atlantic along the north coast of 
America, took place to no inconsiderable extent by sledge journeys over the 
ice, and that no English vessel has ever sailed by this route from the one 
sea to the other. The North-west Passage has thus never been accomplished 
by a vessel. 



iiil] MALDONADOS fictitious VOYAGE. 216 



compass free from variation, and with the question, very difficult 
in his time, of finding a method of determining the longitude 
at sea (see the work of Amoretti quoted below, p. 38). Of his 
imi^inary voyage he has written a long narrative, of which a 
Spanish copy with some drawings and maps was found in a 
library at Milan. The narrative was published in Italian and 
French translations by the superintendent of the library. Chevalier 
Cablo Amoretti,^ who besides added to the work a number of 
his own learned notes, which however do not give evidence of 
experience in Arctic waters. The same narrative has since been 
published in English by J. Barrow I A Chronological History of 
Voyages into the Arctic Regions, &c., London, 1818. App. p. 24.) 
The greater part of Maldonado's report consists of a detailed 
plan as to the way in which the new sea route would be used and 
fortified by the Spanish-Portuguese government.^ The voyage 
itself is referred to merely in passing. Maldonado says that in 
the beginning of March he sailed from Newfoundland along the 
north coast of America in a westward direction. Cold, storm, 
and darkness, were at first very inconvenient for navigation, but 
at all events he reached without difficulty " Anian Sound," which 
separates Asia from America. This is described in detail. Here 
various ships were met with prepared to sail through the sound, 
laden with Chinese goods. The crews appeared to be Russian 
or Hanseatic. Conversation was carried on with them in Latin. 
They stated that they came from a very large town, situated a 
little more than a hundred leagues from the sound. In the 
middle of June Maldonado returned by the way he came to the 
Atlantic, and on this occasion too the voyage was performed 
without the least difficulty. The heat at sea during the return 
journey was as great as when it is greatest in Spain, and 

* Amorettii Viaggio del mare Atlantico al Pasifico per la via del Nord- 
Ovtsty &c. Fatto del capitano Lorenzo Ferrer Maldonado^ Vanno mdlxxxviii. 
Milano, 1811. 

' At the date of Maldonado's voyage Spain and Portugal were united. 



21G THE VOYAGE OF THE VEGA. [chap. 



meeting with ice is not mentioned. The banks of the river 
which falls into the haven at Anian Sound (according to 
Amoretti, identical with Behring's Straits) were overgrown with 
very large trees, bearing fruit all the year round : among the 
animals met with in the regions seals are mentioned, but also 
two kinds of swine, buflfaloes, &c. All these absurdities show 
that the whole narrative of the voyage was fictitious, having 
been probably written with the view of thereby giving more 
weight to the proposal to send out a north-west expedition from 
Portugal, and in the full behef that the supposed sound actually 
existed, and that the voyage along the north coast of America 
would be as easy of accompHshment as one across the North 
Sea.^ The way in which the icing down of a vessel is described 
indicates that the narrator himself or his informant had been 
exposed to a winter storm in some northern sea, probably at 
Newfoundland, and the spirited sketch of the sound appears to 
have been borrowed from some East Indian traveller, who had 
been driven by storm to northern Japan, and who in a channel 
between the islands in that region believed that he had dis- 
covered the fabulous Anian Sound. 

Of a third voyage in 1660 a naval officer named DE LA 
Madeleine gave in 1701 the following short account, probably- 
picked up in Holland or Portugal, to Count DE Pontchartrin : 
" The Portuguese, David Melquer, started from Japan on the 
14th March, 1660, with the vessel le Pdre it&mel, and following 
the coast of Tartary, i.e, the east coast of Asia, he first sailed 

1 The narratives of the Russian voyagers in the Polar Seas bear a quite 
different stamp. Details are seldom wanting in these, and they correspond 
with known facts, and the discoveries made are of reasonably modest 
dimensions. 1 therefore consider, as I have said already, that the doubts 
of the trustworthiness of Deschnev, Chelyuskin, Andrejev, Hedenstrom, 
Sannikov, &c., are completely unfounded, and it is highly desirable that 
all journals of Russian explorers in the Polar Sea yet in existence be 
published as soon as possible, and not in a mutilated shape, but in a 
complete and unaltered form. 



xm.] BUACHE'S POLAR MAP. 217 

north to 84** N.L. Thence he shaped his course between 
Spitzbeigen and Greenland^ and passing west of Scotland and 
Ireland came again to Oporto in Portugal." M. de la Madeline's 
narrative is to be found reproduced in M. Buache's excellent 
geographical paper " Sur les diffdrentes id^es qii'on a eues de la 
travers^ de la M^re Glaciale arctique et sur les communications 
ou jonctions qu'on a suppos^es entre diverses rivieres " (Histoire 
de rAcodUmie, Ann^ 1754, Paris, 1759, Memoires, p. 12). The 
paper is accompanied by a Polar map constructed by Buache 
himself, which, though the voyage which led to its construc- 
tion was clearly fictitious, and though it also contains many 
other errors — ^for instance, the statement that the Dutch 
penetrated in 1670 to the north part of Taimur Land — ^is yet 
very valuable and interesting as a specimen of what a learned 
and critical geographer knew in 1754 about the Polar regions. 
That Melguer's voyage is fictitious is shown partly by the ease 
with which he is said to have gone from the one sea to the 
other, partly by the fact that the only detdil which is to be 
found in his narrative, viz. the statement that the coast of 
Tartary extends to 84** N.L., is incorrect. 

All these and various other similar accounts of north-east, 
north-west, or Polar passages achieved by vessels in former times 
have this in common, that navigation from the one ocean to the 
other across the Polar Sea is said to have gone on as easily as 
drawing a line on the map, that meeting with ice and northern 
animals of the chase is never spoken of, and finally that every 
particular which is noted is in conflict with the known geo- 
graphical, climatal, and natural conditions of the Arctic seas. All 
these narratives therefore can be proved to be fictitious, and to 
have been inveiited by persons who never made any voyages in 
the true Polar Seas. 

The Vega is thus the first vessel that has penetrated by the 
north from one of the great world-oceans to the other. 



CHAPTER XIV. 

Passage through Behring's Straits — Arrival at Nunamo — Scarce species of 
seal — Rich vegetation — Passage to America — State of the ice — Port 
darence — The Eskimo — Return to Asia — Konyam Bay — Natural con- 
ditions there — The ice breaks up in the interior of Konyam Bay — St. 
Lawrenc3 Island — Preceding visits to the Island — Departure to Behring 
Island. 

After we had passed the easternmost promontory of Asia, 
the course was shaped first to St. Lawrence Bay, a not incon- 
siderable Qord, which indents the Chukch peninsula a little 
south of the smallest part of Behring's Straits. It was my 
intention to anchor in this i^ord as long as possible, in order 
to give the naturalists of the Vega expedition an opportunity 
of making acquaintance with the natural conditions of a part 
of Chukch Land which is more favoured by nature than the 
bare stretch of coast completely open to the winds of the Polar 
Sea, which we hitherto had visited. I would willingly have 
stayed first for some hours at Diomede Island, the market-place 
famed among the Polar tribes, situated in the narrowest part of 
the Straits, nearly half-way between Asia and America, and 
probably before the time of Columbus a station for traffic be- 
tween the Old and the New Worlds. But such a delay would 
have been attended with too great difficulty and loss of time in 
consequence of the dense fog which prevailed here on the 
boundary between the warm sea free from drift-ice and the cold 
sea filled with drift-ice. 



CHAP. XIV.] SCARCE SPECIES OF SEAL. 21i) 

Even the high mountains on the Asiatic shore were atiU 
wrapped in a thick mist, from which only single mountain- 
sununits now and then appeared. Next the vessel large 
fields of drift-ice were visible, on which here and there flocks 
of a beautifully marked species of seal {Histriopkoca /asciata, 
Zimm.) had settled. Between the pieces of ice sea-birds 
swarmed, mostly beloi^^g to other species than those which 



Hitlriiipkoai/iuclala, Zlinid. 

are met with in the European Polar seas. The ice was fortu- 
nately so broken up that the Vega could steam forward at full 
speed to the neighbourhood of St. Lawrence Bay, where the 
coast was surrounded by some more compact belts of ice, which 
however were broken through with ease. First, in the mouth 
of the (jord itself impenetrable ice was met with, completely 
blocking the splendid haven of St. Lawrence Bay. The Vega 



220 THE VOYAGE OF THE VEGA. [chap. 



was^ therefore, compelled to anchor in the open road off the 
village Nunamo. But even here extensive ice-fields, though 
thin and rotten, drifted about ; and long, but narrow, belts of 
ice passed the vessel in so large masses that it was not advisable 
to remain longer at the place. Our stay there was therefore 
confined to a few hours. 

During the course of the winter Lieutenant Nordquist en- 
deavoured to collect from the Chukches travelling past as 
complete information as possible regarding the Chukch villages 
or encampments which are found along the coast between 
Chaun Bay and Behring's Straits. His informants always 
finished their list with the village Ertryn, situated west of 
Cape Deschnev, explaining that farther east and south there 
lived another tribe, with whom they indeed did not stand in 
open enmity, but who, however, were not to be fully depended 
upon, and to whose villages they therefore did not dare to 
accompany any of us.^ This statement also corresponds, as 
perhaps follows from what I have pointed out in the preceding 
chapter, with the accounts commonly found in books on the 
ethnography of this region. While we steamed forward 
cautiously in a dense fog in the neighbourhood of Cape 
Deschnev, twenty to thirty natives came rowing in a large 
skin boat to the vessel. Eager to make acquaintance with 
a tribe new to us, we received them with pleasure. But when 
they climbed over the side we found that they were pure 

^ The enmity appeared, however, to be of a very passive nature and by 
no means depending on any tribal dislike, bat only arising from the inhab- 
itants of the villages lying farthest eastward being known to be of a 
quarrelsome disposition and having the same reputation for love of fight- 
ing as the peasant youths in some villages in Sweden. For Lieut. Hooper, 
who during the winter 1848-9 made a journey in dog-sledges from Chukot- 
skoj-nos along the coast towards Behring^s Straits says that the inhabitants 
at Cape Deschnev itself enjoyed the same bad reputation among their 
Namollo neighbours to the south as among the Chukches living to the 
westward. "They spoke another language/' Possibly they were pure 
Eskimo. 



XIV.] THE POPULATION OF NORTH-EASTERN ASIA. 221 

Chukches, some of them old acquaintances^ who during winter 
had been guests on board the Vega. " Ankali " said they, with 
evident contempt, are first met with farther beyond St. Lawrence 
Bay. When we anchored next day at the mouth of this bay 
we were immediately, as usual, visited by a large number of 
natives, and ourselves visited their tents on land. They still 
talked Chukch with a limited mixture of foreign words, lived 
in tents of a construction differing somewhat from the Chukches', 
and appeared to have a somewhat different cast of countenance. 
They themselves would not allow that there was any national 
difference between them and thie old warrior and conqueror 
tribe on the north coast, but stated that the race about 
which we inquired were settled immediately to the south. 
Some days after we anchored in Konyam Bay (64«° 4y N.L., 
172** 53' W.L. from Greenwich). We found there only pure 
reindeer-owning Ohukches; there was no coast population 
living by himting and fishing. On the other hand, the 
inhabitants near bur anchorage off St. Lawrence Island 
consisted of Eskimo and NamoUo. It thus appears as if 
a great part of the Eskimo who inhabit the Asiatic side 
of Behring's Straits, had during recent times lost their own 
nationality and become fused with the Chukches. For it is 
certain that no violent expulsion has recently taken place 
here. It ought besides to be remarked that the name OnJdlon 
which Wrangel heard given to the old coast population driven 
out by the Chiikches is evidently nearly allied to the word 
Ankaii, with which the reindeer-Chukch at present distin- 
guishes the coast-Chukch, also that, in the oldest Russian 
accounts of Schestakov's and Faulutski's campaigns in these 
regions, there never is any mention of two different tribes 
living here. It is indeed mentioned in these accoimts that 
among the slain Chukches there were found some men with 
perforated lips, but probably these were Eskimo from the 
other side of Behring's Straits, previously taken prisoners by 



222 THE VOYAGE OF THE VEGA. [ohap. 



the Chukclies, or perhaps merely Eskimo who had been 
paying a friendly visit to the Chukches and who had taken 
part as volunteers in their war of freedom. It therefore 
appears to me to be on the whole more probable that the 
Eskimo have migrated from America to Asia, than that, as 
some authors have supposed, this tribe has entered America 
from the west by Behring's Straits or Wrangel Land. 

The tent-village Nimamo, or, as Hooper writes, "Noonah- 
mone,'' does not lie low, like the Chukch villages we had 
formerly seen, on the sea-shore, but pretty high up on a 
cape between the sea and a river which debouches immediately 
to the south-west of the village, and now during the snow- 
melting season was much flooded. At a short distance from 
the coast the land was occupied by a very high chain of 
mountains, which was split up into a 'number of summits and 
whose sides were formed of immense stone moxmds distributed 
in terraces. Here a large number of marmots and lagomys 
had their haunt. The lagomys, a species of rodent that 
does not occur in Sweden, of the size of a large rat, is remark- 
able for the care with which in summer it collects great stores 
for the winter. The village consisted of ten. tents built without 
order on the first high strand bank. The tents differed some- 
what in construction from the common Chukch tents, and as 
drifb-wood appears to be met with on the beach only in limited 
quantity, whale-bones had been used on a very large scale in 
the frame of the tent. Thus, for instance, the tent-covering 
of seal-skin was stretched downwards over the ribs or lower 
jawbones of the whale which were fixed in the ground like 
poles. These were united above with slips of whale-bones, 
from which other slips of the same sort of bones or of whale- 
bone rose to the summit of the tent, and finally, to prevent 
the blast from raising the tent-covering from the ground, its 
border was loaded with masses of large heavy bones. Eleven 
shoulder-blades of the whale were thus used round a single 



xiv.] USE OF WHALE-BONES. 223 



tent. In the absence of drift-wood, whale and seal bones 
drenched in train-oil are also used as fuel in cooking in the 
open air during summer ; a large curved whale rib was placed 
over the fire-place to serve as a pot-holder ; the vertebrae of 
the whale were used as mortars ; the entrances to the blubber- 
cellars were closed with shoulder-blades of the whale ; hollowed 
whale-bones were used as lamps ; slices of whale-bone or pieces 
of the under-jaw and the straighter ribs were used for shoeing 
the sledges, for spades and ice-mattocks, the different parts 
of the implement being bound together with whale-bone 
fibres, &c.^ 

Masses of black seal-flesh, and long, white, fluttering strings 
of inflated intestines, were hung up between the tents, and in 
their interior there were everywhere to be seen bloody pieces 
of flesh, prepared in a disgusting way or lying scattered about, 
whereby both the dwellings and their inhabitants, who were 
occupied with hunting, had a more than usually disagreeble 
appearance. A pleasant interruption was formed by the heaps 
of green willow branches which were placed at the entrance 
of nearly every tent, commonly surrounded by women and 
children, who ate the leaves with delight. At some places 
whole sacks of Rhodiola and various other plants had been 
collected for food during winter. As distinctive of the Chukches 
here it may be mentioned in the last place that they were 
abundantly provided with European household articles, among 
them Remington guns, and that none of them asked for 
spirits. 

Most of the seals which were seen in the tents were the common 
Phoca hispida, but along with them we found several skins of 

* There is still in existence a sketch of a tribe, living far to the south on 
the coast of the Indian Sea, who at the tirae of Alexander the Great used 
the bones of the whale in a similar way. ^'They build their houses so 
that the richest among them take bones of the whale, which the sea casts 
up, and use them as beams ; of the larger bones they make their doors. 
Arrian, Historia Indica, XXIX. and XXX. 



THE VOYAGE OF THE VEGA. 



[chap. 



Sistriophoea fasdaia, Zimm., and I even succeeded, though with 
great difficulty, in inducing the Chukches to part with the 
skin and skull of this uncommon species, distinguished by 
its pecuhar marking. The natives appeared to set a special 
value on its skin, aud parted Trith it unvnllingly. We had 



\ 



\. 



//. 



^N 



ourselves, as I have already stated, seen during our ] 
from Behring's Straits a number of these seals on the ice- 
floes drifting south, but the limited time at our disposal did 
not permit us to hunt them. 



xiT.] NUNAMO. 225 



When we left Pitlekaj, vegetation there was still far from 
having reached its full development, but at Nunamo the strand- 
bank was gay with an exceedingly rich magnificence of colour. 
On an area of a few acres Dr. Ejellman collected here more than 
a hundred species of flowering plants, among wbich were a con- 
siderable number that he bad not before seen on the Cbukcb 
Peninsula. Space does not permit me to give another list of 
plants, but in order that the reader may have an idea of the 
great difference in the mode of growth which the same species 
may exhibit under the influence of different climatal conditions, I 
give here a drawing of the Alpine whitlow grass {Draha alpiruiy 
L.) from St. Lawrence Bay. It would not, perhaps, be easy to 
recognise in this drawing the species delineated on page 341 of 
vol. i. ; the globular form which the plant assumed on the 
shore of Cape Chelyuskin exposed to the winds of the Polar 
Sea, has here, in a region protected from them, completely 
disappeared. 

At tbe rocky headlands there were still, however, considerable 
snowdrifts, and from the heights we could see that considerable 
masses of ice were still drifting along the Asiatic side of 
Behring's Straits. During an excursion to the top of one of the 
neigbbouring mountains, Dr. Stuxberg found the corpse of a 
native laid out on a stone-setting of the form common among 
the Chukches. Alongside the dead man lay a broken percussion 
gun, spear^ arrows, tinder-box, pipe, snow-shade, ioe-sieve, and 
various otber things whicb the departed was considered to be in 
want of in tbe part of the Elysian fields set apart for Chukches. 
The corpse had lain on the place at least since tbe preceding 
summer, but the pipe was one of the clay pipes that I had 
caused to be distributed among the natives. It had thus been 
placed there long after the proper buriaL 

Anxious as I was to send off soon from a telegraph station 
some re-assuring lines to the home-land, because I feared that 
a general uneasiness had already begun to be felt for the fate of 
VOL. II. Q 



226 THE VOYAGE OF THE VEGA. [chap. 



the Vega, I would willingly have remained at this place, so 
important and interesting in a scientific point of view, at least for 
some days, had not the ice-belts and ice-fields drifting about in 
the ofiing been so considerable that if a wind blowing on land 
had risen unexpectedly, they might readily have been dangerous 
to our vessel, which even now was anchored in a completely 
open road, for the splendid haven situated farther in in 
St. Lawrence Bay was still covered with ice, and consequently 
inaccessible. On the afternoon of 21st July, accordingly, when 
all were assembled on board pleased and delighted with the 
results of the morning visit to land, I ordered the anchor to 
be weighed that the Vega might steam across to the American 
side of Behring's Straits. As in all the Polar seas of the 
northern hemisphere, so also here, the eastern side of the Straits 
was ice-bestrewn, the western, on the other hand, clear of ice. 
The passage was at all events a rapid one, so that by the after- 
noon of the 2ist July we were able to anchor in Port Clarence, 
an excellent haven south of the westernmost promontory of Asia, 
Cape Prince of Wales. It was the first time the Vega anchored 
in a proper haven; since on the 18th Augtist 1878 she left Actinia 
Haven o^ti Taimur Island, During the intermediate time 
she had been constantly anchored or moored in open roads 
without the least land shelter from sea, wind, and drift-ice. The 
vessel was, however, thanks to Captain Palander's judgment and 
thoughtfulness, and the ability of the oflScers and crew, still not 
only quite free from damage, but even as seaworthy as when she 
left the dock at Karlskrona, and we had still on board provisions 
for nearly a year, and about 4,000 cubic feet of coal. 

Towards the sea Port Clarence is protected by a long low 
sandy reef, between the north end of which and the land there 
is a convenient and deep entrance. There a considerable river 
falls into the interior of the harbour, the mouth of which widens 
to a lake, which is separated from the outer harbour by a sandy 
neck of land. This lake also forms a good and spaciousi harbour, 



XIV.] VISIT TO PORT CLARENCE. 227 



but its entrance is too shallow for vessels of any considerable 
draught. The river itself, on the contrary, is deep, and about 
eighteen kilometres from* its mouth flows through another lake, 
btxa the eastern shore of which rugged and shattered mountains 
rise to a height which I estimate at 800 to 1000 metres ; but it 
is quite possible that their height is twice as great, for in making 
such estimates one is liable to fall into error. South of the river 
and the harbour the land rises abruptly &om the river bank, 
which is from ten to twenty metres high. On the north side, on 
the other hand, the bank is for the most part low, but farther 
into the interior the ground rises rapidly to rounded hills from 
300 to 400 metres high. Only in the valleys and at other places 
where very large masses of snow had collected during the winter, 
were snow-drifts still to be seen. On the other hand, we saw no 
glaciers, though we might have expected to find them on the 
sides of the high mountains which bound the inner lake on the 
east- It was also clear that during the recent ages no widely 
extended ice-sheet was to be found here, for in the many 
excursions we made in different directions, among others up the 
river to the lake just mentioned, we saw nowhere any moraines, 
erratic blocks, striated rock-surfaces, or other traces of a past 
ice-age. Many signs, on the other hand, indicate that during 
a not very remote geological period glaciers covered considerable 
areas of the opposite American shore, and contributed to 
excavate the Qords there — Kolyutschin Bay, St. Lawrence Bay, 
Metschigme Bay, Konyam Bay, &c. 

When we appoached the American side we could see that the 
shore cliffs were formed of stratified rocks. I theiefore hoped 
to be able, at last, to make a rich collection of fossils, something 
that I had no opportunity of doing during the preceding part of 
the voyage. But I found, on reaching them, that the stratified 
rocks only consisted of crystalline schists without any traces of 
animal or vegetable remains. Nor did we find on the shore 
any whale-bones or any of the remarkable mammoth-bearing 



228 THE VOYAGE OF THE VEGA. [chap. xiv. 



ice-strata which were discovered in the bay situated immediately 
north of Behring's Straits, which was named after Dr. EscH- 
SCHOLZ, medical oflScer during Kotzebue's famous voyj^e.* 

Immediately after the anchor fell we were visited by several 
very large skin boats and a large number of kayaks. The 
latter were larger than the Greenlanders', being commonly in- 
tended for two persons, who sat back to back in the middle of 
the craft. We even saw boats from which, when the two 
rowers had stepped out, a third person crept who had lain 
^ almost hermetically sealed in the interior of the kayak^ 

\^ stretched on the bottom without the possibility of moving his 
limbs, or saving himself if any accident should happen. It 
appeared to be specially common for children to accompany 
their elders in kayak voyages in this inconvenient way. 

After the natives came on board a lively traffic commenced, 
whereby I acquired some arrow-points and stone fishing-hooka. 
Anxious to procure as abundant material as possible for 

* These strata were discovered during Kotzebue's circumnavigation of 
the globe {Entdechungs Reise, Weimar, 1821, i. p. 146, and ii. p. 170). 
The strand-bank was covered by an exceedingly luxuriant vegetable 
carpet, and rose to a height of eighty feet above the sea. Here the " rock," 
if this word can be used for a stratum of ice, was found to consist of pure 
ice, covered with a layer, only six inches thick, of blue clay and turf-earth. 
The ice must have been several hundred thousand years old, for on its 
being melted a large number of bones and tusks of the mammoth appeared, 
from which we may draw the conclusion that the ice-stratum was formed 
during the period in which the mammoth lived in these regions. This 
remarkable observalion has been to a certain extent disputed by later 
travellers, but its correctness has recently been fully confirmed by Dall. 
On the other hand, the extent to which the strong odour, which was 
observed at the place and resembled that of burned horns, arose from the 
decaying mammoth remains, is perhaps uncertain. Kotzebue fixed tlie 
latitude of the place at 66° 16' 36". During Beechey's voyage in 1827 tlie 
place was thoroughly examined by Mr. Collie, the medical officer of the 
expedition. He brought home thence a large number of the bones of the 
mammoth, ox, musk-ox, reindeer, and horse, which were described by the 
famous geologist Buckland (F. W. Beechey, Narrative of a Voyage to the 
Pacific and Behring^s Straits^ 1825-28. London, 1831, ii. Appendix). 



I Bird-dirt *ltli* 



(Ddi with pnlnti a[ iroD. il 



>p gtaM. one-ftuhlli. 



md n«phr1te. ont-ball 4. I 

Ini dut-polnt, ose-hiir. 8 

Qnlvtr, one-flgMh. 



230 THK VOYAGE OF THE VEGA. [chap. 

instituting a compaxison between the household articles of 
the Eskimo and the Chukches, I examined carefully the skin- 
bogs which the natives had with them. In doing so I picked 
out one thing after the other, while they did not object to me 
making an inventory. One of them, however, showed great 
unwillingness to allow me to get to the bottom of the sack, but 
this just made me curious to ascertain what precious thing was 



(After n photograph by h, Piliuuler.) 

concealed there. I was urgent, and went through the bag half 
with violence, until at last, in the bottom, I got a solution of 
the riddle — a loaded revolver. Several of the natives had also 
breechloaders. The oldest age with stone implements, and the 
most recent period with breechloaders, thus here reach hands 
one to the other. 



Tiv.] THE ESKIMO AT POBT CLARENCE. 231 

Many natives were evidently migrating to more northerly 
hunting-grounds and lishing places, perbapi^ also to the markelE 
and play-booths, which Dr. John Simpson describes in his well- 
known paper on the West Eskimo.^ Others had already pitched 
their sutnmer tents on the banks of the inner harbour, or of the 
river before mentioned. On the other hand, there was found in 



Altar > pbntognph b; L. Piiliaider.) 

the region only a small number of winter dwellings abandoned 
during the warm season of the year. The population consisted, 
as has been said, of Eskimo. They did not understand a word 
of Chukch. Among them, however, we found a Chukch woman, 

' Fwlhtr Paper* relative lo llie reeatt Arctic Erpedxtion, etc. Presented 
lo both HoiiseB of Parliament London, 1855, p. 917. 



232 THE VOYAGE OF THE VEGA. [chap. 

who stated that true ChukcheBwere found also on the American 
side, north of Behring's Straits. Two of the men spoke a httle 
English, one had even been at San Francisco, another at 
Honolulu. Many of their household articles reminded us of 
contact with American whalers, and justice demands the 
recognition of the fact that in opposition to what we commonly 
see stated, contact with men of civilised race appears to have 
heen to the advantage and improvement of the savj^e in an 
economical and moral point of view. Most of them now Uved 
in summer-tents of thin cotton cloth ; many wore European 



(AlUr pliotognplu bj h. PaUndn-.) 

clothes, others were clad in trousers of seal or reindeer-skin and 
a light, soft, often beautifully ornamented pesk of marmot skin, 
over which in rainy weather was worn an overcoat made of 
piece" of gut sewn tf^ther. The arrangement of the h^ 
resembled that of the Chukches. The women were tattooed with , 
some lines on the chin. Many of the men wore smalli 
moustaches, some even a scanty beard, while others had! 
attempted the American goatee. Most of them, but not all,| 
had two holes from six to seven millimetres in length, cut in the] 



XIV.] THE ESKIMO AT PORT CLARENCE. 233 



lips below the comers of the mouth. In these holes were worn 
large pieces of bone, glass, or stone (figure 9, page 237). But 
these ornaments were often removed, and then the edges of the 
large holes closed so much that the face was not much dis- 
figured. Many had in addition a similar hole forward in the 
lip. It struck me, however, that this strange custom was about 
to disappear completely, or at least to be Europeanised by the 
exchange of holes in the ears for holes in the mouth. An 
almost full-grown young woman had a large blue glass bead 
hanging from the nose, in whose partition a hole had been 
made for its suspension, but she was very much embarrassed and 
hid her head in a fold of maxusLspesk, when this piece of grandeur 
attracted general attention. All the women had long strings of 
beads in the ears. They wore bracelets of iron or copper, resem- 
bling those of the Chukches. The colour of the skin was not very 
dark, with perceptible redness on the cheeks, the hair black 
ind tallow-like, the eyes small, brown, slightly oblique, the 
face fiat, the nose small and depressed at the root. Most of 
the natives were of average height, appeared to be healthy and 
in good condition, and were marked neither by striking thinness 
nor corpulence. The feet and the hands were small. 

A certain elegance and order prevailed in their small tents, 
the floor of which was ^overed with mats of plaited plants. In 
many places vessels formed of cocoa-nut shells were to be seen, 
brought thither, like some of the mats, by whalers from the 
South Sea Islands. For the most part their household and 
hunting implements, axes, knives, saws, breechloaders, revolvers, 
&c., were of American origin, but they still used or preserved in 
the lumber repositories of the tent, bows and arrows, bird-darts, 
bone boat-hooks, and various stone implements. The fishing 
implements especially were made with extraordinary skill of 
coloured sorts of bone or stone, glass beads, red pieces of the 
feet of certain swimming birds, &c. The different materials 
were bound together by twine made of whalebone in such a 



UA 



CHAP, xivj THE ESKIMO AT PORT CLARENCE. 236 



maimer that they resembled large beetles, being intended for 
use in the same way as salmon-flies at home. 

Fire was got partly with steel, flint, and tinder, partly by 
means of the fire-drill. Many also used American lucifers. The 
bow of the fire-drill was often of ivory, richly ornamented with 
hunting figures of different kinds. Their tools were more 
el^ant, better carved and more richly coloured with graphite ^ 
and red ochre than those of the Chukches; the people were 
better off and owned a larger number of skin-boats, both 
kayaks and umiaks. This undoubtedly depends on the sea 
beii^ here covered with ice for a shorter time and the ice being 
thinner than on the Asiatic side, and the hunting accordingly 
being better. All the old accounts however agree in represent- 
ing that in former times the Chukches were recognised as a 
great power by the other savage tribes in these regions, but 
all recent observations indicate that that time is now past. A 
certain respect for them, however, appears still to prevail among 
their neighbours. 

1 Graphite must be found in great abundance on the Asiatic side of 
Behring'R Straits. I procured during winter a number of pieces, which had 
evidently been rolled in running water. Chamisso mentions in Rotzebue's 
Voyages (iii. p. 169) that he had seen this mineral along with red ochre 
among the inhabitants at St Lawrence Bay ; and Lieut. Hooper states in 
his work (p. 139), that graphite and red ochre are found at the village 
Oongwysac between Chukotskoj-nos and Behring's Straits. The latter 
colour was sold at a high price to the inhabitants of distant encamp- 
ments. These minerals have undoubtedly been used in the same way from 
time immemorial^ and they are probably, like flint and nephrite, among 
the few kinds of stone which were used by the men of the Stone Age. So 
far afi is known, graphite came first into use in Europe during the middle 
ages. A black-lead pencil is mentioned and delineated for the first time 
by Conrad Gessner in 1666. The rich but now exhausted graphite seam 
at Borrowdale, in England, is mentioned for the first time by Dr. Merret 
in 1667, as containing a useful mineral peculiar to England. Very rich 
graphite seams have been found during recent decades, both at the 
mouth of the Yenisej (Sidoroffs graphite quarry) and at a spur of 
the Sayan mountains in the southern part of Siberia (Alibert's graphite 
qaarry), and these discoveries have played a certain role in the recent 
history of the exploration of the country. 



236 TPIE VOYAGE OP THE VEGA. [chap. xiv. 



The natives, after the first mistrust had disappeared, were 
friendly and accommodating, honourable in their dealings though 
given to begging and to much haggling in making a bargain. 
There appeared to be no chief among them ; complete equality 
prevailed, and the position of the woman did not appear to be 
inferior to that of the man. The children were what we would 
call in Europe well brought up, though they got no bringing up 
at all. All were heathens. The liking for spirits appeared to 
be less strong than among the Chukches. We learn besides 
that all selling of spirits to savages is not only forbidden on 
the American side, but forbidden in such a way that the law 
is obeyed. 

During our stay among the Chukches my supply of articles 
for barter was very limited ; for up to the hour of departure 
uncertainty prevailed as to the time at which we would get 
free, and I was therefore compelled to be sparing of the stores. 
I often found it diflScult on that account to induce a Chukch to 
part with things which I wished to acquire. Here on the 
contrary I was a rich man, thanks to the large surplus that 
was over from our abundant winter equipment, which of 
course in warm regions would have been of no use to us. I 
turned my riches to account by making visits like a pedlar in the 
tent villages with sacks full of felt hats, thick clothes, stockings, 
ammunition, &c., for which goods I obtained a beautiful and 
choice collection of ethnographical articles. Among these may 
be mentioned beautiful bone etchings and carvings, and several 
arrow-points and other tools of a species of nephrite,^ which is 

^ Nephrite is a light green, sometimes grass-green, very hard and compact 
species of amphibolite, which occurs in High Asia, Mexico, and New Zealand. 
At all these places it has been employed for stone implements, vases, 
pipes, &c. The Chinese put an immensely liigh value upon it, and the 
wish to procure nephrite is said often to have determined their politics, 
to have caused wars, and impressed its stamp on treaties of peace con- 
cluded between millions. I also consider it probable that the precious 
Vasa Murrhina, which was brought to Rome jrfter the campaign against 



238 THE VOYAGE OF THE VEGA. [chap. 



so puzzlingly like the well-known nephrite from High Afda, that 
I am disposed to believe that it actually comes originally from 
that locality. In such a case the occurrence of nephrite at 
Behring's Straits is important, because it cannot be explained in 
any other way than either by supposing that the tribes living 
here have carried the mineral with them from their original 
home in High Asia, or that during the Stone Age of High Asia 
a like extended commercial intercommunication took place 
between the wild races as now exists, or at least some decades 
ago existed, along the north parts of Asia and America. 

On the north side of the harbour we found an old Euro- 
pean or American train-oil boiling establishment. In the 
neighbourhood of it were two Eskimo graves. The corpses had 
been laid on the ground fully clothed, without the protection 
of any coffin, but surrounded by a close fence consisting of a 
number of tent poles driven crosswise into the ground. Along- 
side one of the corpses lay a kayak with oars, a loaded double- 
barrelled gun with locks at half-cock and cjips on, vaidous other 
weapons, clothes, tinderbox, snow-shoes, drinking-vessels, two 
masks carved in wood and smeared with blood (figures 1 and 
2, page 241), and strangely-shaped animal figures. Such 
were seen also in the tents. Bags of sealskin, intended to be 

Mithridates, and has given rise to so much discussion, was nephrite. 
Nephrite was also perhaps the first of all stones to be used ornamentally. 
For we find axes and chisels of this material among the people of the 
Stone Age both in Europe (where no locality is known where unworked 
nephrite is found) and in Asia, America, and New Zealand. In Asia 
implements of nephrite are found both on the Chukch Peninsula and in old 
graves from the Stone Age in the southern part of the country. They 
have been discovered at Tel ma, sixty versts from Irkutsk, by Mr. J. N. 
WilkofEski, conservator of the £ast Siberian Geographical Society. In 
scientific mineralogy nephrite is first mentioned under the name of Ka9cha- 
Umg {\.e. a species of stone from the river Kasch). It has been brought 
home under this name by Renat, a prisoner-of-war from Charles XII. V 
army, from High Asia, and was given by him to Swedish mineralogists, 
who described it very correctly, though kascholong has since been 
erroneously considered a species of quartz. 



«v,] THE ESKIMO AT PORT CLARENCE. 239 

inflated and fastened to harpoons as floats, were sometimes 
onuunented with small taces carved in wood (figure 3, pi^ 
HI). In one of the two amulets of the same kind, which 
I brought home with me, one eye is represented by a piece 
of blue enamel stuck in, and the other by a piece of iron 
pyrites fixed in the same way. Behind two tents were found, 
erected on posts a metre and a half in height, roughly-formed 
wooden images of birds with expanded wings painted red. I 
endeavoured without success to purchase these tent-idols^ for 
a laige new felt hat — an article of exchange for which in other 
cases I could obtain almost anything whatever. A dazzlingly 



(After > dnwio); bj O Noidqnlit) 

white liayak ot a very elegant shape, on the other hand, 
I purchased without difficulty for an old felt ha,t and 500 
Remington cartridges. 

As a peculiar proof of the ingenuity of the Americans when 
offering their goods for saie, it may be mentioned in conclusion 
that an Eskimo, who came to the vessel during our stay in the 
harbour, showed us a printed paper, by which a commercial house 
at San Francisco offered to " sporting gentlemen " at Behring's 
Straits (Eskimo ?) their stock of excellent hunting shot. 

' The Eskimo however, like the Chnkehea, do not appear to have any 
proper religion or idea of a life after this. 



240 THE VOYAGE OF THE VEGA. [ch.vp. xiv. 

A^ the west coast of Europe is washed by the Gulf Stream, 
there also runs along the Pacific coast of America a wann 
current, which gives the land a much milder, climate than that 
which prevails on the neighboumig Asiatic side, where, as on 
the east coast of Greenland, there runs a cold northerly current. 
The limit of trees therefore in north-western America goes 
a good way north of Behring's Straits, while on the Chukch 
Feninsula wood appears to be- wholly wanting. Even at Port 
Clarence the coast is devoid of trees, but some kilometres 



into the country alder bushes two feet high are met with, and 
behind the coast hills actual forests probably occur. V^etation 
is besides already luxuHant at the coast, and far away here, on 
the coast of the New World, many species are to be found 
nearly allied to Scandinavian plants, among them the 2/inncBa. 
Dr. Kjellman therefore reaped here a rich botanical harvest, 
valuable for the purpose of comparison with the flora of the 
neighbouring portion of Asia and other High Arctic regions. 



/\ 



1. Woodtn ibuId. round at R gnTs, one-iiith ot t1>e luttnnl aiit. 
oTsunuL tba ottur of p^rltw. tflvm a harpoon -float of lealakln, o 
(. Boatbook, on«-lii«lfUL B. The liook ol catred iton'- oDc-too 



I. Amnlet, ft face « 



242 THE VOYAGE OF THE VEGA. [criAr. 



Dr. Almquist in like manner collected very extensive materials 
for investigating the lichen-flora of the region, probably before 
very incompletely known. The harvest of the zoologists, on the 
other hand, was scanty. Notwithstanding the luxuriant vege- 
tation land-evertebrates appeared to occur in a much smaller 
number of species than in northern Norway. Of beetles, for 
instance, only from ten to twenty species could be found, 
mainly Harpalids and Staphylinids, and of land and fresh-water 
moUusca only seven or eight species, besides which nearly all 
occurred very sparingly. Among remarkable fishes may be 
mentioned the same black marsh-fish which we caught at 
Yinretlen. The avi-fauna was scanty for a high northern land, 
and of wild mammalia we saw only musk-rats. Even the 
dredgings in the harbour yielded, on account of the unfavourable 
nature of the bottom, only an inconsiderable number of animals 
and algaB. 

On the 26th July, at three o'clock in the afternoon, we 
weighed anchor and steamed back in splendid weather and 
with for the most part a favourable wind to the shore of the 
Old World. In order to determine the salinity and temperature 
at diflferent depths, soundings were made and samples of water 
taken every four hours during the passage across the straits. 
Trawling was besides carried on three times in the twenty-four 
hours, commonly with an extraordinarily abundant yield, among 
other things of large shells, as, for instance, the beautiful Fusiis 
deformis, Reeve, with its twist to the left, and some lai^ 
species of crabs. One of the latter {Chionoecetes opUio, Kroyer) 
the dredge sometimes brought up in hundreds. We cooked 
and ate them and found them excellent, though not very rich 
in flesh. The taste was somewhat sooty. 

Lieutenant Bove constructed the diagram reproduced at 
page 244, which is based on the soundings and other obser- 
vations made during the passage, from which we see how 
shallow is the sound which in the northernmost part of the 



III.] SUKVEY OF BEHRING'S STRAITS. 243 

Pacific separates Uie Old World from the New, Ao elevation 
of the land leas than that -which has taken place since the 
gladal period at the well-known Chapel Hill s at Uddevalla would 
evidently be sufficient to unite the two worlds with each other 
by a broad bridge, and a corresponding depression would have 
been enough to separate them if, as is probable, they were at 
one time continuous. The diagram shows besides that the 
deepest channel is quite close to the coast of tlie Chukch 



Peainaula, and that that chahbel contains a mass of cold water, 
which is separated by a ridge from the warmer water on the 
American side. 

If we examine a msp of Siberia we shall find, as I have 
already pointed out, that its coasts at most places are straight, 
and are thus neither ihdented with deep Qords surrounded with 
high mountains like the west coast of Norway, nor protected 
1^ an archipelago of islands like the greater part of the coasts 
of Scandinavia and Finland. Certain parts of the Chukch 

R 2 



244 



THE VOYAGE OF THE VEGA. 



[chap. 



Peninsula, especially its south-eastern portion, form the only 
exception to this rule. Several small iQords here cut into 
the coasts, which consist of stratified granitic rocks, and in the 
ofiBng two large and several small rocky islands form an archi- 
pelago, separated from the mainland by the deep Senjavin 
Sound. The wish to give our naturalists an opportunity of 
once more prosecuting their examination of the natural history 

DIAORAX, 

Showing the Tomperatnie and Depth of the water at Behiing't Stralta between Fort Claienoe 

and SeiJaTln Sound. 

By O. BovB. 



*r^ 



U| 



irfl- 




r. 






MN 8 e. m. 4 e. m. MD 8 f . m. 4 f m. 

28 July, 1879 ^^^^^ ^^ ^^^^^ 

Lat. Isw 'eJos' 7?To' l^M' 7?o5 

Long. ITO'SS* 170'17' 169 47' 168*52' 168*24' 







MN 8 e. m. 

27 July, 1879 27 July, 1879 

66tF «?i7' 



Tew^perahtn at the tmface. 

at a depth of 80 metres. 
ai the loitom. 




I 



50 
I 



100 
I 



150 200 
I I 



»» 



Depth in metrta. 



of the Chukch Peninsula, and the desire to study one of the 
few parts of the Siberian coast which in all probability were 
formerly covered with inland ice, led me to choose this place 
for the second anchorage of the Vega on the Asiatic side south 
of Behring's Straits. The Vega accordingly anchored here on 
the forenoon of the 28th July, but not, as was at first in- 
tended, in Glasenapp Harbour, because it was still occupied by 



XIV.] KONYAM BAY. 245 

unbroken ice, but in the mouth of the most northerly of the 
Qords, Konyam Bay. 

This portion of the Chukch Peninsula had been visited before 
us by the corvette Senjavin, commanded by Captain, afterwards 
Admiral, Fr, Llitke, and by an English Franklin Expedition on 
board the Plover, commanded by Captain Moore. Llitke stayed 
here vrith his compaoions, the naturalists Mertens, Postels, and 
KiTTLiTZ, some days in August 1828, during which the harbour 
was surveyed and various observations in ethnography and the 
natural sciences made. Moore wintered at this place in 1848-49. 
I have already stated that we have his companion, Lieut. W. H. 
Hooper, to thank for very valuable information relating to the 
tribes which live in the neighbourhood. The region appears to 
have been then inhabited by a rather dense population. Now 
there lived at the bay where we had anchored only three 
rerndeer-Chukch families, and the neighbouring islands must 
at the time have been uninhabited, or perhaps the arrival of 
the Vega may not have been observed, for no natives came on 
board, which otherwise would probably have been the case. 

The shore at the south-east part of Konyam Bay, in which 
the Vcffa now lay at anchor for a couple of days, consists of a 
rather desolate bog, in which ^ large number of cranes were 
breeding. Farther into the country several mountain summits 
rise to a height of nearly 6.00 metres. The collections of the 
zoologists and botanists on this shore were very scanty, but on 
the north side of the bay, to which excursions were made with 
the steam-launch, grassy slopes were met with, with pretty high 
bushy thickets and a great variety of flowers, which enriched 
Dr. Kjellman's collection of the higher plants from the north 
coast of Asia with about seventy species. Here were found too 
the first land mollusca (Succinea, Limax, Helix, Pupa, &c.) on 
the Chukch Peninsula.^ 

^ We have already found some land mollusca at Port Clarence, but none 
at St, Lawrence Bay. The northenimost Jind of such animals now known 



246 THE VOYAGE OF THE VEGA. [chap. xiv. 



We also visited the dwellings of the reindeer-Chukch 
families. They resembled the Chukch tents we had fseen 
before, and the mode of life of the inhabitants difiFered little 
from that of the coast- Chukches, with whom we passed the 
winter. They were even clothed in the same way, excepting 
that the men wore a number of small bells in the belt. The 
number of the reindeer which the three families owned was, 
according to an enumeration which I made when the herd had 
with evident pleasure settled down at noon in warm sunshine 
on a snow-field in the neighbourhood of the tents, only about 
400, thus coiksiderably fewer than is required to feed three Lapp 
families. The Chukches have instead a better supply of fish, 
and, above all, better hunting than the Lapps; they also do 
not drink any cofiee, and themselves collect a part of their 
food from the vegetable kingdom. The natives received us in 
a very friendly way, and ofiered to sell or rather barter three 
reindeer, a transaction which on account of our hasty departure 
was not carried into efiect. 

The mountains in the neighbourhood of Konyam Bay were 
high and split up into pointed summits with deep valleys still 
partly filled with snow. No glaciers appear to exist there at 
present. Probably however the Qords here and the sounds, 
like St. Lawrence Bay, Kolyutschin Bay, and probably all the 
other deeper bays on the coast of the Chukch Peninsula, have 
been excavated by former glaciers. It may perhaps be un- 
certain whether a true inland-ice covered the whole countrv ; 
it is certain that the ice-cap did not extend over the plains of 
Siberia, where it can be proved that no Ice Age in a Scandi- 
navian sense ever existed, and where the state of the land from 
the Jurassic period onwards was indeed subjected to some 
changes, but to none of the thoroughgoing mundane revolutions 
which in fomier times geologists loved to depict in so bright 

was made by Von MidJer.doiff, who found a species of Physa on the 
Taiinur l*enii:sida. 



CHAP. XIV.] KONYAM BAY. 249 

colours. At least the direction of the rivers appears to have 
been unchanged since then. Perhaps even the difference 
between the Siheria where Chikanovski's Oiriko woods grew 
and the mammoth roamed about, and that where now at a 
limited depth under the surface constantly frozen ground is to 
be met with, depends merely on the isothermal lines having 
sunk slightly towards the equator. 

The neighbourhood of Konyam Bay consists of crystalline 
rocks, granite poor in mica, and mica-schist lowermost, and then 
grey non-fossiliferous carbonate of lime, and last of all magnesian 
schists, porphyry, and quartzites. On the summits of the hills 
the granite has a rough trachytic appearance, but does not 
pass into true trachyte. Here however we are already in the 
neighbourhood of the volcanic hearths of Kamchatka, which for 
instance is shown by the hot spring, which Hooper discovered 
not far from the coast during a sledge journey towards Behring's 
Straits. In the middle of the severe cold of February its waters 
had a temperature of + 69** C. Hot steam and drifting snow 
combined had thrown over the spring a lofty vault of dazzling 
whiteness formed of masses of snow converted into ice and 
covered with ice-crystals. The Chukches themselves appear 
to have found the contrast striking between the hot spring 
from the interior of the earth and the cold, snow, and ice on its 
surface. They offered blue glass beads to the spring, and 
showed Hooper, as something remarkable, that it was possible 
to boil fish in it, though the mineral water gave the boiled fish 
a bitter unpleasant taste.^ 

The interior of Konyam Bay was during our stay there still 
covered by an unbroken sheet of ice. This broke up on the 

^ That a fire-emitting mountain was to be found in Siberia east of the 
Tenisej is already mentioned in a treatise by Isaak Massa, inserted in 
Hessal Gerritz, DetecUo Freti^ Amsterdam, 1612. The rumour about the 
volcanos of Kamchatka thus appears to have reached Europe at that early 
date. 



250 THE VOYAGE OF THE VEGA. [quAP, 



afternoon of the 30th July, and had almost, rotten as it was, 
suddenly brought the voyage of the Vetfa to a termination by 
pressing her ashore. Fortunately the danger was observed in 
time. Steam was got up, the anchor weighed, and the vessel 
removed to the open part of the Qord. As on this account 
several cubic feet of coal had to be used for getting up steam, as 
our hitherto abundant stock of coal must now be saved, and as 
in the last place I was still urged forward by the fear that a 
too lengthened delay in sending home despatches might not 
only cause much anxiety but also lead to a heavy expenditure 
of money, I preferred to sail on immediately rather than to 
enter a safer harbour in the neighbourhood from which the 
scientific work might continue to be prosecuted. 

The course was now shaped for the north-west point of St. 
Lawrence Island. A little oflf Senjavin Sound we saw drift-ice 
for the last time. On the whole the quantity of ice which drifts 
down through Behring's Straits into the Pacific is not very 
great, and most of that which is met with in summer on the 
Asiatic side of the Behring Sea, is evidently formed in Qords and 
bays along the coast. South of Behring's Straits accordingly I 
saw not a single iceberg nor any large block of glader-ice, but 
only even and very rotten fields of bay-ice. 

The Vega was anchored on the 31st July in an open bay on 
the north-western side of St. Lawrence Island. This island, 
called by the natives Enguae, is the largest one between the 
Aleutian Islands and Behring*s Straits. It lies nearer Asia 
than America, but is considered to belong to the latter, for 
which reason it was handed over along with the Alaska 
Territory by Russia to the United States. The island is inha- 
bited by a few Eskimo families, who have commercial relations 
with their Chukch neighbours on the Russian side, and therefore 
have adopted some words from their language. Their dress also 
resembles that of the Chukches, with the exception that, want- 
ing reindeer-skin, they use pesks made of the skins of birds and 



ST. LAWRENCE ISLAND. 



marmots. Like the Chukches and Eskimo they use overcoats 
of pieces of seal-gut sewed together. On St. Lawrence Island 
their dress is much ornamented, chiefly with tufts of feathers uf 



/_^*Hk4 



-ifc; 



JUU ILMJU "^ 

^ "TTnlmr* , 



the sea-fowl that bi-eed in innumerable flocks on the island. It 
even appears that gut clothes are made here for sole to other 



252 THE VOYAGE OF THE VEGA. [chap. 

tribes ; otherwise it wouH be difficult to explmn how Kotzebue's 
Bailors could in half an hour purchase at a single encampment 
200 coats of this kind. At the tune of our visit all the natives 
went bareheaded, the men with their black tallow-like hair 
clipped to the root, with the exception of the common small 
border above the forehead. The women wore their hair 
plaited and adorned with beads, and were much tattooed, partly 
ailer very intricate patterns, as is shown hy the accompanying 
woodcute. Like the children they mostly went barefooted and 



(Altar ■ dnirlne by A. GtnxtorB.) 

barelegged. They were well grown, and many did not look ill, 
but all were merciless beggars, who actuaUy followed our 
naturalists on their excursions on land. 

The summer-tents were irregular, but pretty clean and light 
huts of gut, stretched on a frame of drift-wood and whale-bones. 
The winter dwellings were now abaiidoned. They appeared 
to consist of holes in the earth, which were covered alxtve, with 
the exception of a square opening, with drift-wood and turf. 



J[iv.] ST. LAWRENCE ISLAND. 263 

During winter a sealskin tent was probably stretched over 
this opening, but it was removed for the time, probably to 
permit the summer heat to penetrate into the hole and melt 
the ice, which had collected during winter on its walls. At 
several tents we found large under-jaws of whales fixed in the 
ground. They were perforated above, and I suppose that the 
winter-tent, in the absence of other framework, was stretched 
over them. Masses of whale-bones lay thrown up along the 
shore, evidently belonging to the same species as those we 
collected at the shore-dunes at Pitlekaj. In the neighbourhood 
of the tents graves were also found. The corpses had been 
placed, unbumed, in some cleft among the rocks which are split 
up by the frost, and often converted into immense stone mounds. 
They had afterwards been covered with stones, and skulls of 
the bear and the seal and whale-bones had been offered or 
scattered around the grave. 

North-east of the anchorage the shore was formed of low hills 
rising with a steep slope from the sea. Here and there ruinlike 
cliffs projected from the hills, resembling those we saw on the coast 
of Chukch Land. But the rock here consisted of the same sort of 
granite which formed the lowermost stratum at Konyam Bay. It 
was principally at the foot of these slopes that the natives erected 
their dwellings. South-west of the anchorage commenced a very 
extensive plain, which towards the interior of the island was 
marshy, but along the coast formed a firm, even, grassy meadow 
exceedingly rich in flowers. It was gay with the large sunflower- 
like Arnica Pseudo-Arnica, and another species of Senecio {Senedo 
frigidus); the Oxytropis niffrescens, close-tufted and rich in flowers, 
not stunted here as in Chukch Land ; several species of Pedicu- 
laris in their fullest bloom (P. sitdetica, P. Langsdorfii, P. Oederi 
and P. capitata) ; the stately snow auricula (Primula nivalis), 
and the pretty Primula horealis. As characteristic of the 
vegetation at this place may also be mentioned several ranunculi, 
an anemone {Anemxme narcissijlora), a species of monkshood 



264 THE VOYAGE OF THE VEGA. [chap. 



with flowers few indeed, but so much the larger on that account, 
large tufts of Silene acaulis and Alsine rruicrocarpa, studded with 
flowers, several Saxifrages, two Claytoniae, the CL aeiUi/olia, 
important as a food-plant in the housekeeping of the Chukches, 
and the tender CI. sarmerUo&a with its delicate, slightly rose* 
coloured flowers, and, where the ground was stony, long but yet 
flowerless, slightly green tendrils of the favourite plant of our 
homeland, the Linncea borealis. Dr. Ejellman thus reaped a rich 
harvest of higher plants ; and a fine collection of land and marine 
animals, lichens and algae was also made here. The ground 
consisted of sand in which lay large granite blocks, which we in 
Sweden would call erratic. They appeared however not to have 
been transported hither, but to be lying in situ, having along with 
the sand probably arisen through the disintegration of the rocks. 

In the sea we found not a few algae and a true littoral 
evertebrat€-fauna, poor in species indeed, something which is 
completely absent in the Polar seas proper. As I walked along 
the coast I saw five pretty large self-coloured greyish-brown seals 
sunning themselves on stones a short distance from land. They 
belonged to a species which I had never seen in the Polar seas. 
As there was no boat at hand, I forbade the hunters that accom- 
panied me, though the seals were within range, to test their skill 
as shots upon them. Perhaps they were females of MistriopJioea 
fasciata, whose beautifully marked skin (of the male) I had seen 
and described at St. Lawrence Bay. The natives had a few dogs 
but no reindeer, which however might find food on the island in 
thousands. No kayaks were in use, but large baydars of the 
same construction as those of the Chukches. 

St. Lawrence Island was discovered during Behring's first 
voyage, but the first who came into contact with the natives was 
Otto von Kotzebue^ (on the 27th June 1816, and the 20th July 

* Kotzebue says that he was the first seafarer who visited the island. 
This however is incorrect. Billings landed there on the Ist August (2l8t 
July), 1791. From the vessel some natives was seen and a baydar which 



XIV.] ST. LAWRENCE ISLAND. 255 



1817). The inhabitants had not before seen any Europeans, and 
they reoeived the foreigners with a friendliness which exposed 
Kotzebue to severe suffering. Of this he gives the following 
account : — 

" So long as the naturalists wandered about on the hills I stayed 
with my aoquaintances, who, when they found that I was the 
commander, invited me into their tents. Here a dirty skin was 
spread on the floor, on which I had to sit, and then they came in 
one after the other, embraced me, rubbed their noses hard against 
mine, and finished their caresses by spitting in their hands and 
then stroking me several times over the face. Although these 
proofs of friendsliip gave me very little pleasure, I bore all 
patiently ; the only thing I did to lighten their caresses some- 
what was to distribute tobacco leaves. These the natives received 
with great pleasure, but they wished immediately to renew their 
proofs of friendship. Now I betook myself with speed to knives, 
scissors, and beads, and by distributing some succeeded in averting 
a new attack. But a still greater calamity awaited me when in 
order to refresh me bodily they brought forward a wooden tray 
with whaJe blubber. Nauseous as this food is to a European 
stomach I boldly attacked the dish. This, along with new presents 
which I distributed, impressed the seal on the friendly relation 
between us. After the meal our hosts made arrangements 
for dandng and ringing, which was accompanied on a little 
tambourine/' ^ 

As von Kotzebue two days after sailed past the north point of 

the island he met three haydars. In one of them a man stood 

up, held up a little dog and pierced it through with his knife, as 

Kotzebue believed, as a sacrifice to the foreigners." 

was rowed along the coast The natives however were frightened by some 
ganshota fired as a signal (Sarytohev's R^sCy ii. p. 91, Sauer, p. 239). 
Billings says that the place where he landed (the south-east point of tlie 
island) was nearly covered with bones of sea-animals. It would be impor- 
tant to have these thoroughly examined, as it is not impossible that Steller's 
sea-cow (Rhytina) may in former times have occasionally come to this 
coast; At all events important contributions to a knowledge of the species 
of whales in Behring^s Straits may be gained here. 

* Otto von Kotzebue. Entdeckungs-Reise an die Sud-See und nach der 
Behring-Sirasse, 1816-18, Weimar, 1821, i. p. 136; ii. p. 104; iii. pp. 171 
and 178. 

' On the days after our arrival at Pitlekaj several dogs were killed. I 



266 THE VOYAGE OF THE VEGA. [chap. xiv. 

Since 1817 several exploring expeditions have landed on St. 
Lawrence Island, but always only for a few hours. It is very 
dangerous to stay long here with a vessel. For there is no 
known haven on the coast of this large island, which is surrounded 
by an open sea. In consequence of the heavy swell which almost 
constantly prevails here, when the surrounding sea is clear of ice, 
it is difficult to land on the island with a boat, and the vessel 
anchored in the open road is constantly exposed to be thrown by 
a storm rising unexpectedly upon the shore cliflEs. This held 
good in fullest measure of the Vegois anchorage, and Captain 
Palander was on this account anxious to leave the place as soon 
as possible. On the 2nd August at three o'clock in the afbemoon 
we accordingly resumed our voyage. The course was shaped at 
first for Karaginsk Island on the east coast of Kamchatka, where 
it was my intention to stay some days in order to get an oppor- 
tunity of making a comparison between the natural conditions 
of middle Kamchatka and the Chukch Peninsula. But as 
unfavourable winds delayed our passage longer than I had 
calculated on, I abandoned, though unwillingly, the plan of 
landing there. The Commander's Islands became instead the 
nearest goal of the expedition. Here the Vega anchored on the 
14th August in a very indifferent harbour completely open to 
the west, north-west, and south, lying on the west side of Behring . 
Island, between the main island and a small island lying off it. 

then believed that this was done because the natives were unwilling to 
feed them during winter, but it is not impossible that they sacrificed them 
to avert the misfortunes which it was feared the arrival of the foreigners 
would bring with it 




CHAPTER XV. 

The poeition of Behring Island — Its inhabitants — The discovery of the 
island by Behring — Behring's death — Steller — ^The former and present 
Fauna on the island: foxes, sea-otters, sea-cows, sea-lions, and sea- 
bears — Collection of bones of the Rhytina — Visit to a ** rookery'* — 
ToporkofE Island — Alexander Dubovski — Voyage to Yokohama— 
Lightning-stroke. 

Behring Island is situated between 54° 40' and 55° 25' N.L. and 
165* 40' and 166° 40' E.L. from Greenwich. It is the westernmost 
and nearest Kamchatka of the islands in the long chain formed 
by volcanic action, which bounds the Behring Sea on the south 
between 51° and 56° N.L. Together with the neighbouring 
Copper Island and some small islands and rocks lying round 
about, it forms a peculiar group of islands separated from the 
Aleutian Islands proper, named, after the rank of the great sea- 
farer who perished here. Commander's or Commandirski Islands. 
They belong not to America but to Asia, and are Russian 
territory. Notwithstanding this the American Alaska Company 
has acquired the right of hunting there,^ and maintains on the 
main islands two not inconsiderable commercial stations, which 
supply the inhabitants, several hundreds in number, with pro- 
visions and manufactured goods, the company buying from them 
instead furs, principally the skin of an eared seal (the sea-cat or 

^ In February 1871 the right of hunting on these islands was granted 
by the Bussian government to Hutchinson, Kohl, Philippeus & Co., who 
have made over their rights to the Alaska Commercial Company of San 
Francisco. 

VOL. II. S 



268 THE VOYAGE OF THE VEGA. [chap. xy. 

sea-bear), of which from 20,000 to 50,000 ^ are killed yearly in 
the region. Some Russian authorities are also settled on the 
island to guard the rights of the Russian state and maintain 
order. Half a dozen serviceable wooden houses have been built 
here as dwellings for the officials of the Russian Government and 
the American Company, for storehouses, shops, &c. The natives 
live partly in very roomy and in the inside not uncomfortable 
turf houses, partly in small wooden houses which the company 
endeavours gradually to substitute for the former, by yearly 
ordering some wooden buildings and presenting them to the most 
deserving of the population. Every family has its own house. 
There is also a Greek-Catholic church and a spacious schoolhouse. 
The latter is intended for Aleutian children. The school was 
unfortunately closed at the time of our visit, but, to judge by the 
writing books which lay about in the schoolroom, the education 
here is not to be despised. The specimens of writing at least 
were distinguished by their cleanness, and by an even and 
beautiful style. At " the colony " the houses were collected at 
one place into a village, situated near the sea-shore at a suitable 
distance from the fishing ground in a valley overgrown in summer 
by a rich vegetation, but treeless and surrounded by treeless 
rounded heights. From the sea this village has the look of a 
northern fishing station. There are besides some scattered 
houses here and there on other parts of the island, for instance 
on its north-eastern side, where the potato is said to be cultivated 



^ According to a communication made to me by Mr. Henry W. Elliot, 
who, in order to study the fur-bearing seals in the North Behring Sea, lived 
a considerable time at the Seal Islands (Pribylov's Islands, &c.) on the 
American side, and has given an exceedingly interesting account of the 
animal life there in his work : A Report upon the Condition of Affairs in the 
Territory of Alaska, Washington, 1875 : the statement in my report to 
Dr. Dickson, founded on oral communications ^of Europeans whom I met 
with at Behring Island, that from 50,000 to 100,000 animals are killed 
yearly at Behring and Copper Island, is thus probably somewhat ex- 
aggerated. 



CHjp.icv.] BEHRING ISLAND. 261 

on a small scale, and at the fishing place on the north side where 
there are two large sheds for skins and a number of very small 
earth-holes used only during the slaughter season. 

Behriug Island, with regard both to geography and natural 
history, is one of the most remarkable islands in the north part 
of the Pacific. It was here that Behring after his last unfortunate 
voyage in the sea which now bears his name, finished his long 
course as an explorer. He was however survived by many of 
his followers, among them by the physician and naturalist Steller, 



to whom we owe a masterpiece seldom surpassed — a sketch of 
the natural conditions and animal life on the island, never before 
visited by man, where he involuntarily passed the time from the 
middle of November 1741, to the end of August 1742.' 

' Original accounts of the wintering on Behring Island are to be found 
in Hnllei'B Sammlung Rauischer Oesehichle, St. Petersburg, 1768, iii. 
pp. 228-238 and 242-266i {Steller'e) Topographi»the vnd phynkalitekt 



262 THE VOYAGE OF THE VEGA. Lchap. xv. 

It was the desire to procure for our museums the skins or 
skeletons of the many remarkable mammalia occurring here, also 
to compare the present state of the island which for nearly a 
century and a half has been exposed to the unsparing thirst of 
man for sport and plunder, with Steller's spirited and picturesque 
description, which led me to include a visit to the island in the 
plan of the expedition. The accounts I got at Behring Island 
firom the American newspapers of the anxiety which our 
wintering had caused in Europe led me indeed to make our 
stay there shorter than I at first intended. Our harvest of 
collections and observations was at all events extraordinarily 
abundant. But before I proceed to give an account of our own 
stay on the island, I must devote a few words to its discovery 
and the first wintering there, which has a quite special interest 
fi-om the island having never before been trodden by the foot of 
man. The abundant animal life, then found there, gives us 
therefore one of the exceedingly few representations we possess 
of the animal world as it was before man, the lord of the creation, 
appeared. 

After Behring' s vessel had drifted about a considerable time 
at random in the Behring Sea, in consequence of the severe 
scurvy-epidemic, which had spread to nearly all the men on 
board, without any dead reckoning being kept, and finally with- 
out sail or helmsman, literally at the mercy of wind and waves, 
those on board on the V*l^ November, 1741, sighted land, off whose 
coast the vessel was anchored the following day at 5 o'clock P.M. 
An hour after the cable gave way, and an enormous sea threw 
the vessel towards the shore-cliffs. All appeared to be already 
lost. But the vessel, instead of being driven ashore by new 

Beschreibung der Beringsinsel (Pallas' Neue Norditchs BeytrSge, St Peters- 
burg and Leipzig, 1781-83, il p. 226) ; G. W. Steller's Tagebuch temer 
Seereise aus dem Petripauls Ha/en . . . und teiner Begebenhtiten auf der 
RilcJcreise (Pallas* Neveate Nordi$che Beytrdge^ St Petersburg and Leiprigy 
1793-96, i. p. 130; ii. p. 1). 



'i 



IJ 



CHAP. XV.] DISCOVERY OF BEHRING ISLAND. 265 

waves, came unexpectedly into a basin 4J fathoms deep sur- 
rounded by rocks and with quite still water, being connected 
with the sea only by a single narrow opening. If the unmanage- 
able vessel had not drifted just to that place it would certainly 
have gone to pieces, and all on board would have perished. 

It was only with great difficulty that the sick crew could put 
out a boat in which Lieut. Waxel and Steller landed. They 
found the land uninhabited, devoid of wood, and uninviting. But 
a rivulet with fresh clear water purled yet unfrozen down the 
mountain sides, and in the sand hills along the coast were found 
some deep pits, which when enlarged and covered with sails 
could be used as dwellings. The men who could still stand on 
their legs all joLoed in this work. On the V^^^ November the 
sick could be removed to land, but, as often happens, many died 
when they were brought out of the cabin Loto the fresh air, others 
while they were being carried from the vessel or immediately 
after they came to land. All in whom the scurvy had taken the 
upper hand to that extent that they were already lying in bed 
on board the vessel, died. The survivors had scarcely time or 
strength to bury the dead, and found it difficult to protect the 
corpses from the hungry foxes that swarmed on the island and 
had not yet learned to be afraid of man. On the V^^^i Behring 
waa garried on land ; he was already much reduced and dejected, 
and could not be induced to take exercise. He died on the V*!^ 
December. 

Vitus Behring was a Dane by birth, and when a young 
man had already made voyages to the East and West Indies. 
In 1707 he was received into the Bussian navy as officer, 
and as such took part in all the warlike enterprises of that 
fleet against Sweden. He was in a way buried aJive on the 
island that now bears his name, for at last he did not 
permit his men to remove the sand that rolled down upon 
him from the walls of the sand pit in which he rested. For 
he thought that the sand warmed bis chilled body. Before 



266 THE VOYAGE OF THE VEGA. [cuap. 

the corpse could be properly buried it had therefore to be 
dug out of its bed, a circumstance which appears to have 
produced a disagreeable impression on the survivors. The two 
lieutenants, Waxel and Chitrov, had kept themselves in pretty 
good health at sea, but now fell seriously ill, though they 
recovered. Only the physician of the expedition, Gteorg 
Wilhelm Steller, was all the time in good health, and that a 
single man of the whole crew escaped with his life was clearly 
due to the skill of this gifted man, to his invincible energy 
and his cheerful and sanguine disposition. These qualities 
were also abundantly tested during the wintering. On the 
night before the ^1^-^^^, the vessel, on which no watch was 
kept, because all the men were required on land to care for 
the sick, was cast ashore by a violent E.S.E. storm. So great 
a quantity of provisions was thus lost, that the remaining 
stock was not sufficient by itself to yield enough food for all 
the men during a whole winter. Men were therefore sent out 
in all directions to inquire into the state of the land. They 
returned with the information that the vessel had stranded, 
not, as was hoped at first, on the mainland but on an un- 
inhabited, woodless island. It was thus clear to the shij)- 
wrecked men that in order to be saved they' could rely only 
on their judgment and strength. At the beginning .they 
found that if any provisions were to be reserved for the 
voyage home, it was necessary that they should support them- 
selves during winter to a considerable extent by hunting. 
They did not like to use the flesh of the fox for food, and 
at first kept to that of the sea-otter. This animal at present 
is very scarce on Behring Island, but at that time the shore 
was covered with whole herds of it They had no fear of 
man, came from curiosity straight to the fires, and did not 
run away when any one approached. A dear-bought experience, 
however, soon taught them caution; at all events, from 80O 
to 900 head were taken, a splendid catch when we consider 



XV.] THE SEA-OTTER AND THE SEA-COW. 267 

that the skin of this animal at the Chinese frontier fetched 
from 80 to 100 roubles each. Besides, in the beginning of 
winter two whales stranded on the island. The shipwrecked 
men considered these their provision depots, and appear to 
have preferred whale blubber to the flesh of the sea-otter, 
which had an unpleasant taste and was tough as leather.^ 

In spring the sea-otters disappeared, but now there came to 
the island in their stead other animals in large herds, viz. 
sea-bears, seals, and sea-lions. The flesh of the young sea- 
lion was considered a great delicacy.^ When the sea-otters 
became scarcer and more shy and difficult to catch, the ship- 
wrecked men found means also to kill sea-cows, whose flesh 
Steller considered equal to beef. Several barrels of their flesh 
were even salted to serve as provisions during the return 
journey. As the land became clear of snow in the middle of 
April, Waxel called together the forty-five men who survived 
to a consultation regarding the steps that ought to be taken 
in order to reach the mainland. Among many different proposals, 
that was adopted of building a new vessel with the materials 
supplied by the stranded one. The three ship-carpenters who 
had been on board were dead. But fortunately there was 
among the survivors a Cossack, Sava Starodubzov, who had 
taken part as a workman in shipbuilding at Okotsk, and 
now undertook to manage the building of the new vessel. 
With necessity for a teacher he also succeeded in executing 

' According to MiiUer^ whose statements (based on communications by 
Waxel ?) often difEer from those of Steller. The latter says that the flesli 
of the sea-otter is better than that of the seal, and a good antidote to 
scarvy. The flesh of the young sea-otter might even compete with lamb 
as a delicacy. 

' To judge by what is stated in Steller's description of Behring Island 
{Neue fiord, Beytr.y ii. p. 290) no one would have dared to attack " diese 
grimmigen Thiere," and the only sea-lion eaten during the winter was an 
animal wounded at Kamchatka and thrown up dead on the coast of 
Behring Island. The fin-like feet were the most delicate part of the sea- 
lion. 



268 THE VOYAGE OF THE VEGA. [chap. 



his commission, so that a new St. Peter was launched on the 
^ August, 1742. The vessel was forty feet long, thirteen 
feet beam, and six and a half feet deep, and sailed as well 
as if built by an experienced master of his craft, but on the 
other hand leaked seriously in a high sea. The return voyage 
at all events passed successfully. On the ^^^^^ Kamchatka 
was sighted, and two days after the St. Peter anchored at 
Petropaulovsk, where the shipwrecked men found a store- 
house with an abundant stock of provisions according to their 
ideas, which probably were not pitched very high. Next year 
they sailed on with their Behring-Island-built vessel to Okotsk. 
On their arrival there, of the seventy-six persons who originally 
took part in the expedition, thirty-two were dead. At Kam- 
chatka they had all been considered dead, and the eflFects they 
left behind them had been scattered and divided. Steller 
voluntarily remained some time longer in Kamchatka in order 
to carry on his researches in natural history. Unfortunately 
he drew upon himself the ill-will of the authorities, in consequence 
of the free way in which he criticised their abuses. This led 
to a trial at the court at Irkutsk. He was, indeed, found 
innocent, and obtained permission to travel home, but at Zoli- 
kamsk he was overtaken by an express with orders to bring 
him back to Irkutsk. On the way thither he met another 
express with renewed permission to travel to Europe. But the 
powers of the strong and formerly healthy man were exhausted 
by this hunting backwards and forwards across the immeasur- 
able deserts of Siberia. He died soon after, on the ^ November. 
1746, at Tjumen, only thirty-seven years of age, ol a fever 
by which he was attacked during the journey.* 

^ According to Miiller's official report, probably written for the purpose 
of refuting the rumours regarding Steller's fate current in the scientific 
circles of Europe. According to the biography prefixed to Georg Wilhelm 
SteWer* B Beschreibung von dem Lande Kamtuchatka, herausgegeben von J'. 
B, 8. (Schecrer), Frankfurt and Leipzig, 1774, Steller had in 1746 begun 



XV.] THE FAUNA OF BEHRING ISLAND : FOXES. 269 

The immense quantity of valuable furs brought home by 
the survivors of Behring's so unfortunate third voyage affected 
the fiir-dealers, Cossacks, and hunters of Siberia much in the 
same way as the rumour about Eldorado or about the riches of the 
Casio Dobaybe did the Spanish discoverers of middle and southern 
America. Numerous expeditions were fitted out to the new 
land rich in furs, where extensive territories previously unknown 
were made tributary to the Czar of Russia. Most of these 
expeditions landed on Behring Island during the voyage out 
and home, and in a short time wrought a complete change in the 
fiftuna of the island. Thanks to Steller's spirited sketch of the 
animal life he observed there, we have also an opportunity of 
forming an idea of the alteration in the fauna which man brings 
about in a land in which he settles. 

Arctic foxes were found in incredible numbers on the island 

during the wintering of the Behring expedition. They not only 

ate up everything that was at all eatable that was left in the open 

air, but forced their way as well by day as by night into the 

houses and carried off all that they could, even such things 

as were of no use whatever to them, as knives, sticks, sacks, 

shoes and stockings. Even if anything had been never so well 

buried and loaded with stones, they not only found the place 

but even pushed away the stones with their shoulders like men. 

Though they could not eat what they found, they carried it 

off and concealed it under stones. In such a case some foxes 

stood on guard, and if a man approached all assisted in speedily 

concealing the stolen article in the sand so that no trace of it 

was left. When any of the men slept out of doors at night 

his return to St Petersburg, and was already beyond Novgorod^ when he 
received orders to appear before the court at Irkutsk. After a year he 
obtained permission to travel to St Petersburg, but when he came to the 
neighbourhood of Moscow, he received a new order to return, and for 
further security he was placed under a guard. They had travelled a good 
way into Siberia, when he froze to death while Hie guard went into a 
public-house to warm themselves and quench their thirst 



270 THE VOYAGE OF THE VEGA. [chap. 



the foxes carried oflf their caps and gloves, and made their way 
under the covering. They nosed the noses of the sleepers to 
find out whether they were dead or living, and attempted to 
nibble at any who held their breath. As the female sea-lions 
and sea-bears often suflfocate their young during sleep, the foxes 
every morning made an inspection of the place where these 
animals lie down in immense herds, and if they found a dead 
young one they immediately helped each other, like good 
scavengers, to carry away the carcase. Vi^hen men were employed 
out of doors they had to drive the foxes away with sticks, 
and they became, in consequence of the slyness and cunning 
with which they knew how to carry out their thefts and the 
skill which they showed in combining to. gain an end which 
they could not compass as sLagle animals, actually dangerous 
to the shipwrecked men, by whom they were therefore heartily 
hated, pursued, tormented, and killed. Since then thousands 
and thousands of foxes have been killed on Behring Island 
by the fur-hunters. Now they are so scarce that during our 
stay there we did not see one. Those that still survive, besides, 
as the Europeans settled on the island informed me, do not wear 
the precious dark blue dress formerly common but the white, 
which is of little value. On the neighbouring Copper Island, 
however, there are still dark blue foxes in pretty large numbers.^ 

^ As early as Schelechov*B wintering at 1783-84 the foxes on Behring 
Island were principally white. During Steller's wintering, over a third of 
the foxes on the island had a bluish fur {Neue nord, Beytr,, ii. p. 277). In 
the year 1747-48 a fur hunter, Gholodilov, caught on Behring Island 1,481 
blue foxes and 350 sea-otters, and the following year another hunter 
returned with over a thousand sea -otters and two thousand blue foxes, 
which probably were also caught on Behring and Copper Islands (Neue 
Nachrichten von denen neuentdeckten Insultiy Hamburg u. Leipzig, 1766, p. 
20). In the year 1751-53 Jugov caught on the same island 790 sea-otters, 
6,844 black and 200 white foxes, and 2,212 sea-bears {loc, cit, p. 22). In 
1752-53 the crew of a vessel belonging to the Irkutsk merchant, Nikifor 
Trapeznikoff, caught on Behring Island 5 sea-otters, 1,222 foxes (colour 
not stated), and 2,500 sea-bears (loc. cit. p. 32). It thus appears as if the 



XV.] THE SEA-OTTER. 271 



Nine hundred sea-otters were killed here by Steller and his 
companions in 1741-42. The following quotation is taken from 
Steller's description of this animal which is now so shy at the 
sight of man : — 

" With respect to playfulness it surpasses every other animal 
that lives either in the sea or on the land. When it comes up 
out of the sea it shakes the water from its fur, and dresses it as 
a cat its head with its fore-paws, stretches its body, arranges its 
hair, throws its head this way and that, contemplating itself and 
its beautiful fur with evident satisfaction. The animal is so 
much taken up with this dressing of itself, that while thus 
employed it may easily be approached and killed. If one strikes 
a sea-otter twenty times across the back, it bears it patiently, but 
if its large beautiful tail be struck once it turns its head to its 
pursuer, as if to offer it as a mark for his club in place of the 
tail. If it eludes an attack it makes the most laughable gestures 
to the hunter. It looks at him, placing one foot above the head 
as if to protect it from the sunlight, throws itself on its back, and 
turning to its enemy as if in scorn scratches itself on the belly 
and thighs. The male and female are much attached to each 
other, embrace and kiss each other like men. The female is also 
very fond of its young. When attacked she never leaves it 
in the lurch, and when danger is not near she plays with it in a 
thousand ways, almost like a child-loving mother with her young 
ones, throws it sometimes up in the air and catches it with her 
fore-feet like a ball, swims about with it in her bosom, throws it 
away now and then to let it exercise itself in the art of 
swimming, but takes it to herself with kisses and caresses when 
it is tired." 

According to recent researches the sea-otter, sea-beaver or 
Kamchatka-beaver (Enhydris lut7ns, Lin.) is a species neither of 
the otter nor the beaver, but belongs to a peculiar genus, allied 
to a certain extent to the walrus. Even this animal, un- 
surpassed in the beauty of its skin, has been long since driven 
away not only from Behring Island but also from most of the 

eager hunting ha] an influence not only on the number of the animals but 
also on their colour, the variet}* in greatest demand becoming also relatively 
less common than before. 



272 THE VOYAGE OF THE VEGA. [chap. 

hunting-grounds where it was commonly killed by thousands, and 
if an eflfective law be not soon put in force to keep the hunting 
in bounds, and check the war of extermination which greed now 
carries on against it, no longer with clubs and darts but with 
powder and breechloaders, the sea-otter will meet the same fate 
which has already befallen Steller's sea-cow. Of the sea-lion 
{Eumetopias Stelleri, Lesson), which in Steller's time were found 
in abundance on the shore cliffs of Behring Island, there are now 
only single animals there along with the sea-bears {Otaria 
ursina, Lin.) ; and finally, the most remarkable of aJl the old 
mammalia of Behring Island, the great sea-cow, is completely 
extinct. 

Steller*8 sea-cow (Rhytina Stelleri, Cuvier) in a way took the 
place of the cloven-footed animals among the marine ma.mma.lia. 
The sea-cow was of a dark-brown colour, sometimes varied with 
white spots or streaks. The thick leathery skin was covered with 
hair which grew together so as to form an exterior skin, which was 
full of vermin and resembled the bark of an old oak. The full 
grown animal Was from twenty-eight to thirty-five English feet 
in length and weighed about sixty-seven cwt. The head was 
small in proportion to the large thick body, the neck short, the 
body diminishing rapidly behind. The short fore-leg terminated 
abruptly without fingers or nails, but was overgrown with a 
number of short thickly placed brush-hairs ; the hind-leg was 
replaced by a tail-fin resembling a whale's. The animal wanted 
teeth, but was instead provided with two masticating plates, one in 
the gum the other in the under jaw. The udders of the female, 
which abounded in milk, were placed between the fore-limbs. 
The flesh and milk resembled those of homed cattle, indeed in 
Steller's opinion surpassed them. The sea-cows were almost 
constantly employed in pasturing on the sea-weed which grew 
luxuriantly on the coast, moving the head and neck while so 
doing much in the same way as an ox. While they pastured 
they showed great voracity, and did not allow themselves to be 



XV.] THE SEA-COW. !>7:-i 



disturbed in the least by the presence of man. One might even 
touch them without their being frightened or disturbed. They 
entertained great attachment to each other, and when one was 
harpooned the others made incredible attempts to rescue it. 
* When Steller came to Behring Island^ the sea-cows pastured 
along the shore, collected like cattle into herds. The ship- 
wrecked men, for want of suitable implements, did not hunt 
them at first. It was only after a thoughtless love of slaughter 
had driven all other animals suitable for food far from their 
winter quarters, that they began to devise means to catch the 
sea-cow also. They endeavoured to harpoon the animal with a 
strong iron hook made for the purpose, and then drag it to land. 
The first attempt was made on the '^^^*; 1742, but it was un- 
successful. It was not until after many renewed attempts that 
they at last succeeded in killing and catching a number of 
animals, and dragging them at high water so near land that they 
were dry at ebb. They were so heavy that forty men were 
required to do this ; we may conclude from these particulars that 
the number of sea-cows killed during the first wintering on 
Behring Island was not very large. For the first one was killed 
only six weeks before the shipwrecked men left the island, and 
the hunting thus fell at a time when they could leave the build- 
ing of the vessel to occupy themselves in that way only in case 
of necessity. Besides, only two animals were required to yield 
flesh-food to all the men for the period in question. 

It is remarkable that the sea-cow is so mentioned by later 
travellers only in passing, that this large animal, still hunted by 
Europeans in the time of Linnaeus, would scarcely have been 
registered in the system of the naturalist if Steller had not 
wintered on Behring Island. What Krascheninnikov says of the 
sea-cow is wholly borrowed from Steller, and in the same way 
nearly all the statements of later naturalists as to its occurrence 
and mode of life. That this is actually the case is shown by the 
following abstract, complete as far as I know, of what is said of 

VOL. II. T 



274 THE VOYAGE OF THE VEGA. [chap. 



the sea-cow in the only original account of the first hunting 
voyages of the Russians to the Aleutian. Islands, which waa 
published at Hamburg and Leipzig in 1776 with the title, Newe 
NachricJUen von denen Tveuervtdeckten Insuln in der See zunscken 
Asien und Amerika, aus mitgetheiUen Urhmnden und Aumlgen 
verf asset von J. L, S * * (Scherer).^ In this book the sea-cow is 
mentioned at the following places : — 

" Ivan Krassilnikoffs vessel started first in 1754 and arrived 
on the 8th October at Behring Island, where all the vessels fitted 
out for hunting the sea-otter on the remote islands are wont to 
pass the winter, in order to provide themselves with a suflScient 
stock of the flesh of the sea-cow " {loc. cit. p. 38). 

" The autumn storms, or rather the wish to take on board a 
stock of provisions, compelled them (a number of hunters sent 
out by the merchant Tolstyk under command of the Cossack 
Obeuchov) to touch at Commander's Island (Behring Island) 
where, during the winter up to the ^h June, 1757, they obtained 
nothing else than sea-cows, sea-lions, and large seals. They found 
no sea-otters this year " {ibid, p. 40). 

" They (a Russian hunting vessel under Studenzov in 1758) 
landed on Behring Island to kill sea-cows, as all vessels are 
accustomed to do " (ibid. p. 45). 

"After Korovin in 1762 (on Behring Island) had provided 
himself with a sufficient stock of the flesh and hides of the sea- 
cow for his boats .... he sailed on" (ibid, p. 82). 

^ From this little work, compiled from the original journals (Of. Coze, 
Russian Discoveries, 1780, p. vi) we see that the undaunted courage and 
the resolution which, matched with other qualities not so praiseworthy, 
distinguished the Promyschlenni during their expeditions of exploration, 
trihute-collecting, and plunder from the Oh to Kamchatka, did not &il 
them in the attempt to force their way across the sea to America. It 
happens yearly that a ship's crew save themselves from destruction in 
the most extraordinary craft, for necessity has no law. But it is perhaps 
not so common that an exploring expedition, wrecked on an uninhabited 
treeless island, huilds for itself of fragments from its own vessel, indeed 
even of driftwood, a new one in order to sail out on the ocean to discover 
new fiflhing-grounds or new wild tribes, willing to pay " jassak" to the 
adventurers. This however happened very frequently during the Russian 
voyages of discovery and hunting to the Aleutian Islands from 1745 to 
1770, and it was remarkable that the craft built in this way were used 
for years, even after the return firom the first voyage. 



xr.] ACCOUNTS OF THE SEA-COW. 276 



vl 



In 1772 Dmitri Bragin wintered on Behring Island during 
a hunting voyage. In a journal kept at the request of Pallas, the 
large marine animaU occurring on the island are enumerated, but 
not a word is said about the sea-cow (Pallas, Nms nordische 
Beytrdge, ii. p. 310). 

ScHELECHOV passed the winter 1783-84 on Behring Island, 
but during the whole time he only succeeded in killing some 
white foxes, and in the narrative of the voyage there is not a 
word about the sea-cow (Grigori Scheleohov russischen 
Kaufmanns erste und ztueite Seise, &c., St. Petersburg, 1793). 

Some further accounts of the sea-cow have been obtained 
through the mining engineer Pet. Jakovlev, who visited 
Commander's Islands in 1755 in order to investigate the 
occurrence of copper on Copper Island. In the account of this 
voyage which he gave to Pallas there is not indeed one word 
about the sea-cow, but in 1867 Pekarski published in the 
Memoirs of the Petersburg Academy some extracts from 
Jakovlev's journal, from which it appears that the sea-cow 
already in his time was driven away from Copper Island. 
Jakovlev on this account on the 27th November, 1755, laid a 
petition before the authorities on Kamchatka, for having the 
hunting of the sea-cow placed under restraint of law and the 
extermination of the animal thus prevented, a thoughtful act 
honourable to its author, which certainly ought to serve as a 
pattern in our times (J. Fr. Brani>t, ^rribolce Sirenologicce, MSm. 
de VAcad, de St. P4tersbourg, t. xii. No. 1, 1861-68, p. 295). 

In his account of Behring's voyage (1785-94) published in 
1802, Sauer says, p. 181 : " Sea-cows were very common on 
Kamchatka and the Aleutian Islands,* when they were first 

* The 0ea-cow does not appear to have ever occurred on the Aleutian 
Islands; on the other hand, according to SteDer, dead sea-cows have 
bometimee been cast ashore on Kamchatka, where they even obtained from 
the Russians a peculiar name kapustnik^ derived from the large quantity 
of sea-weed found in their stomach. It appears to me that this name, 
specially distinctive of a graminivorous animal, appears to indicate that on 

T 2 



276 THE VOYAGE OF THE VEGA. [chap. 



discovered, but the last was killed on Behring Island in 1768, 
and none has been seen since then," 

On the ground of the writings of which I have given an 
account above, and of various pieces of information collected 
during this century from the Russian authorities in the region, 
by the skilfiil conservator Wosnessenski, the academicians von 
Baer and Brandt^ came to the conclusion that the sea-cow 
had scarcely been seen by Europeans before the y th November, 
1741, when Steller, the day after his landing on Behring Island, 
for the first time saw some strange animals pasturing with 
their heads under water on the shores of the island ; and that 
the animal twenty-seven years afterwards, or in 1768, was com- 
pletely exterminated. The latter statement however is im- 
doubtedly incorrect ; for, in the course of the many inquiries I 
made of the natives, I obtained distinct information that living 
sea-cows had been seen much later. A creole (that is, the 
offspring of a Russian and an Aleutian), who was sixty-seven 
years of age, of intelligent appearance and in the full possession 
of his mental faculties, stated "that his father died in 1847 at 
the age of eighty-eight. He had come from Volhynia, his 
native place, to Behring Island at the age of eighteen, accordingly 
in 1777. The two or three first years of his stay there, i.e. till 
1779 or 1780, sea-cows were still being killed as they pastured 
on sea-weed. The heart only was eaten, and the hide used for 
haydars? In consequence of its thickness the hide was split 

the first arrival of the Kussians at Kamchatka the sea-cow actually visited 
occasionally the coasts of that peninsula. It is probable that in former 
times the sea-cow was to be met with as far south as the north part of 
Japan. Some scientific men have even conjectured that the animal may 
have occurred north of Behring's Straits. This however is improbable. 
Among the mass of subfossil bones of marine animals which we examined 
at Pitlekaj the bones of the sea-cow did not appear to be present. 

^ Yon Baer's and Brandt's numerous writings on the sea-cow are to be 
found in the publications of the St. Petersburg Academy. 

" That the hide of the sea-cow was used for haydars is evident from the 
short extract given from Korovin's voyage. On hearing this " Creole's " 



XV.] WHEN DID THE RHYTJNA DIB OUT? 277 

■ ■ — ■ ■ 

in two, and the two pieces thus obtained had gone to make a 
haydar twenty feet long, seven and a half feet broad, and three 
feet deep. After that time no sea-cows had been killed." 

There is evidence, however, that a sea-cow had been seen 
at the island still later. Two Creoles, Feodor Mertchenin and 
Stepnoflf, stated, that about twenty-five years ago at Tolstoj-mys, 
on the east side of the island, they had seen an animal unknown 
to them which was very thick before, but grew smaller behind, 
had small fore-feet, and appeared with a length of about fifteen 
feet above water, now raising itself up, now lowering itself. 
The animal "blew," not through blowholes, but through the 
month, which was somewhat drawn out. It was brown in 
colour with some lighter spots. A back fin was wanting, but 
when the animal raised itself it was possible, on account of its 
great leanness, to see its backbone projecting. I instituted a 
through examination of both my informants. Their accounts 
agreed completely, and appeared to have claims to be regarded as 
trustworthy. That the animal which they saw was actually a 
sea-cow, is clearly proved both by the description of the animal's 
form and way of pasturing in the water, and by the account 
of the way in which it breathed, its colour, and leanness. In 
Aiisfurliehe Beschreihung von sonderharen Meerthieren, Steller 
says, p. 97, " While they pasture, they raise every fourth or fifth 
minute their nose from the water in order to blow out air and 
a little water ; " p. 98, " During winter they are so lean that 
it is possible to count their vertebrae and ribs ; " and p. 54, 
"Some sea-cows have pretty large white spots and streaks, 
so that they hava a spotted appearance." As these natives 
had no knowledge of Steller's description of the animal, it 
is impossible that their statement can be false. The death- 
year of the Rhytina race must therefore be altered at least 

account I inquired whether there were not to be found remaining on the 
island any very old sea-cow skins that had been used for baydarsy but the 
answer unfortunately was in the negative. 



278 THE VOYAGE OF THE VEGA. [chap. xv. 



to 1854. With reference to this point it may be remarked 
that many circumstances indicate that the Bhytina herds were 
rather driven away from the rich pastures on Behring Island 
than exterminated there, and that the species became extinct 
because in their new haunt they were unable to maintain the 
struggle for existence. The form of the sea-cow, varying from 
that of most recent animals, besides indicates that, like the long- 
tailed duck on Iceland, the dront on Mauritius, and the large 
ostrich-Uke birds on New Zealand, it was the last representative 
of an animal group destined to extinction. 

Mr. OscHE, one of the Alaska Company's skin inspectors, a 
native of LifBand and at present settled on Copper Island, in- 
formed me that the bones of the sea-cow also occurred on the 
western side of that island. On the other hand, such bones 
are said not to be found on the small island described farther on 
lying off the colony on Behring Island, although Bhytina bones 
are common on the neighbouring shores of the main island. ** 

This is the scanty information I have been able to collect 
from the natives and others resident in the quarter regarding 
the animal in question. On the other hand, my endeavours to 
procure Bhytina bones were crowned with greater success, and 
I succeeded in actually bringing together a very laige and fine 
collection of skeleton fragments. 

When I first made the acquaintance of Europeans on the 
island, they told me that there was little probability of finding 
anything of value in this respect ; for the company had offered 
150 roubles for a skeleton without success. But before I had 
been many hours on land, I came to know that large or small 
collections of bones were to be found here and there in the huts 
of the natives. These I purchased, intentionally paying for them 
such a price that the seller was more than satisfied and his neigh- 
bours were a little envious. A great part of the male population 
now began to search for bones very eagerly, and in this way I 
collected such a quantity that twenty-one casks, large boxes, or 



= i 

- I 
= I 




280 THE VOYAGE OF THE VEGA, [ch*p, 

barrels were filled with Rbytiim bones ; among which were three 
very fine, complete skulls, and others more or less damaged, 
several considerable collections of bones from the same 
skeleton, &c. 

The Ehytioa bones do not lie at the level of the sea, but upon 
a strand-bank thickly overgrown with luxuriant grass, at a height 
of two or three metres above it. They are commonly covered 
with a layer of earth and gravel from thirty to fifty centimetres 
in thickness. In order to find them, aa it would be too trouble- 
some to dig the whole of the grassy bank, one must examine 
the ground with a pointed iron rod, a bayonet, or some such 
tool. One soon leama to distinguish, by the resistance and 



Aftu J. Ft. Bnodt (Srmbote Btrtnoteslia, Fmc UI. p. US), 

nature of the sound, whether the rod stuck into the ground 
has come into contact with a stone, a piece of wood, or a 
fragment of bone. The ribs are used by the natives, on account 
of their hard ivory-like structure, for shoeing the runners of 
the sledges or for carvings. They have accordingly been 
already used up on a large scale, and are more uncommon than 
other bones. The finger-bone, which perhaps originally was 
cartilaginous, appears in most cases to be quite destroyed, as 
well as the outermost vertebrae of the tail. I could not obtain 
any such bones, though I specially urged the natiyes to get 
me the smaller bones too and promised to pay a high price 
for them. 



XV.] THE SEA-BEAR. 281 



r 
I 



The only large animal which is still found on Behring Island 

in perhaps as large numbers as in Steller's time is the sea-hear. 

Even it had already diminished so that the year's catch was 

inconsiderable,* when in 1871 a single company obtained for 

a payment to the Eussian crown, if I recollect right, of two 

roubles for every animal killed, and exclusive right to the 

hunting, which was accordingly arranged in a more purposelike 

way. At certain times of the year the killing of the sea-bear 

is wholly prohibited. The number of the animals to be killed 

is settled beforehand, quite in the same way as the farmer at 

I the time of killing in autumn is wont to do with his herd of 

! cattle. Females and young are only killed exceptionally. Even 

the married males, or more correctly the males that can get 

^ themselves a harem and can defend it, commonly escape being 

killed, if not for any other reason, because the skin is too often 

torn and tattered and the hair pulled out. It is thus the 

bachelors that have to yield up their skins. 

I That a wild animal may be slaughtered in so orderly a 

\ way, depends on its peculiar mode of life.^ For the sea-bears 

^ The number of these animals killed on Behring Island is shown by the 
following statement given me by Mr. Henry W. Elliot : 

Intbe Year 
: 1867 ... 

1868 ... 

• 1869 ... 

X 1870 ... 

1871 ,.. 

^ Daring the eighteen years from 1862 to 1880 there have thus been shipped 
from Behring Island 389,462 skins. The catch on the Pribylov Islands 
■"' has been still larger. These islands were discovered in 1786, but the 
n nnmber of animals killed there is not known for the first ten years ; it is 
only known that it was enormously large. In the years 1797-1880 — that is 
in eighty-four years— over three-and-a-half millions of skins have been 
exported from these islands. In recent years the catch has increased so 
that in each of the years from 1872 to 1880, 99^000 animals might have 
been killed without inconvenience. 

' Tlie traits here given of the sea-bear's mode of life are mainly taken 
from Henry W. Elliot's work quoted above. 



1* 





ria the Tear 




In ihe Year 




27,500 


1872 ... 


29,318 


1877 ... 


21,532 


12,000 


1873 ... 


30,396 


1878 ... 


31,340 


24,000 


1874 ... 


31,292 


1879 ... 


42,762 


24,000 


1876 ... 


36,274 


1880 ... 


48,604 


3,614 


1876 ... 


26,960 







282 THE VOYAGE OF THE VEGA. [chap. 

are found year after year during gununer at certain points 



(riom ■ •riter-coloni pointing bf B. W, EUlott) 

pixijecting into the sea (rookeries), where, collect«cl in bundreds 



XV.] LIFE AT A " ROOKERY." 283 



of thousands, they pass several months without the least food. 
The males (oxen) come first to the place, most of them in the 
month of May or at the beginning of June. Combats of 
excessive violence, often with a deadly issue for one of the 
parties, now arise regarding the space of about a hundred square 
feet, which each seal-ox considers necessary for its home. The 
strongest and most successful in fight retain the best places 
near the shore ; the weaker have to crawl farther up on land, 
where the expectation of getting a sufficient nimiber of spouses 
is not particularly great. The fighting goes on with many 
feigned attacks and parades. At first the contest concerns the 
proprietorship of the soil. The attacked therefore never follows 
its opponent beyond the area it has once taken up, but haughtily 
lays itself down, when the enemy has retired, in order in the 
arms of sleep to collect forces for a new combat. The animal 
in such a case grunts with satisfaction, throws itself on its back, 
scratches itself with its fore-feet, looks after its toilet, or cools 
itself by slowly fanning with one of its hind-feet, but it is always 
on the alert and ready for a new fight until it is tired out and 
meets its match, and is driven by it farther up from the beach. 
One of the most peculiar traits of these animals is that 
during their stay on land they unceasingly use their hind-paws 
as fans, and sometimes also as parasols. Such fans may on a 
warm day be in motion at the same time by the hundred 
thousand at a " rookery." 

In the middle of June the females come up fix)m the sea. At 
the water's edge they are received in a very accommodating way by 
some strong oxen that have succeeded in securing for themselves 
places next the shore, and now are bent by fair means or foul 
on annexing the fair for their harem. But scarcely is the 
female that has come up out of the water established with 
seal-ox No. 1, when this ox rushes towards a new beauty 
on the surface of the water. Seal-ox No. 2 now stretches 
out his neck and without ceremony lays hold of No. I's spouse. 



284 THE VOYAGE OP THE VEGA. [ohap. xv. 



to be afterwards exposed to a repetition of the trick by 
No. 3. In such cases the females are quite passive, never 
fall out with each other, and bear with patience the severe 
wounds they often get when they are pulled about by the 
combatants, now in one direction, now in another. All the 
females are finally distributed in this way after furious combats 
among the males, those of the latter who are nearest the beach 
getting from twelve to fifteen consorts to their share. Those 
that have been compelled to settle farther from the shore 
must be content with four or five. Soon after the landing of the 
females they bring forth their young, which are treated with 
great indifference and are protected by the adopted father only 
within the boundaries of the harem. Next comes the pairing 
season, and when it has passed there is an end to the arrange- 
ment and distribution into families at first so strictly main- 
tained. The seal-oxen, rendered lean by three months absolute 
fasting, by degrees leave the " rookery," which is taken possession 
of by the sea-cows, the young, and a number of young males^ 
that have not ventured to the place before. In the middle of 
September, when the young have learned to swim, the place is 
quite abandoned, with the exception of single animals that 
have remained behind for one reason or other. In long con- 
tinued heavy rain many of the animals besides seek protection 
in the sea, but return when the rain ceases. Continuous heat 
and sunshine besides exert the same influence ; cold, moist air, 
with mist-concealed sun, on the other hand draw, them up on 
land by thousands. 

Males under six years of age cannot, like the older males, 
possess themselves, by fighting, of spouses and a home of their 
own. They therefore collect, along with young females, in herds 
of several thousand to several hundred thousand, on the shores 
between the rookeries proper, some of them close packed next 
the water's edge, others scattered in small flocks a little fSsuther 
from the shore on the grass, where they by turns play with each 



i 

k 

it 

i! 



\ 



CHAP. XY.] THE SLAUGHTER OF THE SEA-BEAR 287 



other with a froKcsomeness like that of young dogs, hy turns 
lie down to sleep at a common signal in all conceivahle 
positions. 

It is these imfortunate useless bachelors which at the properly 
managed hunting stations yield the contingent for slaughter. 
For this purpose they are driven by the natives from the shore 
slowly, about a kilometre an hour, and with frequent rests, to 
the place of slaughter, situated a kilometre or two from the 
shore. Then the females and the young ones are driven away, 
as well as the males whose skins are unserviceable. The rest 
are first stunned with a blow on the head, and afterwards 
stabbed with a knife. 

While the Vega steamed down towards Behring Island we 
met, already far from land, herds of sea-bears, which followed 
the vessel from curiosity for long stretches. Being unacquainted 
with the sea-bear's mode of Hfe, I believed from this circum- 
stance that they had already left their summer haunts, but on 
our arrival at the colony I was informed that this was not the 
case, but that a very great number of animals still remained at 
the rookery on the north-eastern point of the island. Naturally 
one of our first excursions was to this place, situated about 
twenty kilometres from the village. Such a journey cannot now 
be undertaken alone and unattended, because even an involuntary 
want of caution might easily cause much economic loss to the 
natives, and to the company that owns the right of hunting. 
During the journey we were accordingly accompanied by the 
chief of the village, a black-haired stammering Aleutian, and 
" the Cossack," a young, pleasant, and agreeable fellow, who on 
solemn occasions wore a sabre nearly as long as himself, but 
besides did not in the least correspond to the Cossack type of 
the writers of novels and plays. 

The journey was performed in large sledges drawn by ten 
dogs over snow-free rounded hills and hill-plateaus covered 
with a rather scanty vegetation, and through valleys treeless 



288 THE VOYAGE OF TUK VEGA, [chap. 

as the mountains, but adorned with luxuriant vegetation, rich in 
splendid lilies, syngenesia, urabellifera,&c. The journey was some- 
times tedious enough, but we now and then went at a whistling 
rate, especially when the dog-team descended the steep moun- 
tain slopes, or went through the morasses and the clay puddles 
formed in the constantly used way. The driver was bespattered 
from top to toe with a thick layer of mud, an inconvenience 



<*ftM n dnwlDg by U. W. Brlott.) 

attending tlie unusual team, which was foreseen before our 
departure from the colony, in consequence of which our friends 
there ui^ed that, notwithstanding the fine weather, we should 
all take overcoats. Tlie d(^-team was kept pretty far from 
the shore in order not to frighten the seals, and then we 
went on foot to the place where the sea-bears were, choosing 



IT.] VISIT TO A ■' ROOKERY." 289 

our way so that we had the wind in our faces. We could in 
this way, without disturbing them, come very near the animals, 
which, according to the undouhtedly somewhat exa^erated 
statement made to us on the spot, were collected at the time 
to the number of 200,000, on the promontory and the neigh- 
bouring shores. We obtained permission to creep, accom- 
panied by our guide, close to a herd lying a little apart. The 
older nniTni\l<; became at first somewhat uneasy when they 



(After 1 dnwlng b; H. W. EUiotl) 

observed our approach, but they soon settled down completely, 
and we had now the pleasure of beholding a peculiar spectacle. 
We were the only spectators. The scene consisted of a beach 
covered with stones and washed by foaming breakers, the back- 
ground of the immeasurable ocean, and the actors of thousands 
of wonderfiilly-formed animals. A number of old males lay 
still and motionless, heedless of what was going on around 
them. Others crept clumsily on their small short legs between 
VOL. n. U 



290 THE VOYAGE OF THE VEGA. [chap. 

the stones of the beach^ or swam with incredible agility among 
the breakers, played, caressed each other, and quarrelled- At 
one place two old animals fought, uttering a peculiar hissing 
sound, and in such a way as if the attack and defence had 
been carried out in studied attitudes. At another place a 
feigned combat was going on between an old and a young 
animal. It looked as if the latter was being instructed in the 
art of fighting. Everywhere the small black young ones crept 
constantly backwards and forwards among the old sea-bears, now 
and then bleating like lambs calling on their mothers. The 
young ones are often smothered by the old, when the latter, 
frightened in some way, rush out into the sea. After such an 
alarm hundreds of dead young are found on the shore. 

'' Only " thirteen thousand animals had been killed that year. 
Their flayed carcases lay heaped on the grass by the shore, 
spreading far and wide a disagreeable smell, which, however, 
had not frightened away their conu^es lying on the neighbour- 
ing promontory, because, even among them, a similar smeU 
prevailed in consequence of the many animals suffocated or 
killed in fight with their comrades, and left lying on the shore.^ 
Among this great flock of sea-bears sat enthroned on the top of 
a high stone a single sea-lion, the only one of these aniinals 
we saw during our voyage. 

For a payment of forty roubles I induced the chief of the 
village to skeletonise four of the half putrefied carcases of the 
sea-bear left lying on the grass ; and I afterwards obtained, by 
the good-will of the Russian authorities, and without any 
payment, six animals, among them two living young, for 
stuflSng. Even the latter we were compelled to kill, after 

^ Elliott {loc. cit. p. 150) remarks that not a single self-dead seal is to be 
found in the *' rookery," where there are so many animals that they pro- 
bably die of old age in thousands. This may he explained by the seals, 
when they become sick, withdrawing to the sea, and forms another con- 
tribution to the question of the finding of self-dead animals to which I 
have already referred (vol. i. p. 322). 



XV.] TOPORKOFF ISLAND. 291 

in vain attempting to induce them to take some food. One of 
them was brought home in spirits for anatomical examination. 
The part of Behring Island which we saw forms a high plain 
resting on volcanic rocks,^ which, however, is interrupted at 
many places by deep kettle valleys, the bottoms of which are 
generally occupied by lakes which communicate with the sea 
by large or small rivers. The banks of the lakes and the 
slopes of the hills are covered with a luxuriant vegetation, rich 
in long grass and beautiful flowers ; among them an iris culti- 
vated in our gardens, the useful dark reddish-brown Sarana 
lily, several orchids, two species of rhododendron with large 
flowers, umbellifera as high as a man, sunflower-like synanthea, 
&c. Quite another nature prevailed on the island lying off 
the haven, regarding which Dr. Kjellman and Dr. Stuxberg 
make the following statements : — 

"ToporkoflF Island is formed of an eruptive rock, which 
everywhere rises along the shore some scores of feet from 
high-water mark, in the form of steep cracked walls from five 
to fifteen metres in height, which is different at different places. 
Above these steep rock-walls the surface of the island forms 
an even plain ; what lies below them forms a gently sloping 
beach. 

" This gently sloping beach consists of two well-marked belts ; 
an outer devoid of all vegetation, an inner overgrown with 
Ammadenia peploideSf Elymus mollis, and two species of umbel- 
lifera, Heracleum sibii'icum, and Angelica archangelica, the two 
last forming an almost impenetrable thicket fifty metres broad 
and as high as a man, along the slope. The steep rock-walls 
are coloured yellow at some places by lichens, mostly Caloplaca 
tnurorum and Cal. crenulata ; at other places they axe covered 
pretty closely with Cochlearia fenestrata. The uppermost level 
plain is covered- with a close and luxuriant turf, over which 

^ According to a statement by Mr. Grebnitski, tertiary fossils and coal 
Beams are also to be found on Behring Island, the former north of the 
colony in the interior, the latter at the beach south of Beh ring's grave. 
Also in the neighbourhood of the colony the volcanic rock-masses are 
under-stratified by thick sandy beds. 

U 2 



292 THE VOYAUE OF THE VEGA. [chap. 

single stalks of the two species of umbellifera named above 
raise themselves here and there. The vegetation on this little 
island unites a very unconmion poverty in species with a high 
degree of luxuriance. 

" Of the higher animals we saw only four kinds of birds^ viz. 
Fratercula cirrhcUa, a black guillemot {Uria gryUe var. coluniba), 
a species of cormorant (Phalocrocorax) and a sort of guU 
(Larus). Fratercula cirrhata lived here by millions. They 
haunted the upper plain, where they had everywhere excavated 
short, deep, and uncommonly broad passages to sleep in, provided 
with two openings. From these on our arrival they flew in large 
flocks to the neighbouring sea and back. Their number was 
nearly equal to that of looms in the Arctic loomeries. The 
black guillemots and cormorants kept to the cliffs near the 
shore. 

" The number of the evertebrate land animals amounted to 
about thirty species. The most numerous were Machilis, 
Yitrina, Lithobius, Talitrus, some Diptera and beetles. They all 
lived on the inner belt of the shore, where the ground was 
uncommonly damp." 

Behring Island might without difliculty feed large herds of 
cattle, perhaps as numerous as the herds of sea-cows that 
formerly pastured on its shores. The sea-cow besides had chosen 
its pasture with discrimination, the sea there being, according to 
Dr. Kjellman, one of the richest in algae in the world. The 
sea-bottom is covered at favourably situated pla<^s by forests of 
seaweed from twenty to thirty metres high, which are so dense 
that the dredge could with difficulty force its way down into 
them, a circumstance which was much against the dredging. 
Certain of the algse are used by the natives as food. 

In the course of our journey to the hunting place we had an 
opportunity, during a rest about halfway between it and the 
village, of taking part in a very peculiar sort of Ashing. The 
place where we rested was in an even grassy plain, resembling a 
natural meadow at home, crossed by a large number of small 
rivulets. They abounded in several different kinds of fish, 
among them a Coregonus, a small trout, a middle-sized long 
salmon with almost white flesh, though the colour of its skin 



XV.} PECULIAR FISHING. 293 

was a purplish-red, another salmon of about the same length, 
but thick and hump-backed. These fish were easily caught. 
They were taken with the hand, were harpooned with common 
unshod sticks, were stabbed with knives, caught with the insect 



net, &c. Other kinds of salmon with deep red flesh are to be 
found in the large rivers of the island. We obtained here for 
a trifle a welcome change from the preserved provisions of which 



294 THE VOYAGE OF THE VEGA. [chap. 



we had long ago become quite tired. The Expedition was also 
presented by the Alaska Company with a fine fat ox, milk, and 
various other provisions, and I cannot sufficiently value the 
goodwill shown to us not only by the Russian official, N. Greb- 
NITSKI, a zealous and skilful naturalist, but also by the officials 
of the Alaska Company and all others living on the island with 
whom we came into contact. 

It was my original intention to sail from Behring Island to 
Petropaulovsk, in order from thence to put a stop to the under- 
takings which were possibly in contemplation for our relief. 
This however became unnecessary, because a steamer, which 
was to start for Petropaulovsk as soon as its cargo was on board, 
had anchored by the side of the Vega two days after our arrival- 
The steamer belonged to the Alaska Company, was named 
the Alexander, was commanded by Captain Sandman, and was 
manned almost exclusively by Swedes, Danes, Fins, and 
Norwegians.^ We found on the Alexander two naturalists. Dr. 
Benedikt Dybovski and Dr. Julian Wiemut. The former is 
a Pole exiled to Siberia but now pardoned, whose masterly 
zoological works are among the best contributions which have 
been made during recent decades to our knowledge of the 
natural conditions of Siberia. His researches have hitherto 
mainly concerned the Baikal region. Now he wishes to extend 
them to Kamchatka, and has therefore voluntarily taken a 
physician's post at Petropaulovsk. Science has reason to expect 
very rich results from his work and that of his companions in 
one of the most interesting, most mis-known, and least known 
lands of the north. 

^ The first European who welcomed us after the completion of the 
North-east passage was a Fin now settled in California, from Bjorkboda 
works in Kimito parish, in which I had lived a great deal when a youth. 
He was sent by the Alaska Company to do some work on Behring Island. 
As we steamed towards the colony he rowed to meet us, and saluted us with 
the cry *' ar det NordenskiSld ? " (*' Is it Nordenskiold ? ") His name w^as 
Isak Andersson. 



XV.] PASSAGE TO JAPAN. 295 

The Vtga left Behring Island on the afternoon of the 19th 
August, and anchored at Yokohama on the evening of the 2nd 
September. The first part of the passage, while we were still 
in the cold northerly Polar Sea current, was favoured by fair 
winds and moderate heat. The surface temperature of the sea 
was from +9° to +10°. On the 25th August in 45'' 15' N.L. 
and 156° E.L. firom Greenwich the temperature of the sea-water 
began to rise so rapidly that the thermometer in 40° Lat. 
and 147° 41' Long, already showed +23°'4 at the surface. 
This indicated that we had come from the cold current favour- 
able to us into Kuro-sivo, the Gulf Stream of the Pacific. The 
wind was now at times unfavourable and the heat oppressive, 
notwithstanding the frequent rain showers accompanied by 
ligiitning and heavy squalls. In such unfavourable weather on 
the 31st August the mainmast of the Vega was struck by 
lightning, the flash and the report being of excessive violence. 
The vane was broken loose and tlirown into the sea along with 
some inches of the pole. The pole itself was split pretty far 
down, and all on board felt a more or less violent shaking, the 
man who felt it most standing at the time near the hawse-hole. 
The incident was not attended by any further noteworthy 
unpleasant consequences. 

On our arrival at Yokohama we were all in good health and 
the Vega in excellent condition, though, after the long voyage, 
in want of some minor repairs, of docking, and possibly of 
coppering. Naturally among thirty men some mild attacks of 
illness could not be avoided in the course of a year, but no 
disease had been generally prevalent, and our state of health had 
constantly been excellent. Of scurvy we had not seen a trace. 



CHAPTER XVI. 

Arrival at Yokohama — A Telegram sent to Europe — The stranding of the 
steamer A. E. Nordenskiold—Fetes in Japan— The 'Minister of Marine, 
Eawamura — Prince Kito-Shira-Kava — Audience of the Mikado — Graves 
of the Shoguns— Imperial Garden at Tokio — The Exhibition there — 
Visit to Enoshima — Japanese manners and customs — ^Thunberg and 
Kampfer. 

Yokohama, the first harbour, telegraph station, and commercial 
town at which the Vega anchored after circumnavigating the 
north coast of Asia, is one of the Japanese coast cities which 
were opened to the commerce of the world after the treaty 
between the United States of America and Japan negotiated by 
Commodore Perry.* At this place there was formerly only 
a little fishing village, whose inhabitants had never seen Europeans 
and were forbidden under severe punishments from entering into 
communication or trading with the crews of the foreign vessels 
that might possibly visit the coast. The former village is 
now, twenty years later, changed into a town of nearly 70,000 
inhabitants, and consists not only of Japanese, but also of very 
fine European houses, shops, hotels, &c. It is also the residence 
of the governor of Eanagava Ken, It is in communication 
by rail with the neighbouring capital Tokio, by regular weekly 

^ The Dutch had permission in former times to send some vessels 
annually to Nagasaki. By Perry's treaty, signed on the Slst March, 1854, 
Shimoda and Hakodate were opened to the Americans. Finally, by new 
treaties with the United States and various European powers, the harbours 
Kanagava (Yokohama), Nagasaki, Hakodate, Niigata, Hiogo, and Osaka, 
were assigned for commerce with foreigners. 



CHAP. XVI.] ARRIVAL AT YOKOHAMA. 297 



steamship sailings with San Francisco on the one hand^ and 
Hong Kong, India, &c., on the other, and finally by telegraph 
not only with the principal cities of Japan but also with all the 
lands that have got entangled in the threads of the world's 
telegraph net. 

The situation of the town on the western shore of the Yedo 
or Tokio Bay, which is perhaps rather large for a haven, is not 
particularly fine. But on sailing in we see in the west, if the 
weather be fine, Fusiyama's snow-clad, incomparably beautiful 
volcanic cone raise itself from a cultivated forest-clad region. 
When one has seen it, he is no longer astonished that the Japanese 
reproduce with such affection on their varnished wares, porcelain, 
cloth, paper, sword-ornaments, &c., the form of their highest, 
stateliest, and also grinmiest mountain. For the number of the 
men who have perished by its eruptions is reckoned by hundreds 
of thousands, and if tradition speaks truth the whole mountain 
in a far distant antiquity was formed in a single night. Before 
we enter Yedo Bay we pass a volcano, active during last year, 
situated on the volcanic island Oshima, known in Japanese 
history as the place of exile of several of the heroes in the many 
internal struggles of the country. 

While we sailed, or more correctly, steamed — for we had still 
sufficient coal remaining to permit the engine to be used — up 
the Bay of Yedo, the coasts were for the most part concealed 
with mist, so that the summit of Fusiyama and the contours of 
the shore only now and then gleamed forth from the fog and 
cloud. The wind besides was against us, on which account it was 
9.30 in the evening of the 2nd September before we could 
anchor in the haven that had been longed-for for such a length 
of time. I immediately hastened on land, along with Captain 
Palander, in order to send home a telegram across Siberia 
about the fortunate issue of the voyage of the Vega. At 
the telegraph station I was informed that the Siberian line was 
interrupted by inundations for a space of 600 versts, and that 



298 THE VOYAGE OF THE VEGA. [chap. xvi. 

the telegram must therefore be sent by India, whereby the cost 
was nearly doubled. The telegraph officials also made difficolties 
about taking the foreign gold coin of various kinds which I had 
about me. Fortunately the latter difficulty was immediately 
removed by the accidental presence of the Russian consul, Mr. 
Pelikan, while I was treating with the telegraph officials. When 
he heard that it concerned the sending home of a telegram firom 
the much-talked-of Vega expedition, he immediately offered to 
arrange the affair until I had time to operate on the letter 
of credit I carried with me from Messrs. James Dickson & Co. 
of Gothenburg. Soon after I met with the Swedish consul, 
Mr. VAN OoRDT, who gave us a large parcel of letters firom 
home. It was very gladly received by most of us, as, so fer 
as I know, it did not bring the thirty members of the expedition 
a single unexpected sorrowful message. I got, however, soon 
after landing, an unpleasant piece of news, viz. that the steamer 
A, E, NordeTiskidldy which Mr. Sibiriakoff had sent to Behring's 
Straits and the Lena to our relief, had stranded on the east coast 
of Yesso. The shipwreck fortunately had not been attended 
with any loss of human life, and the vessel lay stranded on 
a sandbank in circumstances which made it probable that it 
would be got off without too great cost. 

As the report of our arrival spread, I waa immediately waited 
upon by various deputations with addresses of welcome, invitations 
to files, clubs, &c. A series of entertainments and festivities 
now began, which occupied a great part of the time we remained 
in this splendid and remarkable country. Perhaps a sketch 
of these festivities may yield a picture of Japan during the state 
of transition which still prevails there, and which in a decade 
or two will undoubtedly belong to a past and to a great extent 
forgotten period, a picture which to future writers may possibly 
form a not unwelcome contribution to the knowledge of the 
Japan that now (1879) is. Such a sketch would however 
carry me too far beyond the subject of this narrative of 



I \ 



CHAP. XVI.] ADMIRAL KAWAMUBA. 301 

travel, and require loo much space, ou which account I must 
confioe myself to an enumeration of the festivities at the head 
of which were public authorities, learned societies, or clubs. 

On the lOtb September a grand dinner was given at the Grand 
Hotel, the principal European hotel — and very well kept — of 
Yokohama, by the Dutch minister. Chevalier van Stoetwegen, 
who at the same time represents Sweden and Norway in Japan. 



(Afar > Japuieu photograph.) 

The members of the Expedition were here introduced to several 
members of the Japanese Government. 

We were invited to a d^'edner a la fourchette, at one o'clock 
P.M. on the 11th September, at the Imperial summer palace 
Hamagoten, by Admiral Kawamura, minister of marine. At 
this entertainment there were present, besides the scientific men 



802 THE VOYAGE OF THE VEGA. [chap. 

and officers of the Vega, and our minister,- Heir van Stoetw^en, 
several of the ministers and highest officials of Japan. Some 
of them spoke one or other of the European languages, others 
only Japanese, in which case ofEcials of lower rank acted as 
interpreters, these however taking no part in the entertainment 
along with the other guests. It was arranged after the European 



Jipinue Ulnletar tit HartiH. 

pattern, with ahundauce of dishes and wines. The palace 
consisted of a one-storied wooden house in the Japanese style 
of construction. The rooms, to which we were admitted, were 
provided with European furniture, much the same as we would 
expect to find in the summer residence of a well-to-do family 
in Sweden. It was remarkable that the Japanese did not take 



XTi.] ADMIRAL KAWAMURA'S ENTERTAINMENT. 303 

the trouble to ornament the room or the table to any consider- 
able extent with the beautiful native bronzes or porcelain, of 
which there is such abundance in the country. The summer 
palace was surrounded by a garden which the Japanese consider 
something very extraordinary, and also on a very large scale. 
We should call it a small, well and originally kept miniature 
park, with carefully dressed turf, wonderful dwarf trees, miniature 
stone bridges, small ponds and waterfalls. The entertainment was 
very pleasant, and all, from our intelligent host to the Premier, 
Daiyo-daiyin, and the Imperial Prince, Sanyo Sanitomi, 
showed us much friendliness. The latter looked a sickly young 
man, some years past twenty. He was, however, much older, 
and had taken a leading part in the most important political 
transactions since the opening of the ports. Our host. Admiral 
Kawamura, had more the appearance of a man of science than 
of a warrior. The modest exterior, however, concealed a great 
and noble man. For Kawamura, as commander of the Mikado's 
troops, had with special distinction brought about the suppression 
of the revolt under the brave Saigo Kichinosuke, who had at the 
restoration of the power of the Mikado been its heart and sword, 
but soon after fell before the government he himself contributed 
to create, and is now, a couple of years after, admired and sung 
by former friends and by former enemies as a national hero. All 
the Japanese present at the dSjeilner were clad in European 
dress — in black dress coat and white tie. Even the interpreters 
and attendants wore the European dress. The people, the lower 
officials, and the servants in private houses are still clothed in 
the Japanese dress, but do not wear a sword, which is now 
prohibited. Many of the people have even exchanged the old 
troublesome Japanese dressing of the hair for the convenient 
European style. 

In the course of conversation after the cUje^Aner the ministers 
offered to do all they could to make our stay in the country 
agreeable and instructive. Distinguished foreigners are always 



304 THE VOYAGE OP THE VEGA. [chap. 

well received in Japan, and we are informed that a special 
committee is appointed to make arrangements for their re- 
ception. This has given offence in certain quarters, and 
shortly before our arrival a proclamation was issued by a secret 
society, which threatened, if no change were made, to kill one of 
the ministers and one of the foreigners who were entertained 
in this, in the opinion of the secret society, extravagant way. 
One of my Japanese friends promised me a copy of the pro- 
clamation, but did not keep his promise, probably because it 
was impossible for the uninitiated to get hold of the dangerous 
writing. 

On the 13th September a grand dinner was arranged for us 
by the German Club, the photographer Andersen being chair- 
man. The hall was adorned in a festive manner with flags, 
and with representations of the Vega in various more or less 
dangerous positions among the ice, which had been got up 
for the occasion; the bill of fare had reference to the cir- 
cumstances of our wintering, &c. A number of speeches were 
made ; the feeling was cheerful and merry. 

On the 15th September there was a grand entertainment in 
Tokio, given by the Tokio Geographical Society, the Asiatic 
Society of Japan, and. the German Asiatic Society. It was 
held in the great hall in Koku-Dai-Gaku, a large stone 
building surrounded with beautiful trees, which were lighted up 
for the occasion by a number of variegated paper lanterns. 
Several Japanese ladies dressed in European style took part 
in the entertainment. I sat by the side of the chairman. 
Prince Kita-Shira-Kava, a young member of the imperial 
house, who had served some time in the German army and 
speaks German very well. During the disturbances which were 
caused by the removal of the residence from Kioto to Yedo 
(Tokio), a group of insurgents had seized the prince, then a 
minor, who under the name of Rinnojino-Miya was chief 
priest in a temple, and endeavoured to set him up in opposition 



XVI.] PRINCE YOHI HISHA. 305 



to the Emperor. The plan failed, and in consequence of the 
reconciliation at the end of the conflict, which distinguished in 
so honourable a way the many involved and bloody political 
struggles in Japan during recent years, this adventure was 
attended with no other result for him than that the former 
chief priest was sent to a German military school. He was 
recalled sooner than was intended because he wished to marry 
a European, which was considered below the dignity of the 
family of the Mikado. After his return he was declared neai-est 
heir to the throne, in case the Mikado should die without male 
heirs, and his name, Kita-Shira-Kava-NO-Miya, was changed 
a second time to YoHl HiSHA. The former name was at the 
bottom of the speech he made for us at the dinner, and which 
he gave me, and the latter, with the addition, " Prince of Japan," 
was on his calling card. The dinner was quite European, 
with a large number of speeches, principally in European 
languages, but also in Japanese. Before every guest lay a map, 
of the form of a fan, with the course of the Vega marked upon 
it. As a memorial of the feast I received some days after a 
huge medal in silver inlaid in gold, of which a drawing is given 
on pages 306, 307. We were conveyed back to the Tokio 
railway station in European equipages, in the same way as we 
had been brought to the dinner. During dinner musicians 
from the band of the imperial navy played European pieces of 
music with great skill, to the evident satisfaction of the 
Japanese. 

On the forenoon of the l7th September we were presented 
at the court of the Mikado in Tokio by the Swedish-Dutch 
minister. We were fetched from the railway station by imperial 
equipages, consisting of simple but ornamental and conve- 
nient suflett carriages, each drawn by a pair of beautiful black 
horses of no great size. As is common in Japan, a running 
groom, clad in black, accompanied each carriage. The recep- 
tion took place in the imperial palace, a very modest wooden 

VOL. II. X 



i 



;«t> THE VOi'AUt: Of THE TEGA. [i:uAr, 

building. The rooms we saw were furnished, almost poorly, iii 
European fashion. We first assembled in an antecbtunber, the 
only remaikable ornament of which was a large piec« of 
nephrit£, which was a little carved and had a Chinese inscription 
un it. Here we were met by some of the ministers and the 



Site uf the ohdiiul. 

interpreter. After u short conversation, in the course of which 
the interpreter got a sight of the writtcu speech, or more 
correctly the words of salutation, I was to speak, we were 
conducted into an inner apartment where the Emperor, clad 
in a uniform of European style and standing in &ont of a 



XVI.] 



ALFDIENCE OF THE MIKADO. 



307 



throne, received us. The only thing unusual at our reception 
was that we were requested at our departure not to turn our 
backs to the Emperor, and on entering and departing to 
make three bows, one at the door, another when we had 
come forward a little on the floor, and one at the place 




IRC riRJBT MEDAL WHICH WAS 81RUCK AB A )I£M«»B1AX. UF THE VOYAUK OV THE " V£UA." 



Size of the origin^]. 



where we were to stand. After we had been presented 
the Emperor read a speech in Japanese, which was translated 
into French by the interpreter, and of which, before we left 
the place, a beautiful copy was given me. I then read my salu- 
tation, on which our minister, van Stoetwegen, said a few 

X 2 



308 THE VOYAGE OF THE VEGA. [chap. 

words, and got some words in reply. After leaving the 
imperial chamber, we were entertained in the anteroom with 
Japanese tea and cigars. The two princes who had taken 
part in the entertainment of the 15th came and talked a 
little with us, as did the minister of foreign affairs. The 
Emperor MuTSUHiTO, in whose name reforms have been 
carried out in Japan to an extent to which history can 
scarcely show anything equal, was bom the 3rd November, 
1850. He is considered the 121st Mikado of the race of 
Jimmu Tenno, the members of which have reigned uninter- 
ruptedly in Japan for nearly two thousand years, with varying 
fates and with varying power — now as wise lawgivers and mighty 
warriors, now for long periods as weak and effeminate rulers, 
emperors only in seeming, to whom almost divine homage was 
paid, but who were carefully freed from the burden of govern- 
ment and from all actual power. In comparison with this race, 
whose first ancestor lived during the first century after the 
foundation of Rome, all the royal houses now reigning in 
Europe are children of yesterday. Its present representative 
does not look to be very strong. During the whole audience 
he stooil so motionless that he might have been taken for a 
wax figure, if he had not himself read his speech. Prince 
Kita-Shira-Kava has the appearance of a young lieutenant of 
hussars. Most of the ministers have sharply marked features,* 
which remind one of the many furious storms they have sur- 
vived, and the many personal dangers to which they have been 
exposed, partly in honourable conflict, partly through murderers* 
plots. For, unfortunately, a political murder is not yet con- 
sidered in Japan an infamous crime, but the murderer openly 
acknowledges his deed and takes the consequences. Repeated 

1 At first it strikes a European as if all the Japanese had about the 
same appearance, but when one has got accustomed to the colour of the 
skin and the traits of the race, the features of the Japanese appear as 
various in form and expression as those of Europeans. 



XVI.] JAPANESE LADIES. 309 



murderous attempts have been made against the men of the 
new time. In order to protect themselves from these, ministers, 
when they go out, generally have their carriages surrounded by 
an armed guard on horseback. 

On the 18th September several of the members of the Vega 
expedition were invited to a d^jeHner A la fourchette by Admiral 
Kawamura, minister of marine. This entertainment had an in- 
terest for us because we were here for the first time received into 
a Japanese home. I sat at table by the side of Lady Kawamura. 
Even the children were present at the entertainment. Lady 
Kawamura was dressed in the Japanese fashion, tastefully but 
very plainly, if we except a heavy gold chain encircling the 
waist* In other respects the entertainment was arranged accord- 
ing to the European mode, with a succession of dishes and 
wines, both in abundance, according to the laws of gastronomy. 
When it was over our host oflFered us an airing in a carriage, 
during which I rode with the lady and one of the children, a 
little girl about ten years of age, who would have been very 
beautiful if she had not been disfigured, in the eyes of Euro- 
peans, by the thick white paint that was evenly spread over her 
whole face, and gave it a sickly appearance. Lady Kawamura 
herself was not painted, nor was she disfigured with blackened 
teeth. Most of the married women of Japan are accustomed 
after marriage to blacken their formerly dazzlingly white teeth ; 
but it is to be hoped that this unpleasant custom will soon 
disappear, as the women of distinction have begun to abandon 
it. During this excursion we visited, among other places, the 
graves of the Tycoons, the imperial garden, and a very 
remarkable exhibition in the capital. 

A number of the Tycoons, or, as they are more correctly 
called, Shoguns, are buried in Tokio. Their place of sepulture 
is one of the most remarkable memorials of Old Japan. The 
graves are in a temple which is divided into several courts, 
surrounded by walls and connected with each other by beautiful 



810 THE VOYAGE OF THE VEGA. [chap. 



gates. The first of these courts is ornamented with more than 
two hundred stone lanterns, presented to the temple by the 
feudal princes of the country, the name of the giver and the 
date at which it was given being inscribed on each. Some of 
these peculiar memorials are only half-finished, perhaps an 
evidence of the sudden close of the power of the Shoguns 
and the feudal princes in Japan. In another of the temple 
courts are to be seen lanterns of bronze, partly gilt, presented 
by other feudal princes. A third court is occupied by a temple, 
a splendid memorial of the old Japanese architecture, and of 
the antique method of adorning their sanctuaries with wooden 
carvings, gilding, and varnishing. The temple abounds in old 
book -rolls, bells, drums, beautiful old lacquered articles, &c. 
The graves themselves lie within a separate inclosure. 

The common Japanese gardens are not beautiful according 
to European taste. They are often so small that they might 
without inconvenience, with trees, grottos, and waterfalls, be 
accommodated in a small State's department in one of the crystal 
palaces of the international exhibitions. All, passages, rocks, 
trees, ponds, yea, even the fishes in the dams, are artificial or 
artificially changed. The trees are, by a special art which has 
been very highly developed in Japan, forced to assume the 
nature of dwarfs, and are besides so pruned that the whole plant 
has the appearance of a dry stem on which some green clumps 
have been hung up here and there. The form of the gold fish 
swimming in the ponds has also been changed, so that they have 
often two or four tail-fins each, and a number of growths not 
known in their natural state. On the walks thick layers of 
pebbles are placed to keep the feet from being dirtied, and at the 
doors of dwelling-houses there is nearly always a block of granite 
with a cauldron-like depression excavated in it, which is kept 
filled with clean water. Upon this stone cauldron is place<l 
a simple but clean wooden scoop, with which one can take water 
out of the vessel to wash himself with. 



xvf .1 THE IMPERIAL GARDES IN TOKIO. 311 

The imperial garden in Tokio is distinguished from these 
miniature gardens by its greater extent, and by the trees, at least 
at most places, bearing fruit. There is here a veritable park. 
with uncommonly large, splendid, and luxuriantly-growing trees 



The public is generally excluded from the garden. At our visit 
we were entertained in one of the imperial summer-houses with 
Japanese tea, sweetmeats, and cigars. 

Last of all we visited the Exhibition. It bad been closed for 



m-^ THE VOYAGE OF THE VEGA. [<HAr. 

some time back on account of cholera. We saw here a nmnber 
of beautiful specimens of Japanese art, from the flint tools and 
pottery of the Stone Age to the silks, porcelain, and bronzes 
of the present. In no country is there at this day such a 
love for exhibitions as in Japan. There are small exhibitions 
in most of the lai^e towns. Many were exceedii^Iy instructive ; 
iu all there were to be 'seen beautiful lacquered wares, porcelain, 



swords, silk, cloths, &c. In one I saw a collection of the birds and 
fishes of Japan, in another I discovered some vegetable im- 
pressions, by means of which I became acquainted with the 
remarkable locality for fossil plants at Mogi, of which I shall 
give an account farther on. 

On the evening of the 18th September I was invited by the 
Danish consul, Herr Bavier, to a boat excursion up the river 



XVI.] JAPANESE RESTAURANTS. 3 



which debouches at Tokio, At its mouth it is very broad and 
deep, and it branches somewhat farther up into several streams 
which are navigable by the shallow boats of the Japanese, With 
the present limited development of roads and railways in Japan, 
this river and its tributaries form the most important channels 
of communication between the capital and the interior of the 
country. During . our row we constantly met with boats laden 
with provisions on their way to, or with goods on their way from, 
the town. The pleasant impression of these and of the remark- 
able environs of the river is sometimes disturbed by a bad odour 
coming from a passing boat, and reminding us of the care with 
which the Japanese remove human excreta, the most important 
manure of their well-cultivated land. Along the banks of the 
river there are numerous restaurants and tea-houses. At long 
^^^N^itervals we see a garden on the banks, which has belonged to 
flMme of the former Daimio palaces. The restaurants and tea-houses 
al^ generally intended only for the Japanese ; and Europeans, 
although they pay many times more than the natives, are not 
/Admitted. The reason of this is to be found in our manners, which 
aie coarse and uncultivated in the eyes of the natives. " The 
European walks with his dirty boots on the carpets, spits on the 
floor, is uncivil to the girls, &c." Thanks to the letters of intro- 
duction from natives acquainted with the restaurant-keepers, 
I have been admitted to their exclusive places, and it must 
be admitted that everything there was so clean, neat, and orderly, 
that even the best European restaurants cannot compare with 
them. When a visitor enters a Japanese restaurant which is 
intended exclusively for the Japanese, he must always take 
off his boots at the stair else he gets immediately into disfavour. 
He is received with bended knee by the host and all the 
attendants, male, but principally female ; and then he is almost 
always surrounded by a number of young girls constantly laugh- 
- ing and chattering. These girls have commonly sold themselves 

to the restaurant-keeper for a certain time, during which they 



314 THE VOYAGR OF THE VEGA. [f^HAP. 

carry on a life which, accordii^ to European standarils of morality, 
is not very commendable. When the time fixed in the agree- 
ment has passed, they return to their homes and marry, without 
having sunk in any way in the estimation of their relatives. 
But those are unfortunate who, in any of the towns that are not 
yet opened to foreigners, carry on a love intrigue with a European. 



They are then openly pointed out, even in the newspapers, ns 
immoral, and tht-ir respectability is helplessly gone. Formerly 
they were even in such cases reverely punished. 

AU women of the lower classes, and even most, of the high<-r, 
wear the Japanese dress. The more distinguished ladies are 
often exceedingly beautiful, they have in particular beautiful 



xvl] JAPANESE WOMEN. 315 

necks. Unfortunately they are often disfigured by paint, for 
which the ladies here appear to have a strong liking. The dress 
of the younger women, even among the poor, is carefully 
attended to ; it is not showy but tasteful, and nearly the same 
for all classes. Their manners are very attractive and agreeable. 
The women of the upper classes already begin to take part in 
the social life of the Europeans, and all European gentlemen and 
ladies with whom I have conversed on this point agree in 
stating that there is no difficulty in the way of a Japanese 
woman leaving the narrow circle to which she was formerly 
confined, and entering with pleasure and womanly dignity into 
European society. She appears to be born " a lady." 

On the 20th and 21st September the Governor of Yokohama 
had arranged an excursion for me. Dr. Stuxberg, and Lieut. 
Nordquist, to the sacred island or peninsula Enoshima, situated 
at a short distance from the town. We first travelled some 
English miles along the excellent road Tokaido, one of the few 
highways in Japan passable in carriages. Then we travelled 
in jinriMs/uis to the famous image of Buddha (Daibutsu) at 
Karoakura,^ and visited the Shinto chief priest living in the 
neighbourhood and his temple. 

The priest was fond of antiquities, and had a collection, not 
very large indeed, but composed almost entirely of rarities. 
Among other things he showed us sabres of great value, a 
head ornament consisting of a single piece of nephrite which 
he valued at 500 yen,^ a number of old bronzes, mirrors, &c. 
We were received as usual with Japanese tea and sweetmeats. 
The priest himself took us round his temple. No images were 
to be seen here, but the walls were richly carved and oraamented 
with a number of drawings and gildings. The innermost wall 

* At the close of the twelfth century this now inconsiderahle town was 
the residence of Joritomo, the founder of the Shogun power, and the 
arranger of the Japanese feudal system. 

* Five yen are about equal to £l sterling. • 



31G THE VOYAGE OF THE VEGA. [chap. xvt. 



of the temple was fenced by heavy doors provided with secure 
locks and bolts, within which " the divine spirit dwelt/' or 
within which " there was nothing else," as the priest phrased it 
on another occasion. 

Enoshima is a little rocky peninsula, which is connected with 
the mainland by a low, sandy neck of land- Occasionally this 
neck of land has been broken through or overflowed, and the 
peninsula has then been converted into an island. It is con- 
sidered sacred, and is studded with Shinto temples. On the side 
of the peninsula next the mainland there is a little village, 
consisting of inns, tea-houses, and shops for pilgrims* and 
tourists' articles, among which are beautiful shells, and the 
fine siliceous skeleton of a sponge, Hycdonema mirabilis, Gray. 
Here I lived for the first time in a Japanese inn of the sort 
to which Europeans in ordinary circumstances are not admitted. 
I was accompanied by two oflicials from the governor s court at 
Yokohama, and it was on their assurance that I did not belong 
to the common sort of uncultivated and arrogant foreigners that 
the host made no diflSculty in receiving us. 

After we had at our entrance saluted the people of the inn 
and passed some time in the exchange of civilities, there came a 
girl, and, in a kneeling posture, offered the foreigners Japanese 
tea, which is always handed round in very small cups only half 
full. Then we took off our shoes and went into the guest- 
chamber. Such chambers in the Japanese inns are commonly 
large and dazzlingly clean. Furniture is completely wanting, 
but the floor is covered with mats of plaited straw. The walls 
are ornamented with songs suitable for the place, or mottoes, and 
with Japanese paintings. The rooms are separated from each 
other by thin movable panels, which slide in grooves, which can 
be removed or replaced at will. One may, therefore, as once 
happened to me, lay himself down to sleep in a very large room, 
and, if he sleeps sound, awake in the morning in a very small one. 
The room generally looks out on a Japanese garden-inclosure, or 



CMAP. XM,] JAPANESE BEDROOM. !Ufl 

if it is in the upper story, on a small balcony. Immediately 
uutside there is always a vessel filled with water and a scoop. 
Generally on one side of the room there is a wall-press, in which 
the bed-clothes are kept. These, the only household articles in 
the roomj consist of a thick mat, which is spread on ihu floor, 
a round cushion for the head, or instead of it a wooden support, 
stuffed on the upper side, for the neck during sleep, and a thick 
stuffed nigbt-sbirt which serves as covering. 



As soon a& one conies iu the female attendants distribute four- 
cornered cushions for sitting on, which are placed on the floor 
round a wooden box, on one corner of which stands a little 
brazier, on the other a high clay vessel of uniform breadth, with 
water in the bottom, which serves as a spittoon and tobacco-ash 
cup. At the same time tea is brought in anew, iu tlie small cups 
previously described, with saucers, not of porcelain, but of metal. 
Pipes are lighted, and a lively conversation commences. Along 



320 THE VOYAGE OF THE VEGA. [chap. 



with the tea sweetmeats are brought in, of which, however, some 
cannot be relished by Europeans. The brazier forms the most 
important household article of the Japanese. Braziers are very 
variable in size and shape, but are often made in an exceedingly 
beautiful and tasteful way, of cast-iron or bronze, with gilding 
and raised figures. Often enough, however, they consist only of 
a clay crock. The Japanese are very skilful in keeping up fire 
in them without the least trace of fumes being perceptible in the 
room. The fuel consists of some well-burned pieces of charcoal, 
which lie imbedded in white straw-ashes, with which the fire- 
pan is nearly filled to the brim. When some glowing coals are 
laid in such ashes they retain their heat for hours, until they are 
completely consumed. In every well-furnished house there are 
a number of braziers of diflferent sizes, and there are often four- 
cornered hatches in the floor, which conceal a stone foundation 
intended as a base for the large brazier, over which the food 
is cooked. 

At meal-times all the dishes are brought^ in at the same time 
on small lacquered tables, about half a foot high, and with a 
surface of four square feet. The dishes are placed in lacquered 
cups, less frequently in porcelain cups, and caiTied to the mouth, 
with chop-sticks, without the help of knife, fork, or spoon* 
For fear of the fish-oils, wliich are used instead of butter, I 
never dared to test completely the productions of the Japanese art 
of cookery ; but Dr. Almquist and Lieut. Nordquist, who were 
more unprejudiced, said they could put up with them very 
well. The following menu gives an idea of what a Japanese 
inn of the better class has to oflfer : — 

Vegetable soup. 

Boiled rice, sometimes with minced fowl. 

Boiled fish or raw fish with horse-radish. 

Vegetables with fish-sauce. 

Tea. 
Soy is used to the fish. Tlie rice is brought in hot in a 



XVI.] TOBACCOSMOKING IN JAPAN. 321 



wooden vessel with a Kd, and is distributed in abundance, but 
the other dishes in extremely small portions. After meals, 
especially in the evening, the Japanese often drink warm sa/a, 
or rice-brandy, out of peculiar porcelain bottles and small cups 
set apart for that purpose alone. 

During the meal one is commonly surrounded by a numerous 
personnel of female attendants, squatted down on the floor, who 
keep up with the guest, if he understands their language, a 
lively conversation, interrupted by salvoes of hearty laughter. 
The girls remain while the man undresses in the evening, and 
permit themselves to make remarks on the ditference of the 
physique of the Europeans and Japanese, which are not only, 
in our way of thinking, unsuitable for young girls, but even 
impertinent towards the guest. The male attendants are seldom 
seen, at least in the inner apartments. In the morning one 
washes himself in the yard or on the balcony, and if he wishes 
to avoid getting into disfavour, the guest will be careful not to 
spill anything or spit on the mat. 

The Japanese tobacco-pipe now in use resembles that of the 
Chukches, is very small, and is smoked out in a couple of whiflFs. 
A Japanese smokes without stopping a score of pipes in succe^- 
sion. Tobacco-smoking is now very general among high and 
low of both sexes. It was introduced at the close of the sixteenth 
century, it is uncertain whether from Corea or from the Portu- 
guese possessions in Asia, and spread with great rapidity. As 
among us, it here too at first gave occasion to stringent pro- 
hibitions, and a lively exchange of writings for and against. In 
a work by the learned Japanologist, Mr. E. M. Satow (" The 
Introduction of Tobacco into Japan," Transactions of the Asiatic 
Society of Japan, vol. vi. part i. p. 68), the following statements 
among others are made on this subject : — 

" In 1609 there were in the capital two clubs whose main 
delight was to contrive quarrels with peaceful citizens. Upwards 
of fifty of the members of these clubs were suddenly arrested 

VOL. II. Y 



322 THE VOTAQB OF THE VEGA. [cHAr. 

and thrown into prison ; but justice was satisfied when four or 
five of the leaders were executed, the rest were pardoned. As 
these societies were originally smoking clubs, the tobacco-plant 
came by the bad behaviour of their members into disrepute, and 
its use was prohibited. At that time tobacco was smoked in long 
pipes, which were stuck in the belt like a sword, or carried after 
the smoker by an attendant. In 1612 a proclamation was 



published in which tobacco-smoking and all trade in tobacco 
were prohibited, under penalty of forfeiture of estate. The 
prohibition was repeated several times, with as httle success 
as in Europe," 

Mr, Satow further gives the following peculiar extracts 



XVI.] ADVANTAGES AND DISADVANTAGES OF SMOKING. 323 

from a Japanese work, which enumerates the advantages and 
disadvantages that are connected with tobacco-smoking : — 

" A. — Advantages. 

''1. It dispels the vapours and increases the energies. 

" 2. It is good to produce at the beginning of a feast. 

" 3. It is a companion in solitude. 

''4. It affords an excuse for resting now and then from 
work, as if in order to take breath. 

" 5. It is a storehouse of reflection, and gives time for the 
fiimes of wrath to disperse. 

** -B.— Disadvantages. 

" 1. There is a natural tendency to hit people over the head 
with one's pipe in a fit of anger.^ 

" 2. The pipe comes sometimes to be used for arranging the 
burning charcoal in the brazier. 

" 3. An inveterate smoker has been known to walk about 
among the dishes with his pipe in his mouth. 

"4. People knock the ashes out of their pipes while still 
ah'ght and forget to extinguish the fire. 

"5. Hence clothing and mats are frequently scorched by 
burning tobacco ash. 

"6. Smokers spit indiscriminately in braziers, footrwarmers, 
and kitchen fires. 

'* 7. Also in the crevices between the floor-mats. 

" 8. They rap the pipe violently on the edge of the brazier. 

"9. They forget to have the ash-pot emptied till it is full 
to overflowing. 

*' 10. They use the ash-pot as nose-paper {ije, they blow their 
nose into the ash-pot)." 

As during our stay at Enoshima as the governor's guests we were 
constantly attended by two officials from his court, I considered 
it my duty to show myself worthy of the honour by a liberal 
distribution of drink-money. This is not given to the attendants, 

^ The Japanese pipes are now so small that no serious results from this 
disadvantage are to he dreaded. In former times the pipes used were long 
and probably heavy. The Dyaks of Borneo still use pipes so heavy that 
they may be used as weapons. 

Y 2 



52* THE VOYAGE OF THE VEGA. [cbap. 

but is banded, wrapped up in paper, and accompanied by sooie 
choice courteous expressions, to the host binnEelf. He on his 
part makes a polite speech with apologies that all had not 
been so well arranged as his honoured guest had a right to 
expect. He accompanies the traveller on his departure a shorter 



A Japinan Editor oT Thnnberg'a wrllingi. 



or longer distance in proportion to the amount of drink-money 
and the way in which his guest has behaved. 

It is a specially praiseworthy custom among the Japanese to 
allow the trees in the neighbourhood of the temples to stand 
untouched. Nearly every temple, even the most inconsiderable. 



nx.] KAEMPFER AND THUNBERG. 325 

is therefore surrounded by a little grove, formed of the most 
splendid pines, particularly Cryptomeria and Ginko, which often 
wholly conceal the small, decayed, and ill-kept wooden hut which 
is dedicated to some of the deities of Buddha or Shinto. 

On the 23rd September the Europeans and Japanese of 
Yokohama gave a dinner and ball for us in th& hall of the 
English club. It was beautifully lighted and decorated. Among 
other things there were to be seen on a wall portraits of Berzelius 



and Thunherg, surrounded by garlands of greenery. The latter 
has a high reputation in Japan. His work on the flora of the 
country has lately been published in a Japanese edition with 
a wood-cut portrait, by no means bad, of the famous Swedbh 
naturalist,' engraved in Japan; and a monument to bis and 

' The work bears the title : Tiii-ui-kon-zo-mri-io {short list of European 
plant-uamee), liy Ito-Keeke, 1829, 3 vols. 



326 THE VOYAGE OF THE VEGA. [chap. xyi. 



Kampfer's memory is to be found at Nagasaki, erected there at 
the instance of von Siebold.^ The chairman of the feast waa 
Dr. Geertz, a Dutchman, who had lived a long time in the 
country and published several valuable works on its natural 
productions. 

On the 26th September I started for Tokio, in order thence 
to undertake a journey proposed and arranged by the Dani^ 
consul, Herr Bavier, to Asamayama, a yet active volcano in the 
interior of the country. In consequence of an unexpected 
death among the European consuls at Yokohama, Herr Bavier, 
however, could not join us until the day after that which had 
been fixed for our departure. The 27th accordingly was passed 
in Tokio among other things, in seeing the beautiful collections 
of antiquities made by the attache of the Austrian legation, 
Herr H. von Siebold, son of the famous naturalist of the 
same name. Japan has also, like most other lands, had its 
Stone Age, from which remains are found at several places in 
the country, both on Yezo and on the more southerly islands. 
Implements from this period are now collected assiduously both 
by natives and Europeans, and have been described by H. von 
Siebold in a work accompanied by photographic illustrations. 
In general the implements of the Japanese stone folk have a 
resemblance to the stone tools still in use among the Eskimo, 
and even in this fruitful land the primitive race, as the bone 
remains in the kitchen-middens show, lived at first mainly by 
hunting and fishing. 

' Carl Peter Thunberg, bom at Jonkoping in 1743, famed for his travels 
in South Africa, Japan, &c., and for a number of important scientific 
works, finally Professor at Upsala, died in 1828. Engelbert Eampf er, bom 
in Westphalia in 1651, was secretary of the embassy that started from 
Sweden to Persia in 1683. Kampfer, however, did not return with the 
embassy, but continued his travels in the southern and eastern parts of 
Asia, among them, even to Japan, which he visited in 1690-92 \ he died in 
1716. Eampfer's and Thunberg's works, together with the great work of 
von Siebold, who erected the monument to them, form the most important 
sources of the knowledge of the Japan that once was. 



CHAPTER XVII. 

Excnnlon to Asamayama — Tho Nakasendo road — Takasaki — Difficulty of 
obtaining quarters for the night — The Baths at Ikaho — Massage in 
Japan — Swedish matches — Travelling in Kago — Savavatari — Criminals 
— ^Kasatsu — ^The Hot Springs and their healing power — Rest at Roku- 
riga-hara — ^The summit of Asamayama — The descent — Journey over 
Usui-toge — Japanese actors — Pictures of Japanese folk-life — Return 
to Yokohama. 

On the 28th September, early in the morning, accompanied 
by lieut. Hovgaard, Herr Bavier, an interpreter, and a Japanese 
cook skilled in European cookery, I started on a journey to 
Asamayama. At first we travelled in two very rattling and 
inconvenient carriages, drawn each by a pair of horses, to the 
town Takasaki, situated on the great road " Nakasendo," which 
passes through the interior of the country and connects Tokio 
and Kioto. This road is considered something grand by the 
Japanese. Id Sweden it would be called an indiflferently kept 
district road. On this road jinrikishas are met in thousands, 
and a great many horses, oxen, and men, hearing heavy burdens, 
but with the exception of the posting carriages, by which, for 
some years back, a regular communication between Tokio and 
Takasaki has been kept up, not a single wheeled vehicle drawn 
by horses or oxen; and though the road passes through an 
unbroken series of populous villages, surrounded by well culti- 
vated rice fields and small gardens, there is not a single work- 
horse or work-ox to be seen. For all the ground in Japan is 
cultivated by the hand, and there are few cattle. 



328 THE VOYAGE OF THE VEGA. [chap. 



Most of the roads in the country consist of foot-paths, so 
narrow that two laden horses can pass each other only with 
difficulty. Goods are therefore carried, where there is no canal 
or river, for the most part by men. The plains are extraordin- 
arily well cultivated, and we must specially admire the industry 
with which water-courses have been cut and the uneven slopes 
changed into level terraces. 

The post-horses on Kakasendo were so poor and wretched 
that in Sweden one would have been liable to punishment for 
cruelty to animals for using them. They went, however, at a 
pretty good speed. There were places for changing horses 
at regular distances of fifteen to twenty kilometres. The 
driver besides halted often on the way at some dwelling-house 
to take a couple of scoopfuls of water out of the water- vessel 
standing before it and throw them into the horses' mouths and 
between their hind-legs. The opportunity was always taken 
advantage of by the girls of the house to come out and ofiFer 
the travellers a small cup of Japanese tea, an act of courtesy 
that was repaid with some friendly words and a copper coin. 

When we visited any of the peasants' gardens by the way- 
side we were always received with extreme friendliness, either on 
a special dais in the common room looking to the road, or in an 
inner room whose floor was covered with a mat of dazzling white- 
ness, and on whose walls hung pictures, with songs and mottoes. 
The brazier was brought forward, tea and sweetmeats were 
handed round, all mth lively conversation and frequent bows. 
The diflFerence between the palace of the rich (if we may dis- 
tinguish with the name any building in Japan) and the dwelling 
of the less well-to-do is much smaller here than in Europe. 
We did not see any beggars in our journey into the interior of 
the country.^ Nor did the distinction of class appear to be 
so sharp as might be expected in a land where the evils of rank 

^ On the contrary, we saw a number of beggars on the country roads in 
the neighbourhood of Yokohama. 



xvii.] CHANGE IN THE STYLE OF HAIBDRESSING. 329 

had been so great as in Old Japan. We several times saw in 
the inns by the roadside, people of condition who were travelling 
in jinrikishas eat their rice and drink their saki together with 
the cooUes who were drawing their vehicles. 

To judge by the crowds of children who swarmed everywhere 
along the roads the people must be very prolific. A girl of 
eight or ten years of age was seldom to be seen without 
another young one bound on her back. This burden did not 
appear to trouble the sister or attendant very much. Without 
giving herself any concern about the child or thinking of its 
existence^ she took part actively in games, ran errands, &c. 

Even in the interior of the country foreigners are received 
with great friendUness. The lower classes in Japan have also 
reason for this, for whatever influence the latest political 
changes may have had on the old kuge, daimio, and samurai 
families of Japan, the position of the cultivator of the soil is now 
much more secure than before, when he was harried by hundreds 
of small tyrants. His dress is the same as before, with the ex- 
ception, however, that a great proportion of the male population, 
even far into the interior, have laid aside the old troublesome way 
of collecting the hair in a knot over a close shaven spot on the 
crown of the head. Instead, they wear their thick raven-black 
hair cut short in the European style. How distinctive of the 
new period this change is may be seen from the eagemess with 
which the Japanese authorities questioned GOLOVIN about the 
religions and political revolutions which they assumed to have 
been connected with the change in the European mode of 
wearing the hair during the commencement of the nineteenth 
century ; for the Russian ambassador Laxman, who was highly 
esteemed by the Japanese, had worn a pig-tail and powdered 
hair, while Golovin and his companions had their hair un- 
powdered and cut short.^ When it is warm the workmen 

1 Vcyage de M. Goloviny Paria, 1818, i. p. 176. Golovin, who was cap- 
tain in the, Russian navy, passed the years 1811-13 in imprisonment in 



330 THE VOYAGE OF THE VEGA. [chap. 



wear only a small, generally light-blue, girdle round the waist 
and between the legs. Otherwise they are naked. They are 
thus seen to be in many cases strongly tattooed oyer the greater 
part of the body. I have not seen the women working naked. 
They perhaps do so at the wannest season of the year. At 
least they do not refram &om undressing completely while 
bathing right in the midst of a crowd of men known and un- 
known, a state of things which at first, in consequence of the 
power of prejudice, shocks the European, but to which even the 
former prude gets accustomed sooner than one would suppose. 
We even frequently see European ladies drawn in SkJinriJcisha by 
a youth completely naked with the exception of the blue girdle. 
Many, especially of the younger men, have besides so well- 
formed a body, that the sculptor who could accurately reproduce 
it in marble would at ouce attain a reputation co-extensive with 
the globe. 

Takasaki is the residence of a govetnor, with a population 
of about 20,000 ; but, like most of the towns of Japan, it differs 
little from many of the villages we passed through. We arrived 
late in the evening, and there had our first and last experience 
of an inconvenience of which Europeans often complain in travel- 
ling in Japan, and to which they have themselves given occasion 
by the offensive way in which they not unfirequently behave. 
We knocked at the door of one inn after another without being 
received. At one place " the house was fuU," at another " the 
rooms were under repair," at a third " the inn people were out,'* 
&c. At last we had to apply to the police. When we had 
shown them our passport, we succeeded with their help in 
getting a night's lodging with an elderly host, who received us 
with a countenance which clearly indicated that he would rather 

Japan. He and his comrades in misfortune were received with great 
friendliness hy the people, and very well treated by the authorities, if we 
except the exceedingly tedious examinations to which they were subjected 
to extract from them the most minute particulars regarding Europe, and 
particularly Russia. 



xYii.] FIRES. 331 



have hewn us in pieces with one of the two swords he had 
fonnerly as samurai been entitled to wear, than received us 
under his roof. After our entrance he still turned to the police 
official with the cry of lamentation : " Must I then actually 
receive these barbarians ? " But we had our revenge in a noble 
way. We took oflf our boots before we entered the room, were so 
profuse with talk, civilities, and bows, and on the whole behaved 
in such a courteous fashion, that our previously distracted host 
not only bade us welcome back, but also gave us a letter of 
introduction to the innkeepers at an inn where we were to stay 
next, declaring that if we showed this letter we need not fear 
any such disagreeable adventure as that just described. 

Most of the houses in the Japanese towns are built of pretty 
thin, carefully joined timbers. But besides these there are to be 
seen here and there small houses with very thick walls, windows 
provided with heavy iron gratings, and doors that could be 
&stened with large locks and bolts. These houses are fire- 
resisting, and are used as storehouses for valuables and household 
articles when there is danger of fire. Fires are so common in 
Japan that it is supposed that a tenth part of every town is 
burned down yearly. The fireman corps is numerous, well 
ordered from old times, its members bold and daring. During 
our stay overnight at Takasaki we were lodged in such a fire- 
proof house, in very large clean apartments with the floor partly 
covered with carpets after the European pattern. The walls 
were very thick and of brick ; the interior fittings and stairs on 
the other hand of wood. 

I have just mentioned that we were compelled to resort to the 
police in order to obtain quarters for the night. Policemen are 
numerous in Japan, both in town and country. For the most 
part they are taken from the former samurai class. They are 
clothed in the European style ; and walk, with a long stick in a 
certain position under the arm, quietly and calmly on the streets 
and roads, without, except in cases of necessity, making any 



332 THE VOYAGE OF THE VEGA. [chap. 



show of their authority. Commonly they are, or appear to be, 
young, and all have a gentlemanlike appearance. In a word, they 
appear to be equal to the best European police of the present 
day, and stand immeasurably above the guardian of the peace, or 
rather the raiser of dispeace, as he appeared some decades ago on 
the European continent. During the latest revolt the police 
were employed by the Government as infantry, and elicited 
general admiration by the fire, the gallantly, and the contempt of 
death with which they went into action with their old favourite 
weapon, the Japanese sword. 

A passport is still required for travelling in the interior of the 
country, but this is easily obtained at the request of the consul 
if health or the wish to prosecute researches be given as the 
reason, it being possible perhaps to include common love of 
travelling under the latter head. Commercial travelling is not 
yet permitted in the interior, nor is the right of settling for the pur- 
pose of carrying on business granted to Europeans. The foreign 
ambassadors have often entered into negotiations in order to bring 
about a change on this point, but hitherto without success, be- 
cause the Government, as a condition for the complete opening 
of the country, require the abrogation of the unreasonable " extra- 
territorial" arrangement which is in force, and by which the 
foreigner is not subject to the common laws and courts of Japan, 
but to the laws of his own country, administered by consular 
courts. An alteration in this point may however be brought 
about in a short time, as Japan will soon be sufficiently powerful 
to be able to abrogate all the injurious paragraphs in her treaties 
with the civilised countries of Europe. Now, besides, the 
ambassadors of the foreign powers, who in former times all acted 
together, have divided into two parties, of which one — Russia 
and America — ^wishes, or at least feigns to wish, gradually to free 
Japan from all tutelage and to place it on an equality with other 
civilised countries; the other again — ^England, Germany, Holland, 
and France — wishes stiU to retain the guardianship, which 



xvil] japan and the FOREIGN POWERS. 833 



was established by violence, and confirmed by treaty several 
years ago. 

Shortly before our arrival a quarrel took place between Japan 
and the European powers about, as the Japanese themselves said, 
a breach of international law, which caused much irritation in 
the country. A Qerman vessel coming from Nagasaki, where 
the cholera was raging, on the advice of the German minister 
broke the quarantine prescribed by the Oovemment, and without 
further precautions discharged her cargo in the harbour of 
Yokohama. That the cholera in this town was thereby made worse 
is indeed not only unproved but also undoubtedly incorrect, 
though many Japanese in their irritation positively affirmed that 
this was the case ; but the words that were uttered by Japan's 
filed guest, ex-President General Grant,^ that the Japanese 
Government had the right without more ado to sink the vessel, 
have left a memory in the minds both of the Government and of 
the people, which may in the future lead them to a perhaps 
unwise but fiilly justified exertion of their strength were such 
a deed to be repeated. 

The first impression of the Japanese, both men and women, 
is exceedingly pleasant, but many Europeans who have lived 
a considerable time in the country say that this impression is not 
maintained, a circumstance which in my belief depends more on 
the Europeans themselves than on the Japanese. For the 
European merchants are said not to find it so easy to cut gold 
here with a case-knife as before, and the ambassadors of the 
Great Powers find it day by day more difficult to maintain their 
old commanding standpoint towards a government which knows 
that a great future is before the country, if •inconsiderate ambi- 
tion or unlooked-for misfortune do not unexpectedly hinder its 
development. Another reproach, that the Japanese can imitate 
what another has done, but is unable himself to invent anything 

^ General Grant^ as is well known, visited Japan in the autumn of 1879. 
He left Yokohama the day after the Vega anchored in its harbour. 



334 THE VOYAGE OF THE VEGA. [chap. 

new, appears on the other hand to be justified in the meantime. 
But it is unreasonable to demand that a nation shotdd not only 
in a few decades pass through a development for which centuries 
have been required in Europe, but also immediately reach the 
summit of the knowledge of our time so as to be at the same 
time creative. But it would be wonderful, if the natural science, 
Uterature, and art of the nineteenth century, transplanted among 
a gifted people, with a culture so peculiar and so pervasive, and 
with an art-sense so developed as those of Japan, did not in 
time produce new, splendid, and unexpected fiiiit. The same 
irresistible necessity which now drives the Japanese to learn all 
that the European and the American know, will, when he has 
reached that goal, spur him on to go further up the Nile river 
of research. 

A short distance beyond Takasaki the road to the volcano to 
which we were on our way, was no longer along Nakasendo, and 
we could therefore no longer continue our journey in carriages 
drawn by horses, but were compelled to content ourselves with 
jinrikishds. In these, on the 29th of September, we traversed 
in five and a half hours the very hilly road to Ikaho, noted for 
its baths, situated at a height of 700 metres above the sea. 
The landscape here assumes a quite different stamp. The road 
which before ran over an unbroken plain, thickly peopled, and 
cultivated like a garden, now begins to pass between steep un- 
ctdtivated hills, overgrown with tall, uncut, withered grass, 
separated by valleys in which run purling rivulets, nearly con- 
cealed by exceedingly luxuriant bushy thickets. Ikaho is 
celebrated for the warm, or more correctly hot, springs which 
well up from the volcanic hills which surround the little town, 
which is beautifully situated on a slope. As at the baths of 
Europe, invalids seek here a remedy for their ailments, and the 
town therefore consists almost exclusively of hotels, baths, and 
shops for the visitors. The baths are situated, partly in large 
open wooden sheds, where men and women bathe together 



XVII.] MASSAGE. 836 

without distinction, partly in private houses. In every bath 
there is a basin one metre in depth, to which a constant stream 
of water is conducted from some of the hot springs. The spring 
water has of course cooled very much before it is used, but is 
still so hot notwithstanding that I cotdd only with difficulty 
remain in it a couple of seconds. 

In the streets of the town we often met blind persons who 
walked about very safely without any attendant, only feeling 
their way with a long bamboo. They blew a short pipe now 
and then to warn passers-by of their presence. I thought 
at first that these unfortunates were trying to regain the sight 
of the eye at the hot springs, but on inquiring whether the 
water was beneficial in that respect, I was informed that they 
were not there as seekers after health, but as "massageurs" 
(shampooers). Massage has been in use in Japan for several 
centuries back, and therefore persons are often to be met with 
in the streets offering their services as massageurs, crying in 
the streets in about the same way as the fruit-sellers in Russia. 

The inn where we lodged for the night, consisted as usual of 
a number of very clean rooms covered with mats, without 
furniture, but ornamented with songs and mottoes on the walls. 
One would live here exceedingly well, if like the Japanese he 
could manage to live wholly on the floor and conform carefully 
to the indispensable rules, an observance which besides is 
necessary, because otherwise the inmate is exposed to a very 
unfriendly reception not only from his host but also from the 
attendants. An inconvenience in travelling in Japan is the 
difficulty a European has in accustoming himself to the dietary 
of the Japanese. Bread they do not use, nor meat, but their 
food consists mainly of rice and fish, with fowls, fruit, mush- 
rooms, sweetmeats, Japanese tea, &c., in addition. Fish is 
generally eaten raw, and in that case is said to differ little in 
taste from our pickled salmon. The food is not unfrequently 
cooked with fish oils of anything but an agreeable taste. If a 



336 THE VOYAGE OF THE VEGA. [ohap. 



traveller wishes to avoid this dietary, he must have his own 
cook with him on the journey. In this capacity there attended 
us a Japanese, whose name was Senkiti-San, but who was 
commonly called by his companions Kok-San (Mr. Cook). He 
had learned European (French) cooking at Yokohama, and 
during the journey devoted himself with so great zeal to his 
calling, that even in the deserts at the foot of Asamayama he 
gave himself no rest until he could offer us a dinner of five 
dishes, consisting of chicken soup, fowl omelette, fowl-beefsteak, 
fowl fricdssi, and omelette avx confitures, all thus consisting only 
of fowls and hens* eggs, cooked in different ways. 

For some years back lucifer matches have been an article of 
necessity in Japan, and it was pleasing to us Swedes to observe 
that the Swedish matches have here a distinct preference over 
those of other countries. In nearly every little shop, even in the 
interior of the country, are to be seen the well-known boxes with 
the inscription " Sakerhets tandstickor utan svafvel och fosfor." 
But if we examine the boxes more carefully, we find upon many 
of them, along with the magic sentence unintelligible to 
the Japanese, an inscription indicating that they have been 
made by some Japanese manufacturer. On other boxes this is 
completely wanting, but the falsification is shown by an un- 
fortunate error in the inscription. It thus appears that the 
Swedish matches are not only introduced into Japan on a large 
scale, but are also counterfeited, being made with the Swedish 
inscription on the box and with a cover resembling that used at 
home. The imitation, however, is not nearly so good as the 
original, and my Japanese servant bade me therefore, when I 
purchased a box of matches, observe carefully that I got one 
of the right (Swedish) sort. 

Photography also has spread so rapidly in the country that at 
many places in small towns and villages in the interior Japanese 
photographers are to be met with who put out of their hands by 
no means bad work. The Japemese appear to have a great 



iFiiJ JOURNEY IN KAGO. 337 

liking for having their by no means remarkable dwellings pboto- 
grapbed. On several occasions, when we left a place we received 
&Dm our host as a partii^ gift a photograph of bis bouse or inn. 
Perbape this was done with the same view as that which induces 
his European brotber-in-trade to advertise at great expense. 

Between Ikaho and Savavatari, our next resting-place, the 
road was so bad that ihe jinrUdsfta could no longer be used, we 
accordingly had to use the kago, a Japanese sedan-chair made of 
bamboo, of the appearance of which the accompanying wood- 



cut gives an idea. It is exceedingly inconvenient for Europeans, 
because they cannot like the Japanese sit with their legs cross- 
wise under them, and in course of time it becomes tiresome 
to let them dangle without other support by tbe side of the 
icago. Even for the bearers this sedan chtur strikes me as being 
of inconvenient construction, which is shown among other things 
by their halting an instant every two hundred, or in going up a 
hill, every hundred paces, in onler to shift the shoulder under the 
bamboo pole. We went up-hill and down-hill with considerable 
VOL. II. z 



338 THE VOYAGK OF THE VEGA. [chap. 

speed however, so that we traversed the road between Ikaho 
and Savavatari, 6 W, or 23*6 kilometres in length, in ten hours. 
The road, which was exceedingly beautiful, ran along flowery 
banks of rivulets, overgrown with luxuriant bamboo thickets, 
and many diflferent kinds of broad-leaved trees. Only round 
the old temples, mostly small and inconsiderable, were to be 
seen ancient tall Cryptomeria and Qinko trees. The burying 
places were commonly situated, not as at home, in the neigh- 
bourhood of the larger temples, but near the villages. They 
were not inclosed, but marked out by stone monuments from a 
third of a metre to half a metre in height, on one side of which 
an image of Buddha was sometimes sculptured. The recent 
graves were often adorned with flowers, and at some of them 
small foot-high Shinto shrines had been made of wooden pins. 

Savavatari, like Ikaho, is built on the slope of a hill. The 
streets between the houses are almost all stairs or steep ascents. 
Here too there well up from the volcanic rocks acidulous 
springs, at which invalids seek to regain health. The watering- 
place, however, is of less repute than Ikaho or Kusatsu. 

While we walked about the village in the evening we saw 
at one place a crowd of people. This was occasioned by a 
competition going on there. Two young men, who wore no 
other clothes than a narrow girdle going round the waist and 
between the legs, wrestled within a circle two or three metres 
across drawn on a sandv area. He was considered the victor 
who threw the other to the ground or forced him beyond the 
circle. A special judge decided in doubtful cases. The be- 
ginning of the contest was most peculiar, the combatants 
kneeling in the middle of the circle and sharply eying eac*h 
other in order to make the attack at a signal given by the judge, 
when a single push might at once make an end of the contest. 
In this competition there took part about a dozen young men, 
all well grown, who in their turn stepped with some encouraging 
cries or gestures into the circle in order to test their powers. 



XTii] JAPANliSE WBESTLBRS. 339 

The spectators consisted of old men and women, and boya and 
girls of all ages. Most of them were clean and well-dressed, and 
had a very attractive appearance. 

Here it was the youth of the villi^e themselves that took 



part in the contest. But there are also in Japan persons who 
canyon these games as their occupation, and exhibit themselves 
for money. They are in general very fat, as appears from the 
accompanying drawing, which represents the beginning of the 

z 2 



340 THB VOYAGE OF THE VEGA. [chap, xvil 

contest, when both the combatante are atUl watching to get 
a good hold. 

Next day, the Ist October, we continued our journey to 
Kusatau, The road was uphill for a distance of 550 metres, 
downhill for nearly as far, then up again, and ran often without 
any protecting fence past deep abysses, or over high bridges of 



the most dangerous construction. It was, therefore, impossible 
for any wheeled vehicle to traverse it, so that we had to use in 
some cases Icagos, in others riding-horses. Unfortunately the 
Japanese high saddle does not suit the European, and if the 
traveller prefers a riding-horse to a hago, he must, if he does not 



CHAP. XVII.] RIDING IN JAPAN. 343 

cany a saddle with him, determine to ride on an unsaddled 
horse, which, with the wretched steeds that are only available 
here, soon becomes so unpleasant that he at last prefers to let 
his legs hang benumbed from the hago, A peculiarity in Japan 
is that the rider seldom himself guides his horse. It is com* 
monly led by a halter by a groom running alongside the rider* 
These grooms are very light-footed and enduring, so that even at 
a rapid pace they are not left behind. Running footmen also 
attend the carriages of people of distinction in the towns and the 
mail-coaches on Nakasendo. When there is a crowd before the 
carriage they jump down and drive away the people by a 
dreadful shouting. From the mail-coach they also blow the 
post-horn, not just to the advantage of the ear-drums of the 
travellers. 

The scenery by the roadside was exceedingly beautiful. Now 
it consisted of wild valleys, filled with luxuriant vegetation 
which completely concealed the crystal-clear streams purling in 
the bottoms ; now of level grassy plains or hill-slopes, thickly 
studded with solitary trees, chiefly chestnuts and oaks. The 
inhabitants were fully occupied with the chestnut harvest. 
Before every hut mats were spread out, on which chestnuts 
lay drying in thick layers. Grain and cotton were being dried 
in the same small way, as it appeared to us Europeans. On the 
plains there stood besides in the neighbourhood of the cabins 
large mortars, by which the grain was reduced to groats. On 
the hills these tramp-stamps are partly replaced by small mills 
of an exceedingly simple construction, introduced by the Dutch. 

We passed the 2nd October at Eusatsu, the Aix-la-Chapelle 
of Japan, famed like that place for its hot sulphurous springs. 
Innumerable invalids here seek an alleviation of their pains. 
The town lives upon them, and accordingly consists mainly of 
baths, inns, and shops for the visitors. 

The inns are of the sort common in Japan, spacious, airy 
clean, without furniture, but with good braziers, miniature 



344 THE VOYAGE OF THE VEGA. [chap. 

tea-services, clean matting, screens ornamented with poetical 
mottoes, which even when translated were almost unintelligible to 
us, friendly hosts, and numerous female attendants. If the 
traveller brings his own cook with him, as we did, he can live 
very comfortably, as I have before stated, at such an inn. 
■ The hot springs which have conferred on Kusatsu its im- 
portaoee rise at the foot of a pretty high hill of volcanic origin. 
The rocks in the surrounding country consist exclusively of lava 



and volcanic tuffs, and a short distance from the town there is an 
extinct volcano in whose crater there are layers of sulphur.^ In 
the immediate neighbourhood of the place where the main 
spring rises there is a thick solidified lava stream, surrounded 
by tuffs, which near the surface is cleft into a number of lai^e 
vesicular blocks. From this point the hot water is conducted 

^ According to the Btatement of the inhabitunta ; I had not time to visit 
the place. 



XVII.] THE HOT SPRINGS AND THEIR HEALING POWERS. 346 



in long open wooden channels to the bath-house of the town, 
and to several evaporating pools, some by the wayside, others in 
the town, intended for collecting the solid constituents of the 
water, which are then sold in the country as medicine. The 
great evaporation from these pools, from the open channels and the 
hot baths, wraps the town almost constantly in a cloud of watery 
vapour, while a very strong odour of sulphuretted hydrogen 
reminds us that this is one of the constituents of the healing 
waters. 

The road between the wells and the town appears to form 
the principal promenade of the place. Along this are to be 
seen innumerable small monuments, from a half to a whole 
metre in height, consisting of pieces of lava heaped upon each 
other. These miniature memorials form by their littleness a 
peculiar contrast to the bauta stones snd jettekast of our Swedish 
forefathers, and are one of the many instances of the people's 
fondness for the little and the neat, which are often to be met 
in Japan. They are said to be erected by visitors as thank- 
offerings to some of the deities of Buddha or Shinto. 

I received from a Japanese physician the following information 
regarding the wells at Kusatsu and their healing power. In 
and near the town there are twenty-two wells, with water of 
about the same quality, but of different uses in the healing 
of various diseases. In the hottest well the water where it 
rises has a temperature of 162° F. (= 72-2° C). The largest 
number of the sick who seek health at the baths, suffer from 
syphilis. This disease is now cured according to the European 
method, with mercury, iodide of potassium, and baths. The 
cure requires a hundred days ; from seventy to eighty per cent, of 
the patients are cured completely, though purple spots remain 
on the skin. The disease does not break out anew. A large 
number of leprous patients also visit the baths. The leprosy is of 
various kinds ; that with sores is alleviated by the baths, and is 
cured possibly in two years ; that without sores but with the skin 



346 THE VOYAGE OF THE VEGA. [chap. 



insensible is incurable, but is also checked by frequent bathing. 
All true lepers come from the coast provinces. A similar disease 
is produced also among the hills by the eating of tainted fish 
and fowl. This disease consists in the skin becoming insensible, 
the nerves inactive, and the patient, who otherwise feels well, 
finding it impossible to walk. It is also cured completely in 
very severe cases, by baths, ammonia applied inwardly, castor*oil, 
Peruvian bark, &c. A third type of this ailment is the bone- 
disease, kaKkCy which is exceedingly common in Japan, and is 
believed to be caused by unvarying food and want of exercise. 
It is very obstinate, but is often cured in two or three years 
with chloride of iron, albumen, change of diet from the common 
Japanese to the European, with red wine, milk, bread, vegetables, 
&c. This disease begins with a swelling in the legs, then the 
skin becomes insensible, first on the legs, next on the stomach, 
the face, and the wrist«. Then the swelling falk. fever comes on. 
and death takes place. There are besides, certain wells for 
curing rheumatism, for which from two to three years are 
required ; for eye-diseases and for headache, the latter playing an 
important part among the illnesses that are cured at Eusatsu. 
It principally attacks women between twenty and thirty years 
of age. One of the Kusatsu wells acts very beneficially in 
this case. Its water is conducted to a special bathing-shed 
open to the street, intended exclusively for the men and 
women who suffer from this disease. 

Many of the baths at Eusatsu are taken so hot that special 
precautions must be adopted before one steps down into the 
water. These consist in winding cotton cloths round those parts 
of the body which are most sensitive, and in causing the body to 
perspire strongly before the bath is taken, which is done by the 
bathers with cries and shouts and with certain movements 
stirring the water in the basin with large heavy boards. They 
then all step down into the bath and up again simultaneously at 
a sign given by the physician sitting at the back of the bathing 



XVK.] 



BATHING AT KUSATSU. 



shed. Without tbis armngement it would perhaps be difficult 
to get the patients to go into the bath, for agreeable it could not 
be, to judge from the grave faces of the bathers and the fire-red 
colour of their bodies when they come out. 

The baths are under open sheds. Hen and women all bathe 
in common, and in presence of both maJe and female spectators. 
They make their remarks without reserve on the diseases of the 
patients, even if they are of that sort about which one would 




not speak willingly even to his physician. Often the bath-basin 
is not fenced off in any way, except that it is protected from 
rain and sunshine by a roof resting on four posts. In such cases 
the bathers dress and undress in the street. 

In consequence of the situation of Eusatsu at a height of 
1050 metres above the sea, the winter there is very cold and 
windy. The town is then abandoned not only by the visitors to 



348 THE VOYAGE OP THE VEGA. [chap. 

the baths, but also by most of the other inhabitants. ALready, 
at the time of our visit, the number of bathers remaining was 
only inconsiderable. Even these were preparing to depart. 
During the second night that we passed at Kusatsu, our night's 
rest was disturbed by a loud noise from the next room. It was 
a visitor who was to leave the place the following morning, and 
who now celebrated his recovery with saki (rice-brandy) and 
string music. 

The environs of Kusatsu are nearly uncultivated, though the 
vegetation is exceedingly luxuriant. It consists partly of bam- 
boo thickets, partly of a high rich grass, above which rise solitary 
pines, mixed with a few oaks or chestnuts. 

On the 3rd October we continued our journey to the foot of 
Asamayama. The road was very bad, so that even the kago 
bearers had difficulty in getting along. It first ran across two 
valleys more than 300 feet deep, occupied with close, luxuriant, 
bushy thickets. We then came to an elevated plain of great 
extent covered with unmown grass, studded with beautiful oaks 
and chestnuts. The plain was not turned to any account, though 
thousands of the industrious population could find an abundant 
living there by tending cattle. Farther up the oaks and chest- 
nuts were mixed with a few birches, resembling those at home, 
and we came next to complete deserts, where the ground consisted 
of lava blocks and lava gravel, scarcely covered by any grass, 
and yielding nourishment only to solitary pines. This continued 
to the place — Rokuriga-hara — where we were to pass the night, 
and from which the next day we were to ascend the summit of 
Asamayama. 

Rokuriga-hara is situated at a height of 1270 metres above 
the sea. There was no inn here, nor any place inhabited all the 
year round, but only a large open shed. This was divided into 
two by a passage in the middle. We settled on one side of this, 
making our bed as well as we could on the raised floor, and pro- 
tecting ourselves from the night air with coverii^ which our 



XVII.] ASCENT OF ASAMAYAMA. 349 



thoughtful host at Kusatsu had lent us. On the other side of 
the passage our Jcoigo bearers and guide passed the night crowd- 
ing round a log fire made on a stone foundation in the middle 
of the floor. The Tcago bearers were protected from the very 
perceptible night cold only by thin cotton blouses. In order to 
warm them I ordered an abundant distribution of saki, a piece 
of generosity that did not cost very much, but which clearly won 
me the undivided admiration of all the coolies. They passed 
the greater part of the night without sleep, with song and jest, 
with their sdki bottles und tobacco pipes. We slept well and 
warmly after partaking of an abundant supper of fowl and eggs, 
cooked in different ways by Kok-San with his usual talent and 
his usual variety of dishes. 

We had been informed that at this place we would hear a 
constant noise from the neighbouring volcano, and that hurtful 
gases (probably carbonic acid) sometimes accimiulated in such 
quantities in the neighbouring woods that men and horses would 
be suffocated if they spent the night there. We listened in vain 
for the noise, and did not observe any trace of such gases. All 
was as peaceful as if the glowing hearth in the interior of the 
earth was hundreds of miles away. But we did not require the 
evidence of the column of smoke which was seen to rise from 
the mountain top, which formed the goal of our visit, or of 
the inhabitants who survived the latest eruption, to come 
to the conclusion that we were in the neighbourhood of an 
enormous, still active volcano. Everywhere round our resting- 
place lay heaps of small pieces of lava which had been thrown 
out of the volcano (so-called lapilli), and which had not yet had 
time to weather sufficiently to serve as an under-stratum for 
any vegetation, and a little from the hut there was a solidified 
lava stream of great depth. 

Next day, the 4th October, we ascended the summit of the 
mountain. At first we travelled in kago over a valley filled 
with pretty close wood, then the journey was continued on foot 



350 THE VOYAGE OF THE VEGA. [chap. 

up the steep volcanic cone, covered with small lava blocks and 
lapilli. The way was staked out with small heaps of stones 
raised at a distance of about 100 metres apart. Near the crater 
we found at one of these cairns a little Shinto shrine, built of 
sticks. Its sides were only half a metre in length. Our guide 
performed his devotions here. One of them had already at a 
stone cairn situated farther down with great seriousness made 
some conjurations with reference to my promise to make an extra 
distribution of red wine, if we got good weather at the top. 

As on Vesuvius, we can also on Ajsamayama distinguish a 
large exterior crater, originating from some old eruption, but 
now almost completely filled up by a new volcanic cone, at 
whose top the present crater opens. This crater has a cir- 
cumference of about two kilometres ; the old crater, or what 
the old geologists called the elevation-crater, has been much 
larger. The volcano is still active. For it constantly throws 
out " smoke," consisting of watery vapour, sulphurous acid, and 
probably also carbonic acid. Occasionally a perceptible smell 
of sulphuretted hydrogen is observed. It is possible without 
diflSculty to crawl to the edge of the crater and glance down 
into its interior. It is very d«ep. The walls are perpendicular, 
and at the bottom of the abyss there are to be seen several 
clefts from which vapours arise. In the same way *' smoke " 
forces its way at some places at the edge of the crater through 
small imperceptible cracks in the mountain. Both on the 
border of the crater, on its sides and its bottom there is to be 
seen a yellow eflBorescence, which at the places which I got at 
to examine it consisted of sulphur. The edge of the crater is 
solid rock, a little-weathered augiteandesite differing very much in 
its nature at different places. The same or similar rocks also pro- 
ject at several places at the old border of the crater, but the 
whole surface of the volcanic cone besides consists of small loose 
pieces of lava, without any trace of vegetation. Only at one 
place the brim of the old crater is covered with an open pine 



r 



XVII.] DESCENT OF ASAMAYAMA. 351 

wood. The volcano has also small side craters, from which 
gases escape. The same coarse fantasy, which still prevails in 
the form of the hell-dogma among several of the world's most 
cultured peoples, has placed the home of those of the followers 
of Buddha who are doomed to eternal punishment in the 
glowing hearths in the interior of the mountain, to which these 
crater-openings lead ; and that the heresies of the well-meaning 
Bishop Lindblom have not become generally prevalent in Japan 
is shown among other things by this, that many of these open- 
ings are said to be entrances to the " children's hell." Neither 
at the main crater nor at any of the side craters can any true 
lava streams be seen. Evidently the only things thrown out 
from them have been gases, volcanic ashes, and lapilli. On the 
other hand, extensive eruptions of lava have taken place at 
several points on the side of the mountain, though these places 
are now covered with volcanic ashes. 

After having eaten our breakfast in a cleft so close to the 
smoking crater that the empty bottles could be thrown directly 
into the bottomless deeps, we conunenced our return journey. 
At first we took the same way as during the ascent, but after- 
wards held oflf to the right, down a much steeper and more 
difficult path than we had traversed before. The mountain side 
had here a slope of nearly forty-five degrees, and consisted of a 
quite loose volcanic sand, not bound together by any vegetable 
carpet. It would therefore have been scarcely possible to ascend 
to the summit of the mountain this way, but we went rapidly 
downii^ards, often at a dizzy speed, but without other incon- 
venience than that one now and then fell flat and rolled head- 
foremost down the steep slopes, and that our shoes were completely 
torn to tatters by the angular lava gravel. Above the mountain- 
top the sky was clear of clouds, but between it and the surface 
of the earth there spread out a thick layer of cloud which seen 
from above resembled a boundless storm-tossed sea, full of 
foaming breakers. The extensive view we would otherwise have 



362 THE VOYAGE OF THE VEGA. [chap. xvri. 



had of the neighbouring mountain ridges from the top of Ajsa- 
mayama was thus concealed. Only here and there, an opening 
was formed in the cloud, resembling a sun-spot, through which 
we got a glimpse of the underlying landscape. When we came 
to the foot of the mountain we long followed a ridge, covered 
with greenery, formed of an immense stream of lava, which had 
issued from an opening in the mountain side now refilled. This 
had probably taken place during the tremendous eruption of 
1783, when not only enormous lava-streams destroyed forests and 
villages at the foot of the mountain, but the whole of the neigh- 
bouring region between Oiwake and Usui-toge, previously fertile, 
was changed by an ash-rain into an extensive waste. Across 
this large plain, infertile and little cultivated, situated at a 
height of 980 metres above the sea, we went without a guide 
to the village Oiwake, where we lodged for the night at an inn 
by the side of the road Nakasendo, one of the cleanest and best 
kept of the many well-kept inns I saw during our journey in 
the interior of the country. 

Hence I sent a messenger on foot to Takasaki to order a 
carriage to Tokio. A former samurai undertook for a payment 
of three yen (about 12s.) to carry the message. Oiwake is indeed 
situated on the great road Nakasendo, but it can here only with 
difficulty be traversed by carriages, because between this village 
and Takasaki it is necessary to go over the pass Usui-toge, 
where the road, though lowered considerably of late, rises to a 
height of 1200 metres. We therefore here used jinrikishas^ a 
mode of conveyance very agreeable to tourists, which, though 
introduced only recently, has already spread to all parts of the 
country. 

Every one with an open eye for the beauties of nature and 
interest in the life and manners of a foreign people, must find a 
journey in B^jinrikisha over Usui-toge pleasant in a high degree. 
The landscape here is extraordinarily beautiful, perhaps un- 
matched in the whole world. The road has been made here 



TBAP. XVII.] TRAVELLING IN JAPAN. 366 



with great diflSculty between wild, black, rocky masses, along 
deep clefts, whose sides are often covered with the most luxuriant 
vegetation. No fence protects the jinrihiska in its rapid progress 
down the mountains from the bottomless abysses by the wayside. 
A man must therefore not be weak in the nerves if he is to derive 
pleasure from the journey. He must rely on the coolie's keen 
eye and sure foot. On all sides one is surrounded by a confused 
mass of lofty shattered mountain tops, and deep down in the 
valleys mountain streams rush along, whose crystal-clear water 
is collected here and there into small lakes coi^fined between 
heights covered with greenery. Now the traveller passes a 
dizzy abyss by a bridge of the most defective construction, now 
he sees a stream of water rushing down from Kt\ enormous 
height by the wayside. Thousands of foot-passengers, crowds of 
pilgrims, long rows of coolies, oxen and horses bearing heavy 
burdens meet the traveller, who during frequent rests at the 
foot of the steep slopes has an opportunity of studying the 
variegated life of the people. He is always surrounded by 
cheerful and friendly faces, and the pleasant impression is never 
disturbed by the expressions of coarseness in speech and 
behaviour which so often meet us in Europe. 

It is not until the traveller has passed the mountain ridge 
and descended to a height of only 300 metres above the sea 
that the road becomes passable for a carriage. While we ex- 
changed, not without regret, our clean, elegant jinrikishas for 
two inferior vehicles drawn by horses, I saw two men wandering 
from shop to shop, standing some moments at each place, ringing 
a bell and passing on when they were not attended to. On my 
inquiry as to what sort of people they were, I was informed 
that they were wandering players. For me of course they did 
not ring in vain. For a payment of fifty cents they were ready 
immediately to show in the street itself a specimen of their art. 
One of them put on a well-made mask, representing the head 
of a monster, with a movable jaw and terrible teeth. To the 

A A 2 



356 



THE VOYAGE OF THE VEGA. 



[chap. 



mask was fastened a cloak, in which the player wrapt hiiuself 
during the representation. He then with great skill and supple 
tasteful gestures, which would have honoured a European 
danseuse, represented the monster now creeping forward fawn- 
ingly, now rushing along to devour its prey. A numerous crowd 
of children collected around us. The small folks followed the 
representation with great glee, and gave life to the play, or 




BCRDEK-BBARER8 ON A JAPANESE ROAD. 



JapaDese drawing. 

rather formed its proper background, by the feigned terror with 
which they fled when the monster approached with open mouth 
and rolling eyes, and the eagerness with which they again 
followed and mocked it when its back was turned. 

In few countries are dramatic representations of all kinds so 
much thought of as in Japan. Playhouses are found even in 
small towns. The play is much frequented, and though the 



XVII.] THE JAPANESE THEATRE. 357 



representations last the whole day, they are followed by the 
spectators with the liveliest interest. There are playbills as at 
home, and numerous writings on subjects relating to the theatre. 
Among the Japanese books which I bought, there was for 
instance a thick one, with innumerable woodcuts, devoted to 
showing how the first Japanese artists conceived the princi- 
pal scenes in their rdles, two volumes of playbills bound up 
together, &c. 

The Japanese pieces indeed strike a European as childish and 
monstrous, but one must admire many praiseworthy traits in 
the play itself, for instance the naturalness with which the 
players often declaim monologues lasting for a quarter or half 
an hour. The extravagances which here shock us are perhaps 
on the whole not more absurd than the scenes of the opera of 
to-day, or the buskins, masks, and peculiar dresses, which the 
Greeks considered indispensable in the exhibition of their great 
dramatic masterpieces. When the Japanese have been able to 
appropriate what is good in European culture, the dramatic art 
ought to have a grand future before it amoug them, if the 
development now going on is carried out cautiously so that the 
peculiarities of the people are not too much eflfaced. For, in 
many departments, and not least in that of art, there is much to 
be found here which when properly developed will form a new 
and important addition to the culture of the West, of which we 
are so proud. 

The large Japanese theatres, besides, often resemble the 
European ones in their interior arrangement. The partition 
between the stage and the space occupied by the spectators is 
the same as among us. Between the acts the former is con- 
cealed by a curtain. The stage is besides provided with painted 
scenes representing houses, woods, hills, &c., supported on 
wheels, so that a complete change of scene can be effected in 
a few moments. The music has the same place between the 
stage and the spectators as at home. The latter, as at home, are 



368 THE VOYAGE OF THE VEGA. [chap. 



distributed partly in a gently rising amphitheatre, partly in 
several tiers of boxes rising one above another, the lowest tier 
being considered the principal one. The Japanese do not sit 
in the same way as we do. Neither the amphitheatre nor the 
boxes accordingly are provided with chairs or benches, but are 
divided into square compartments one or two feet deep, each in- 
tended for about four persons. They sit on cushions, squatting 
cross-legged in the common Japanese fashion. The compart- 
ments are divided by broad cross beams, which form the passages 
by which the spectators get to their places. During the play 
we saw attendants running about with tea, sofci, tobacco pipes, 
and small braziers. For every one smokes during the acts, and 
places himself in his crib as comfortably as possible. The piece 
is followed with great attention, favourite actors and favourite 
passages being saluted with lively applause. Even women and 
children visit the theatre, and I have seen the former give their 
children suck without the least discomposure among thousands 
of spectators. Besides the plays intended for the public, there 
are given also a number of other dramatic representations, as 
society plays, peculiar family plays intended for the homes of the 
old feudal princes, spectacles got up for the Mikado, and some 
which have a half religious significance, &c. 

On the evening of the 5th October we came to Takasaki, 
prepared to start immediately for Tokio. But though the 
messenger we sent had duly executed his commission, horses 
could not be procured before midnight. We passed the evening 
with our former host, who at our first visit received us so un- 
willingly, but now with great friendliness. We would easily 
have reconciled ourselves to the delay, for a Japanese smaU 
town such as Takasaki has much worth seeing to offer a 
European, but a great part of the time was wasted in fruit- 
less attempts to get the horse-hirer to let us have the horses 
a few houra earlier. In spending time in long conversations 
mixed with civilities and bows the Japanese are masters. Of 



xvii] TOILET OF JAPANESE GIRLS. 369 



this bad habit, which still often makes the European desperate, 
it will not perhaps be long necessary to complain, for everything 
indicates that the Japanese too will soon be carried along at the 
endlessly roaring speed of the Steam Age. 

When we had at last got horses we continued our journey, first 
in a carriage to Tokio, then by rail to Yokohama, arriving there 
on the afternoon of the 6th October. From this journey I shall 
only relate an incident which may form a little picture throwing 
light on life in Japan. 

While we halted for a short time in the morning of the 6th 
October at a large inn by the roadside, we saw half a dozen 
young girls finishing their toilets in the inn-yard. In passing 
we may say, that a Japanese peasant girl, like girls in general, 
may be pretty or the reverse, but that she generally is, what 
cannot always be said of the peasant girls at home, cleanly and 
of attractive manners. They washed themselves at the stream 
of water in the inn-yard, smoothed their artistically dressed hair, 
which, however, had been but little disturbed by the cushions on 
which they had slept, and brushed their dazzlingly white teeth. 
Soap is not used for washing, but a cotton bag filled with bran. 
The teeth were brushed with a wooden pin, one end of which 
was changed by beating into a brush-like collection of wooden 
cords. The tooth-powder consisted of finely powdered shells and 
corals, and was kept in small, neat wooden boxes, which, along 
with tooth-brushes and small square bundles of a very strong 
and cheap paper, all clearly intended for the use of the peasants, 
were sold for a triflie in most of the innumerable shops along 
the road. For such stupid regulations as in former times in 
Europe rendered traflSc in the country difficult, and often obliged 
the countryman to betake himself to the neafest town to buy 
some horse-shoes or a roll of wire, appear not to be found in 
Japan, on which accoimt most of the peasants living on a 
country road- seek a subsidiary way of making a living by 
trafficking in small articles in request among the country people. 



360 THE VOYAGE OF THE VEGA. [chap. 



Incidents of the sort referred to we had seen so many times 
before that on this occasion it would not have attracted any 
further attention on our part, if we had not thereby been 
reminded that we must look after our own exterior, before we 
could make our entrance into the capital of Japan. We there- 
fore took from the carriage our basket with linen, shaving 
implements, and towels, settled down around the stream of 
water at which the girls stood, and immediately began to 
wash and shave ourselves. There was now general excitement. 
The girls ceased to go on with their own toilet, and crowded 
round us in a ring in order to see how Europeans behave in 
such cases, and to give us the assistance that might be required. 
Some ran laughing and bustling about, one on the top of another, 
in order immediately to procure us what we wanted, one held 
the mirror, another the shaving-brush, a third the soap, &c. 
Round them gathered other elder women, whose blackened 
teeth indicated that they were married. A little farther off 
stood men of all ages. Chance had here quite unexpectedly 
shown us a picture from folk-life of the most agreeable kind. This 
pleasant temper continued while we immediately after, in the 
presence of all, ate our breakfast in the porch of the ground- 
floor, surrounded by our former ministering spirits, now kneeling 
around us, continually bowing the head to the ground, laughing 
and chattering. The same fun went on when a little after 
I bought some living fresh-water fishes and put them in spirit, 
yet with the difference that the girls now, with some cries, to 
show their fear of handling the living animals — though fish^ 
cleaning was one of their ordinary occupations — handed over to 
the men the trouble of taking the fishes and putting them into 
the spirit-jars. For a worm placed in spirit they feigned the 
greatest terror, notwithstanding its covering of spirit and 
glass, and ran shrieking away when any one suddenly brought 
the jar with the worm near their faces. It ought- to be noted 
to the honour of the Japanese, that although we were by no 



xni.] JAPANESE GOOD BREEDING. 361 



means surrounded by any select circle, there was not heard 
during the whole time a single offensive word among the 
closely-packed spectators, a fact which gives us an idea of the 
excellent tone of society which prevails here, even among 
the lowest of the population, and which shows that the 
Japanese, although they have much to learn from the Euro- 
peans, ought not to imitate them in all. In Japan there is much 
that is good, old, and national to take note of, perhaps moie 
than the Japanese at present have any idea of, and undoubtedly 
more than many of the European residents will allow. 




CHAPTER XVIII. 

Farewell dinner at Yokohama — The Chinese in Japan — Voyage to Kobe — 
Purchase of 'Japanese Books — Journey by rail to Kioto — Biwa Lake 
and the Legend of its Origin — Dredging there — Japanese Dancing- 
Girls — Kioto — The Imperial Palace — Temples — Swords and Sword- 
bearers — Shintoism and Buddhism — The Porcelain Manufacture — 
Japanese Poetry — Feast in a Buddhist Temple — Sailing across the 
Inland Sea of Japan — Landing at Hirosami and Shimonoseki — Nagasaki 
— Excursion to Mogi — Collection of Fossil Plants — Departure from 
Japan. 

The last days at Yokohama were taken up with farewell visits 
there and at Tokio. An afbemoon^s leisure during the last day 
I spent in the capital of Japan I employed in making an ex- 
cursion in order to dredge from a Japanese boat in the river 
debouching at the town. The Japanese boats diflFer from the 
European in being propelled not by rowing but by sculling. 
They have usually a deck above the level of the water, which 
is dazzlingly white and laid with matting, like the rooms in a 
Japanese house. The dredging yielded a great number of 
Anodonta, large Paludina, and some small shells. 

During our stay in Japan I requested Lieutenant Nordquist 
to make as complete a collection of the land and fresh-water 
Crustacea of the country as the short time permitted. In conse- 
quence of the unusual poverty of the country in these animal 
forms the result was much smaller than we had hoped. During 
a preceding voyage to the Polar Sea I had assisted in making 



CHAP, xviii.] THE CHINESE IN JAPAN. 363 



a collection of land Crustacea on Renoe, an island north of the 
limit of trees in the outer archipelago of northern Norway. It is 
possible to collect there in a few hours as many animals of this 
group as in feiiile Japan in as many days. There are parts of Japan^ 
covered with thick woods and thickets of bushes, where during 
a forenoon s excursion one can scarcely find a single crustacean, 
although the ground is full of deep, shady clefts in which 
masses of dried leaves are collected, and which therefore ought 
to be an exceedingly suitable haunt for land mollusca. The 
reason of this poverty ought perhaps to be sought in the want 
of chalk or basic calcareous rocks, which prevails in the parts of 
Japan which we visited. 

After the Swedish-Dutch minister had further given us a 
splendid farewell dinner at the Qrand Hotel, to which, as before, 
the Japanese ministers and the representatives of the foreign 
powers in Japan were invited, we at last weighed anchor on the 
11th October to prosecute our voyage. At this dinner we saw 
for the first time the Chinese embassy which at the time visited 
Japan with the view of settling the troublesome Loo-Choo affair 
which threatened to lead to a war between the two great powers 
of Eastern Asia. The Chinese ambassadors were, as usual, two 
in number, being commissioned to watch one over the other. 
One of them laughed immoderately at all that was said during 
dinner, although he did not understand a word. According 
to what I was told by one who had much experience in the 
customs of the heavenly empii'e, he did this, not because he 
'heard or understood anything worth laughing at, but because 
he considered it good manners to laugh. 

Remarkable was the interest which the Chinese labourers 
settled at Yokohama took in our voyage, about which they 
appeared to have read something in their own or in the 
Japanese newspapers. When I sent one of the sailors ashore 
to execute a commission, and asked him how he could do that 
without any knowledge of the language, he replied, " There is no 



364 THE VOYAGE OF THE VEGA. [chap. 



fear, I always meet with some Chinaman who speaks English 
and helps me." The Chinese not only always assisted our 
sailors as interpreters without remuneration, but accompanied 
them for hours, gave them good advice in making purchases, 
and expressed their sympathy with all that they must have 
suflFered during our wintering in the high north. They were 
always cleanly, tall, and stately in their figures, and corresponded 
in no particular to the calumnious descriptions we so often read 
of this people in European and American writings. 

From Yokohama the course was shaped for Kobe, one of the 
more considerable Japanese ports which have been opened to 
Europeans. Kobe is specially remarkable on account of its 
having railway communication with Osaka, the most important 
manufacturing town of Japan, and with Kioto, the ancient 
capital and seat of the Mikado's court for centuries. 

I had already begun at Yokohama to buy Japanese books, 
particularly such as were printed before the opening of the 
ports to Europeans. In order to carry on this traflSc with 
greater success, I had procured the assistance of a young 
Japanese very familiar with French, Mr. Okuschi, assistant in 
Dr. Qeertz' chemico-technical laboratory at Yokohama. But 
because the supply of old books in this town, which a few years 
ago had been of little importance, was very limited, I had at 
first, in order to make purchases on a larger scale, repeatedly 
sent Mr. Okuschi to Tokio, the seat of the former Shogun 
dynasty, and from that town, before the departure of the Vega 
from Yokohama, to Kioto, the former seat of learning in Japan. 
The object of the Vega's call at the port of Kobe was to fetch 
the considerable purchases made there by Mr. Okuschi.^ 



^ The number of the works which the collection of Japanese books 
contains is somewhat over a thousand. The number of volumes amounts 
to five or six thousand ; most of the volumes, however, are not larger than 
one of our books of a hundred pages. So far as can be judged by 
the Japanese titles, which are often little distinctive, the works may be 



XVIIl.] 



KOBE. 



365 



Kobe, or Hiogo, as the old Japanese part of the town is 
called, is a city of about 40,000 inhabitants, beautifully situated 
at the entrance to the Inland Sea of Japan, i,e., the sound 
which separates the main island from the south islands, Shikoku 
and Kiushiu. Mountain ridges of considerable height here run 
along the sea-shore. Some of the houses of the European 
merchants are built on the lower slopes of these hills, with high, 
beautiful, forest-clad heights as a background, and a splendid 
view of the harbour in front. The Japanese part of the town 
consists, as usual, of small houses which, on the side next the 
street, are occupied mainly with sale or work-shops where the 



distributed among the various branches of knowledge in the following 
way: 



History 

On Buddhism and Education 

On Shintoism 

On Christianity (printed in 1716) 

Manners and Customs 

The Drama 

^-'^ •■ O ••• «■• ••• ■•• ■•• 

Politics, Political argumentative writings, partly 
privately printed against the recent statues 

Poetry and Prose fiction 

Heraldry, Antiquities, Ceremonies 

The Art of War and the Use of Weapons 

V^Ucas ••• ••* .,, ,,, ... 

Coining 

Dictionaries, Grammars 

Geography, Maps 

Natural History 

The Science of Medicine 

Arithmetic, Astronomy, Astrology 

Handicrafts, Agriculture 

Notebooks 

The art of making bouquets (Horticulture ?) 

Bibliography 

Various ... 

Total ... 



new and 



Number 
of Works. 

176 

161 

38 

1 

as 

13 
5 



24 

137 

27 

41 

1 

4 

18 

76 

68 

13 

39 

43 

73 

16 

9 

20 

1036 



366 THE VOYAGE OF THE VEGA. [chap, xviii. 



whole family lives all day. The streets have thus a very lively 
appearance, and ofiFer the foreigner an endless variety of remark- 
able and instructive pictures from the life of the people. The 
European part of the tovm, on the other hand, is built with 
stately houses, some of which are situated on the street that runs 
along the shore. Here, among others, are to be found splendid 
European hotels, European clubs, counting-houses, shops, &c. 

Not far from Kobe, ancj having railway communication with 
it, is Osaka, the largest manufacturing town of Japan, famed for 
its theatres and its dancing-girls. Unfortunately I had not time 
to visit it, for I started for the old capital, Kioto, a few hours 
after the Vega anchored, and after I had waited on the governor 
in order to procure the passport that is still required for travel- 
ling in the interior. He received me, thanks to a letter of 
introduction I had with me from one of the ministers at Tokio, 
in an exceedingly agreeable way. His reception-room ,was part 
of a large European stone house, the vestibule of which was 
tastefully fitted up in European style with a Brussels carpet 
gay with variegated colours. At our visit we were oflFered 
Japanese tea, as is customary everywhere in Japan, both in the 
palace of the Emperor and the cabin of the poor peasant. The 
Governor was, as all the higher officials in Japan now are, 
dressed like a European of distinction, but he could not speak 
any European language. He showed himself, however, to be 
much interested in our voyage, and immediately ordered an 
official in his court, who was well acquainted with English, 
Mr. Yanimoto, to accompany me to Kioto. 

We travelled thither by a railway constructed wholly in the 
European style. At Kioto my companion, at my special request^ 
conducted me, not to the European hotel there, but to a 
Japanese inn, remarkable as usual for cleanliness, for a 
numerous crowd of talkative female attendants, and for the 
extreme friendliness of the inn people to their guests as soon 
as they indicated, by taking off their boots at the door, that it 



CHAP. XVIII.] A JAPANESE RAILWAY. 360 



was their intention not to break Japanese customs and usages 
in any o£fensive way. A calling card and a letter from Admiral 
Kawamura, minister of marine, which I sent from the hotel to 
the Governor of Kioto, procured me an adjutant No. 2, a young, 
cheerful, and talkative official, Mr. Koba-Yaschi, whose eyes 
sparkled with intelligence and meiTy good humour. One would 
sooner have taken him for a highly-esteemed student president 
at some northern university, than for a Japanese official. It 
was already late in the day, so that before nightfall I had time 
only to take the bath which, at every Japanese inn not of too 
inferior a kind, is always at the traveller's call, and arrange the 
dredging excursion which, along with Lieut. Nordquist, I 
intended to make next day on Lake Biwa. 

The road between Kioto and Biwa we travelled the following 
morning in jinrikishas. In a short time there will be com- 
munication between these two places by a railway constructed 
exclusively by native workmen and native engineers. It will 
be, and is intended to be, an actual Japanese railway. For a 
considerable distance it passes through a tunnel, which, how- 
ever, as some of the Europeans at Kobe stated, might easily 
have been avoided " if the Japanese had not considered it 
desirable that Japan, too, should have a railway tunnel to 
show, as such are found both in Europe and America." It is 
probable, in any case, that the bends which would have been 
required if the tunnel was to be avoided, would have cost more 
by the additional length than the tunnel, and that therefore the 
procedure of the Japanese was better considered than their 
envious European neighbours would allow. There appears to 
prevail among the European residents in Japan a certain 
jealousy of the facility with which this country, till recently so 
fer behind in an industrial respect, assimilates the skill in art 
and industry of the Europeans, and of the rapidity with which 
the people thereby make themselves independent of the wares 
of the foreign merchants. 

VOL. n. B B 



870 THE VOYAGE OF THE VEGA. [chap 



When we reached Lake Biwa we were conducted by Mr. 
Koba-Yaschi to an inn close by the shore, with a splendid view 
of the southern part of the lake. We were shown into beautiful 
Japanese rooms, which had evidently been arranged for the 
reception of Europeans, and in which accordingly some tables 
and chairs had been placed. On the tables we found, on our 
arrival, bowls with fruit and confections, Japanese tea, and 
braziers. The walls were formed partly of tastefiiUy gilt paper 
panels ornamented with mottoes, reminding visitors of the 
splendid view. 

A whole day of the short time which was allowed me to 
study the remarkable things of Kioto I devoted to Lake Biwa, 
because lakes are exceedingly uncommon in the south, for they 
occur only in the countries which have either been covered with 
glaciers in the most recent geological periods, or, in consequence 
of the action of volcanic forces, have been the scene of violent 
disturbances of the surface of the earth. I believed that Lake 
Biwa would form an exception to this, but I was probably 
mistaken ; for tradition relates that this lake was formed in a 
single night at the same time that the high volcanic cone of 
Fusiyama was elevated. This tradition, in its general outline, 
corresponds so closely with the teaching of geology, that scarcely 
any geologist will doubt its truth. 

After our arrival at the inn we had to wait a very long time 
for the steamer I had ordered. On this account I thoughtlessly 
enough broke out in reproaches on my excellent Japanese adju- 
tants, who, however, received my hard words only with friendly 
smiles, which increased still further my impatience at the loss of 
time which was thus occasioned. It was not until far on in the 
day, when I was already out dredging from a small steamer, that 
I was informed as to the cause of the delay. The Biwa Steamship 
Company had, at the request of the Governor, intended to place 
at my disposal a very large boat well provided with coal, but afier 
taking the coal on board it had sunk so deep that it grounded 



:sviii.] LAKE BIWA. 371 



in the mud of the haxbour. We had already got far out with 
the little steamer when the large one at last got ofF. I was 
now obliged to exchange vessels in order to be received " in a 
more honourable way." It was not until this took place that 
I was informed that I was guest and not master, on which 
account I was obliged to employ the rest of the afternoon in 
excusing my former violent behaviour, in which, with the help 
of friendly words, beer, and red wine, I succeeded pretty well, 
to judge by the mirth which soon began to prevail among my 
now very numerous Japanese companions. 

On the little steamer I had ordered two of my crew whom I 
had brought with me from the Vega to prepare a meaJ for the 
Japanese and ourselves. In this way tlie dinner that had been 
arranged for us, without my knowledge, became superfluous. 
I was obliged instead to receive as a gift the provisions and 
liquors purchased for the dinner, consisting of fowls, eggs, 
potatoes, red wine and beer, giving at the same time a receipt 
as a matter of form. 

During our excursion on the lake we met with various boats 
laden with sea-weed, which had been taken up from the bottom 
of the lake to be used as manure for the neighbouring culti- 
vated fields. Partly among these algae, partly by dredging, 
Lieut. Nordquist collected various interesting fresh-water Crus- 
tacea (Paludina, Melania, Unio, Planorbis &c.,) several sorts 
of shrimps (a Hippolyte) small fishes, &c. Lake Biwa abounds 
in fish, and harbours besides a large clumsily-formed species of 
lizard. In order to make further collections of the animal 
forms occurring there, Lieut. Nordquist remained at the lake 
till next day. I, on the other hand, went immediately back to 
Kioto, arriving there in the evening after nightfall. 

After having eaten, along with my two Japanese companions* 
an unexceptionable European dinner at the inn of the town, 
kept by Japanese, but arranged in European style, we paid a 
visit to a company of Japanese dancing-girls. 

B B 2 



372 THE VOYAGE OF THE VEGA. [chap. 



Kioto competes with Osaka for the honour of having the 
prettiest dancing-girls. These form a distinct class of young 
girls, marked by a peculiar variegated dress. They wear besides 
a peculiar hair-pmament, are much painted, and have their lips 
coloured black and gold. At the dancing places of greatest note 
a European is not received, unless he has with him a known 
native who answers for his courteous behaviour. After taking 
ofif his shoes on entering, the visitor is introduced to a separate 
room with its floor covered with matting and its walls orna- 
mented with Japanese drawings and mottoes, but without 
other furniture. A small square cushion is given to each of the 
guests. After they have settled themselves in Japanese fiashion, 
that is to say, squatting cross-legged, pipes and tea are brought 
in, on which a whole crowd of young girls come in and, chatting 
pleasantly, settle themselves around the guests, observing all the 
while complete decency even according to the most exacting 
European ideas. There is not to be seen here any trace of the 
effrontery and coarseness which are generally to be found in 
similar places in Europe. One would almost believe that be 
was among a crowd of school-girls who had given the sour moral 
lessons of their governess the slip, and were thinking of nothing 
else than innocently gossiping away some hours. After a while 
the dance begins, accompanied by very monotonous music and 
singing. The slow movements of the legs and arms of the 
dancers remind us of certain slow and demure scenes firom 
European ballets. There is nothing indecent in this dance, 
but we learn that there are other dances wilder and less 
decorous. 

The dancing-girls are recruited exclusively from the poorer 
classes ; pretty young girls, to help their parents or to earn some 
styvers for themselves, selling themselves for a certain time to 
the owners of the dancing-places, and when the time agreed 
upon has come to an end returning to their homes, where not- 
withstanding this they many without difficulty. All the 



xviii.] JAPANESE FEMALE BEAUTY. 373 

dancing-girls therefore Bid young, many of them pretty even 
according to European ideas, though their appearance is 
destroyed in our eyes by the tasteless way in which titey 
paint themselves and colour their lips. Unfortunately I liad 
not time to avail myself of the opportunity which Kioto offers 
the foreigner of judging with certainty regarding the Japanese 
iBste in female beauty. For here, as at various other Japanese 



towns, there are a number of girls who have been officially 
selected m the most beautiful among the youth of the place. 
The Japanese may visit them for a certain payment, but to 
Europeans they do not show themselves willingly, and only 
for a large sum. When this takes place at any time, it is 
only a dumb show for a few moments, during which no 
words are exchanged. 



374 THE VOYAGE OF THE VEGA. [chap. 

The Governor hati promised to carry me round next day 
to see whatever wai^ remarkable in the town. I was not much 
delighted at this, because I feared that the whole day would 
be taken up with inspecting the whole or half-Eurupean 
public offices and schools, which had not the slightest intere.st 
for me. My fear hfiwever was quit« unjustified. The Governor 
was a man of genius, who, 
according to the statements of 
my companions, was reckoned 
among the firet of the coo- 
t«mporary poets of Japan. He 
immediately declared that he 
supposed that the new public 
offices and schools would in- 
terest me much less than the 
old palaces, temples, porcelain 
and faiencfi manufactories of 
the town, and that he there- 
fore intended to employ the 
day I spent under his gui<lance 
in showing me the latter. 

Wemade a beginningwith the 

old imperial palace Gosho, the 

most splendid dwelling of Old 

Japan. It is not however very 

grand according to European 

NOBtE m im\wT. im.as, ideas. A very extensive spac« 

of ground is here covered with 

a number of one-story wooden houses, intended for the Emperor, 

the imperial family, and their suite. The buildings are, like all 

Japanese houses, divided by movable panels into a number of 

rooms, richly provided with paintings and gilded ornamentation, 

but otherwise without a trace of furniture. For the palace now 

stands iminhabited since the Mikado overthrew the Shogun 



sviii.] JAPANESE TEMPLES. 375 

dyoosty and removed to Tokio. It already gives a strikiDg 
picture of the change which has taken place in the land. Only the 
imperial family and the great men of the country were formerly 
permitted to enter the sacred precincts of Gosho. Now it 
stands open to every curious native or foreigner, and it has 
even as an exhibition building been already pressed int<i the 
service of industry. Alongside 
the laige buildings there are 
several small ones, of which 
one was intended to protect 
the Emperor-<leity during 
earthquakes ; the others formed 
play-places for the company of 
grown children who were then 
permitted togovem thecountry. 
Much more remarkable and 
instnictive than the now de- 
serted imperial palace are the 
numerous temples at Kioto, of 
which we visited several. Wo 
were generally received by tho 
priests in a large vestibule, 
whose fli>or was covered with a 
fine woollen carpet and was pro- 
vided with tables and chairs of 
European patterns. The priests 

first offered us Japanese tea, bidpfht mufw. 

cigars, and sweetmeats ; then we 

examined some valuable articles exhibited in the room, consistii^ 
of bronzes, worics in the noble metals, splendid old lacqiier work, 
and a number of famous swords dedicated to the temple. Tlieso 
were the only things that our freethinking Governor treated with 
reverence ; for the rest neither the priests nor their reliques 
seemed to inspire him with any parti cidar respect. 



376 THK VOYAGE OF THE VEGA. [chip. 

■ftTien a valuable Japanese sword is exhibited one touches 
neither the Iiilt nor the acabbaxd, and of course still less the 
blade, with the bare hand, but it ia taken hold of either with a 
gloved hand, or with the hand with a handkerchief or piece of 
cloth wrapped round it. The blade is only half bared, the 
steel setting b looked at against the light and admired ; on the 
often exceedingly valuable 
blades which are not moun- 
ted, but only provided with 
a wooden case to protect 
them from rust, the maker's 
mark is examined, and so 
on. As among us in former 
times, the swordsmith'a is 
the only handicraft which 
in old times was held in 
high esteem in Japan, and 
immense sums were oiien 
paid for sword-blades forged 
by famous masters of the art. 
Among old Japanese writings 
are to be found many works 
specially treating of the 
making of weapons. But 
since the swordsmen (samu- 
rut) have now been forbidden 
A imnR*!. to show themselves armed, 

old Japanese swords are 
sold iu all the towns by hundreds and thousands, often for a 
trifle. During our stay in the country I purchased for a com- 
paratively limited sum a fine collection of such weapons. Even 
those who cannot appreciate the artistic forging of the blade, 
the steel-setting, and tempering, must admire the exceedingly 
tasteful casting and embossing of the ornamentation, especially 



XVI II.] WEARING THE SWORD IN JAPAN. 377 

of the guard-plates of the sword. They are often veritahle 
works of art, unsurpassed in style and execution. 

It is not very many years ago since the men who belonged to 
the mmurai class never showed themselves abroad without 
being armed with two swords. Even schoolboys went armed to 
the first European schools that were established in the country. 
This gave occfusdon to several acts of violence during the time 
which succeeded the opening of the ports, for which reason the 
European ambassadors some years after requested that carrying 
the sword in time of peace should be prohibited. To this the 
Japanese government answered that it would make short work 
with the minister who should publish such a prohibition. Soon 
after, however, it gave permissicn to those who desired it to go 
without weapons, and the carrying of arms soon became so un- 
fashionable that one of the authorities did dare at last to issue a 
distinct prohibition of it. During our stay in Japan, accordingly, 
we did not see a single man armed with the two swords formerly 
in use. 

After we had seen and admired the treasures in the temple 
vestibule, we visited the temple itself. This is always of wood, 
richly ornamented with carvings and gilding. If it is dedicated 
I to Shinto, there are no images in it, and very few ornaments, if 

i we except a mirror and a large locked press with the doors 

smashed in, which sometimes occupies the wall opposite the 
entrance, and in which, as I have already stated, the spirit of the 
deity is said to dwell. The Shinto temples are in general poor. 
Many are so inconsiderable as to look almost like dovecotes. 
They are often completely deserted, so that it is difficult to 
discover them among the magnificent trees by which they were 
surrounded. The entrance to the temple is indicated by a gate 
{torryi) of wood, stone, or copper, and here and there are ropes, 
stretched over the way, to which written prayers and vows are 
affixed. 

Even those who have long studied Japan and its literature 



87fl THE VOYAGE OF THE VEGA. [chap. 

have very little knowledge of the inner essence of Shintoism. 
This religion is considered by some a pure deisnk, by others a 
belief with political aims, the followers of which worship the 
departed heroes of the country. Of a developed morality this 
religion is wholly devoid. In the same way it appears to be 
uncertain whether Shintoism is a survival of the original religion 
of the country or whether it has been brought from abroad. 



Buddhism was intrixluced from China by Corea. Its temples 
are more onamented than the Shinto temples, and contain images 
of deities, bells, drums, holy books, anil a great quantity of altar 
ornaments. The transmigration of souls, and rewards and 
punishments in a life after this, are doctrines of Buddhism. 
Outside the temples proper there are to be found in many pWes 
large or small images in stone or bronze of the deities of 



itviii.] STATUES OP BHUDIU. 379 

Buddha. The largest of these consist of colossal statues in 
bronze (Daibutsti), representing Buddha in a sitting position, and 
themselves forming the screen to a temple with smaller images. 
A similar statue is also Ui be found at Kamakura, another at 



«C 



Tokio, a third at Nara near Kioto, and so on. Some have of 
late years been sold for the value of the metal ; one has in this 
way been brought to I/mdon, an<l is now exhibited in the 
Kensington Museum. The metal of the statues consists of an 
alloy of copper with tin and a little g<jld, the last named 



380 THE VOYAGE OF THE VEGA. [chap. 

constituent giving rise to the report that their value is very 
considerable. To give an idea of the size of some DaibtUsu 
statues it may be mentioned that the one at Nara is fifty-three 
and a half feet high, and that one can crawl into the head 
through the nose orifices. 

Nearly all the DaibtUstc images are made after nearly the 
same design, which has been improved from generation to 
generation until the countenance of the image has received a 
stamp of benevolence, calm, and majesty, which has probably never 
been surpassed by the productions of western art. Daibutsu 
images evidently stand in the same relation to the works of 
private sculptors as folk-poetry to that of individual bards. 

As I have before pointed out, the Western taste for the 
gigantic was not prevalent in Old Japan. It was evidently 
elegance and neatness, not grandeur, that formed the object 
towards which the efforts of the artist, the architect, and 
the gardener were directed. Only the Daibutsu images, some 
bells, and other instruments of worship form exceptions to 
this. During our excursion at Kioto we passed an inclosure 
where the walls were built of blocks of stone so colossal, that 
it was difficult to comprehend how it had been possible to 
lift and move them with the means that were at the dis- 
posal of the Japanese in former times. In the neighbourhood 
of that place there was a grave, probably the only one of its 
kind. It is described in the following way in an account of 
the curiosities of Kioto written by a native : — 

"Mimisuka, or the grave of the noses and the ears, was 
erected by Hideyoshi Taiko, who lived about A.D. 1590. When 
the military chiefs of this famous man attacked Corea with 
a hundred and fifty thousand soldiers, he gave orders that they 
should bring home and show him all the ears and noses of the 
enemies who were killed in the contest, for it was an old 
practice in Japan to cut off the enemies' heads to show them 
to the king or the commander of the army. But it was now 
impossible to bring the heads of the dead Corean warriors to 



XTiii.] THE CERAMIC ART OF JAPAN. 381 

Japan^ because the distance was too great. Hideyoshi therefore 
gave the above order, and the ears and noses, which were brought 
to Japan, were buried together at that place. The grave is 
730 feet in circumference, and is 30 feet high." 

Kioto is one of the principal places for the manufacture of 
fa%e7ice, porcelain, and claisonnS. The productions of the ceramic 
art are, as is well-known, distinguished by their tasteful forms 
and beautiful colours, and are highly valued by connoisseurs^ 
on which account they are exported on a large scale to Europe 
and America. The works are numerous and small, and are 
owned for the most part by families that for a long succession 
of generations have devoted themselves to the same occupation. 
The articles are burned in very small furnaces, and are commonly 
sold in a shop which is close to the place where they are made. 
The making of porcelain in Japan, therefore, bears the stamp 
rather of handicraft than of manufacturing industry. The wares 
gain thereby in respect of art to an almost incredible degree. 
They have the same relation to the productions of the great 
European manufactories that the drawing of an artist has to 
a showily coloured lithograph. But the price is high in propor- 
tion, and the Japanese porcelain is too dear for every-day use 
even in its own country. Nearly all the large sets of table 
porcelain that I saw in Japan were, therefore, ordered from 
abroad. The cups which the natives themselves use for rice, 
tea, and saki are, however, of native manufacture; but even 
in a well-provided Japanese household there is seldom so much 
porcelain as would be required for a proper coflfee-party 
at home. 

In the evening the Governor had invited us to a dinner, 
which was given in a hall belonging to a literary society in 
the town. The rooms were partly furnished in European style 
with tables, chairs, Brussels carpets, &c. The dinner was 
European in the axrangement of dishes, wines, and speeches. 
The dishes and wines were abundant and in great variety. The 



382 THE VOYAGK OF THE VEGA. [chap. 



company were very merry, and the host appeared to be greatly 

pleased, when I mentioned that at one of the places which I 

had seen that day I saw a wall adorned by a motto of his 

composition. He immediately promised to write a similar one 

on me with reference to my visit to the town, and when a few 

moments after he had the first line ready, he invited his 

Japanese guests to write the second. They tried for a good 

while with merry jests to hit upon some suitable conclusion, 

but in vain. Early the following morning Mr. Koba-Yaschi 

came to me, bringing with Mm a broad strip of silk on 

which the following was pencilled in bold, nobly-formed 

characters : 

Umi hara-no-hate-made 
Akiva-Sumi-watare, 

which when translated runs thus : 

"As far as the sea extends 
The autumn moon spreads her beneficent light.*' 

According to the explanation which I received the piece 
points out that the autumn moon spreads her beneficent rays 
as far as to that place in the high north where we wintered. 
After the above-quoted verse came the following addition in 
Japanese: "Written by Machimura Masanavo, Governor of 
Kioto-Fu, to Professor Nordenskiold, on the occasion of a dinner 
given to him during the autumn of 1879." The whole besides 
was signed with the author's common, as well as his poetical, 
name, and had his seal attached. His poetical name was KlO* 
San, which may be literally translated " Dragon-Mountain." 

The poetry of the Japanese is so unlike that of the Western 
nations that we find it difficult to comprehend the productions 
of the Japanese poets. Perhaps they ought more correctly to 
be called poetical naottoes. They play a great part in the 
intellectual life of the Japanese. Their authors are highly 
esteemed, and even in the homes of the poorer classes the walls 



[vir!.] JAPANESE POETRY. 3S3 



are ofteD ornamented with strips of silk or paper on which 
poeias are written in lai^e, bold, pencil characters. Amung the 
books I brought home mth me are many which contain 
collections of the writings of private poets and poetesses, or 
selections from the most famous of the productions of Japanese 
literature in this department. A roll of drawings wliich turned 
up very often represents the sorrowful fate of a famous poetess, 
First of all she is depicted as a representative Japanese beauty, 
blooming with youth and grace, then she is represented in 
different stages of decay, liien as dead, then a.-^ a half-decayed 



corpse torn asunder by ravens, and finally as a heap of bones. 
The series ends with a cherry-tree in splendid bloom, into which 
the heroine, after her body had passed through all the stages of ■ 
annihilation, has been changed. The cherry-tree in blossom is 
considered by the Japanese the ideal of beauty in the vegetable 
kingdom, and during the flowering season of this tree excursions 
are often undertaken to famous cherry-groves where hour after 
hour is passed in tranquil admiration of the flower-splendour 
of the tree. Unfortunately I was so late in getting the 



384 THE VOYAGE OF THE VEGA. [chap, xviii. 



explanation of the beautiful poetical idea that ran through 
this series of pictures, some of which were executed with 
execrable truth to nature, that I missed the opportunity of 
purchasing it. 

I was obliged to leave Kioto too early in order to be present 
at a fiie, which was given to us at Kobe by the Japanese, 
Europeans, and Chinese who were interested in our voyage. 
The entertainment was held in a Buddhist temple without 
the town, and was very pleasant and agreeable. The Japanese 
did not seem at all to consider that their temple was desecrated 
by such an arrangement. In the course of the afternoon for 
instance there came several pilgrims to the temple. I observed 
them carefully, and could not mark in their countenances any 
trace of displeasure at a number of foreigners feasting in the 
beautiful temple grove whither they had come on pilgrimage. 
They appeared rather to consider that they had come to 
the goal of their wanderings at a fortunate moment, and 
therefore gladly accepted the refreshments that were 
oflFered them. 

On the morning of the 18th October the Vega again weighed 
anchor, to proceed on her voyage. The course was shaped 
through the Inland Sea of Japan for Nagasaki. When I 
requested of the Governor of Kobe permission to land at two 
places on the way, he not only immediately granted my request, 
but also sent on the Vega the same English-speaking official 
from his court who had before attended me to Kioto. The 
weather was clear and fine, so that we had a good opportunity 
of admiring the magnificent environs of the Inland Sea. They 
resemble much the landscape in a northern archipelago. The 
views here are however more monotonous in consequence of 
their being less variety in the contours of the mountains. 
Here as at Kobe the hills consist mainly of a species of granite 
which is exposed to weathering on so large a scale that the 
hard rocks are nearly everywhere decomposed into a yellow 



CHAP. xviiL] THE SHORES OF THE INLAND SEA. 387 



sand unfavourable for vegetation. The splendid wild granite 
cliSs of the north accordingly are absent here. All the hill-tops 
are evenly rounded, and everywhere, except where there has 
been a sand-slip, covered with a rich vegetation, which in 
consequence of the evenness of height of the trees gives little 
variety to the landscape, which otherwise is among the most 
beautiful on the globe. 

We landed at two places, on the first occasion at Hirosami. 
Here some fishermens' cabins and some peasants' houses formed 
a little village at the foot of a high, much-weathered granite 
ridge. The burying-place was situated near one of the houses, 
close to the shore. On an area of some hundred square yards 
there were numerous gravestones, some upright, some fallen. 
Some were ornamented with fresh flowers, at one was a Shinto 
shrine of wooden pins, at another stood a bowl with rice and a 
small sahi bottle. Our zoologists here made a pretty rich 
collection of littoral animals, among which may be mentioned a 
cuttle-fish which had crept down amongst the wet sand, an 
animal that is industriously searched for and eaten by the 
natives. Among the cultivated plants we saw here, as many 
times before in the high-lying parts of the country, an old 
acquaintance from home, namely buckwheat. 

The second time the Vega anchored at a peasant village right 
opposite Shimonoseki. When we landed there came an official 
on board, courteously declaring that we had no right to land at 
that place. But he was immediately satisfied and made no 
more difficulties when he was informed that we had the 
permission of the Governor, and that instead of the usual pass- 
port an official from Kobe accompanied the vessel. Shimonoseki 
has a melancholy reputation in European-Japanese history from 
the deeds of violence done here by a united English, French, 
Dutch, and American fleet of seventeen vessels on the 4th 
and 5th September, 1864, in order to compel the Japanese to 
open the sound to foreigners, and the unreasonably heavy 

c c 2 



333 THE VOYAGE OF THE VEGA. [rwAr. 

compensation which after the victory was won they demanded 
from the conquered. Although only fifteen years have passed 
since this occurred, there appears to be no trace of hitter feeling 
towards Europeans among the inhahitants of the region. At 
least we were received at the village in the neighbourhood of 
which we landed with extraordinary kindness. Tbe vill^e was 
situated at the foot of a rocky ridge, and consisted of a number 



of bouses arranged in a row along a single street, the fronts of 
the bouses being as usual occupied as shops, places for selling 
saki, and workshops for home industry. The only remarkable 
things besides that the village had to offer consisted of a Shinto 
temple surrouuded by beautiful trees and a considerable salt- 
work, which consisted of extensive, shallow, well-planned ponds 
now nearly dry, into which the sea-water is admitted in order to 



xviii.] THE JAPANESE WAX TREE. 389 



evaporate, and from which the condensed salt liquid is 
afterwards drawn into salt-pans in order that the evaporation 
may be completed. It was remarkable to observe that 
several Crustacea throve exceedingly well in the very 
strong brine. 

On the surrounding hills we saw thickets of the Japanese 
wax tree, EhAis succedanetcs. The wax is pressed out of the 
berries of this bush with the help of heat. It is used on a 
large scale in making the lights which the natives themselves 
bum, and is exported bleached and refined to Europe, where it 
is sometimes used in the manufacture of lights. Now, however, 
these wax lights are increasingly superseded by American kero- 
sene oil. The price has fallen so much that the preparation of 
vegetable wax is now said scarcely to yield a profit.^ 

We left this place next morning, and on the 21st October the 
Veffa anchored in the harbour of Nagasaki. My principal 
intention in visiting this place was to collect fossil plants, 
which I supposed would be found at the Takasima coal- 
mine, or in the neighbourhood of the coal-field. In order to 
find out the locality without delay, I reckoned on the fondness of 
the Japanese for collecting remarkable objects of all kinds from 
the animal, vegetable, and mineral kingdoms. I therefore hoped 
to find in some of the shops where old bronzes, porcelain, 
weapons, &c., were offered for sale, fossil plants from the neigh- 
bourhood, with the locality given. The first day, therefore, I 
ran about to all the dealers in curiosities, but without success. 
At last one of the Japanese with whom I conversed told me 
that an exhibition of the products of nature and art in the 
region was being arranged, and that among the objects exhibited 
I might possibly find what I sought for. 

Of course I immediately availed myself of the opportunity to 

^ Further infomiation on this point is given by Henry Gribble in "The 
Preparation of Vegetable Wax" {Transactions of the A natic Society of Japan, 
vol. iii. part i. p. 94. Yokohama, 1876). 



390 THE VOYAGE OF THE VEGA. [chap. 



see one of the many Japanese local exhibitions of which I had 
heard so much. It was yet in disorder, but I was, at all events, 
willingly admitted, and thus had an opportunity of seeing much 
that was instructive to me, especially a collection of rocks from . 
the neighbourhood. Among these I discovered at last, to my 
great satisfaction, some beautiful fossil plants from Mogi, a place 
not far from Nagasaki. 

Immediately the following morning I started for Mogi, accom- 
panied by the Japanese attendant I had with me from Kobe, 
and by another adjutant given me by the very obliging governor 
of Nagasaki. We were to travel across the hills on horse- 
back. I was accompanied, besides my Japanese assistants and a 
man from the Vega, all on horseback, by a number of coolies 
carrying provisions and other equipment. The Governor had 
lent me his own horse, which was considered by the Japanese 
something quite grand. It was a yellowish-brown staUion, not 
particularly large, but very fine, resembling a Norwegian horse, 
very gentle and sure-footed. The latter quality was also quite 
necessary, for the journey began with a ride up a hundred 
smooth and not very convenient stone steps. Farther on, too, 
the road, which was exceedingly narrow and often paved with 
smooth stones, went repeatedly up and down such stairs, not very 
suitable for a man on horseback, and close to the edge of preci- 
pices several hundred feet deep, where a single false step would 
have cost both the horse and its rider their lives. But as has 
been said, our horses were sure-footed and sure-eyed, and the 
riders took care in psussing such places not to pull the reins. 

None of the mountain regions I have seen in Japan are so well 
cultivated as the environs of Nagasaki. Every place that is some- 
what level, though only several hundred square yards in extent, is 
used for growing some of the innumerable cultivated plants of 
the country, principally rice : but as such easily cultivated places 
occur in only limited numbers, the inhabitants have by industry 
and hard labour changed the steep slopes of the mountains 



xviii.] VISIT TO MOGI. 301 



into a succession of level terraces rising one above the other, all 
carefully watered by irrigating conduits. 

Mogi is a considerable fishing village lying at the seaside 
twenty kilometres south of Nagasaki in a right line, on the 
other side of a peninsula occupied by lava beds and volcanic 
tuffs, which projects from the island Kiushiu, which at that place 
is nearly cut asunder by deep Qords. No European lives at the 
place, and of course there is no European inn there. But we 
got lodgings in the house of one of the principal or richest men 
in the village, a maker and seller of sdki, or as we would call 
him in Swedish, a brandy distiller and publican. Here we were 
received in a very friendly manner, in clean and elegant rooms, 
and were waited on by the young and very pretty daughter of 
our host at the head of a number of other female attendants. 
It may be supposed that our place of entertainment had no 
resemblance to a public-house in Sweden. We did not witness 
here the tipsy behaviour of some human wrecks, and as little 
some other incidents which might have reminded us of public- 
house life in Europe. All went on in the distillery and the 
public-house as calmly and quietly as the work in the house of 
a well-to-do country squire in Sweden who does not swear and 
is not quarrelsome. 

SoJd is a liquor made by fermenting and distilling rice. It 
is very variable in taste and strength, sometimes resembling 
inferior Khine wine, sometimes more like weak grain brandy. 
Along with sciki our host also manufactured vinegar, which was 
made from rice and saki residues, which with the addition of 
some other vegetable substances were allowed to stand and 
acidify in large jars ranged in rows in the yani. 

When my arrival became known I was visited by the prin- 
cipal men of the village. We were soon good friends by the 
help of a friendly reception, cigars and red wine. Among 
them the physician of the village was especially of great use to 
me. . As soon as he became aware of the occasion of my visit he 



392 THE VOYAGE OF THE VEGA. [chap, xviii. 



stated that such fossils as I was in search of did indeed occur in 
the region, but that they were only accessible at low water. I 
immediately visited the place with the physician and my com- 
panions from Nagasaki, and soon discovered several strata 
containing the finest fossil plants one could desire. During 
this and the following day I made a rich collection, partly with 
the assistance of a numerous crowd of children who zealously 
helped me in collecting. They were partly bojrs and partly girls, 
the latter always haviiig a little one on their backs. These little 
children were generally quite bare-headed. Notwithstanding 
this they slept with the crown of the head exposed to the hot- 
test sun-bath on the backs of their bustling sisters, who jumped 
lightly and securely over stocks and stones, and never appeared 
to have any idea that the burdens on their backs were at all 
unpleasant or troublesome. 

According to Dr. A. G. Nathorst's examination, the fossil 
plants which I brought home from this place belong to the 
more recent Tertiary formation. Our distinguished and acute 
vegetable palaeontologist fixes attention on the point, that we 
Would have expected to find here a fossil flora allied to the 
recent South Japanese, which is considered to be derived from 
a Tertiary flora which closely resembles it. There is, however, 
no such correspondence, for impressions of ferns are ahnost com- 
pletely wanting at Mogi, and even of pines there is only a single 
leaf-bearing variety which closely resembles the Spitzbergen 
form of Sequoia Langsdorfii, Brag. On the other hand, there 
are met with, in great abundance, the leaves of a species of 
beech nearly allied to the red beech of America, Fagus 
ferrugiiiea, Ait., but not resembling the recent Japanese 
varieties of the same family. There were found, besides, leaves 
of Quercus, Juglans, Populus, Myrica, Salix, Zelkova, Liqui- 
dambar, Acer, Prunus, Tilia, &c., resembling leaves of recent 
types from the forests of Japan, from the forest flora of 
America, or from the temperate flora of the Himalayas. But 



lb LearM yaju /tmiginnt. Alt., var. pltttna. Nath.). a. Maple I*..f U«r Mono, 



394 THE VOYAGE OF THE VEGA. [cbap. 

03 the place wliere they were found is situated at the sea-shore, 
quite close to the southern extremity of Japan, it is singular 
that the tropical or sub-tropical elements of the flora of Japan 
are here wanting. From this Dr. Nathorst draws the con- 
clusion that these are not, as has been hitherto supposed, the 
remains of a flora originating in Japan, b<it that they have since 
migrated thither from a former continent situated further to the 
80uth, which has since disappeared. Br. Nathorst's examination 
is not yet completed, but even if this were the case, want of 
space would not permit me to treat of this point at greater 
length. I cannot, however, omit to 
mention that it was highly agreeable 
to be able to connect with the memory 
of the Vega expedition at least 
a small contribution from more 
southerly lands to vegetable palieon- 
tology, a branch of knowledge to 
which our preceding Arctic expe- 
ditions yielded new additions of 
such importance through the fossil 
herbaria from luxuriant ancient 
forests which they brought to light 
from the ice-covered clifls of Spitz- 
bergen and from the basalt-covered 
roBBiL puKT nuiii J.OOI. sandstones and schists of the Nour- 

Lraf of Zia-Bi-a Kiakll, Bleb., t«. i i> ■ i ■ ,-. , , 

piiutHia, Nuih. soak reniDsula m (jreenland, now 

so bleak. 
After our return from Mogi I made an excursion to the coal- 
mine at Takasami, situate*! on an island some kilometres from 
the town. Even here I succeeded in bringing together some 
further contributions to the former flora of the region. 

After the inhabitants of Nagasaki, too, had given us a grand 
parting feast, at which speeches were spoken in Japanese, 
Chinese, English, French, Gemian, Italian, Dutch, Russian, 



xviii.J THE FUTURE OF JAPAN. 395 



Danish, and Swedish, a proof of the mixture of nationalities 
which prevailed there, the Vega again weighed anchor on the 
27th October, in order to continue her voyage. We now left 
Japan to commence in earnest our return, and on our departure 
we were saluted by the crews of two English gun-boats anchored 
in the harbour, the Hornet and the Sylvia, manning the yards 
and bulwarks. It was natural that the hour of departure, after 
fifteen months' absence from home, should be looked forward to 
with joy. But our joy was mixed with a regretful feeling that 
we were so soon compelled to leave-r-without the hope of ever 
returning — the magnificent country and noble people among 
whom a development is now going on which probably will not 
only give a new awakening to the old cultured races of Eastern 
Asia, but will also prepare a new soil for European science, 
industry, and art. It is difficult to foresee what new nndreamed- 
of blossoms and fruit this soil will yield. But the Europeans 
are perhaps much mistaken who believe that the question here 
is only that of clothing an Asiatic feudal state in a modem 
European dress. Bather the day appears to me to dawn of a 
time in which the countries round the Mediterranean of eastern 
Asia will come to play a great part in the further development 
of the human race. 




CHAPTER XIX. 

Hong Kong and Canton — Stone-polishing Establishments at Canton — 
Political Relations in an English Colony — Treatment of the Natives — 
Voyage to Labuan — Coal Mines there — Excursion to the shore of 
Borneo — Malay Villages — Singapore — Voyage to Ceylon — Point de 
Galle — The Gem Mines at Ratnapoora — Visit to a Temple — Purchase of 
Manuscripts— The Population of Ceylon — Dr. Almquist's Excursion to 
the Interior of the Island. 

Some days after our arrival at Yokohama the Vega was 
removed to the dock at Yokosuka, there to be protected by 
coppering against the boring mussels of the warm seas, so 
injurious to the vessel's hull ; the opportunity being also taken 
advantage of by me to subject the vessel to some trifling repairs 
and alterations in the fitting up, which were desirable because 
during the remainder of our voyage we were to sail not in a cold 
but in a tropical climate. The work took • somewhat longer 
time than was reckoned on, so that it was not until the 21st 
September that the Vega could leave the dock and return to 
Yokohama. It had originally been my intention to remain in 
Japan only so long as was necessary for the finishing of this 
work, during which time opportunity could be given to the 
officers and crew of the Vega to rest after the labours and 
sufferings of the long winter, to receive and answer letters frona 
home, and to gather from the newspapers the most important 
occurrences that had taken place during our fourteen months' 
absence from the regions which are affected by what takes place 
in the world. But as appears from the foregoing narrative, the 



CHAP. XIX.] ARRIVAL AT HONG KONG. 397 



delay was longer than had been intended. This indeed was 
caused in some degree by the difficulty of tearing ourselves 
away afler only a few days' stay from a people so remarkable, so 
lovable, and sp hospitable as the Japanese, and from a land so 
magnificently endowed by nature. Besides, when the Vega was 
again ready for sea, it was so near the time for the change of 
the monsoon, that it was not advisable, and would not have been 
attended with any saving of time, to sail immediately. For at 
that season furious storms are wont to rage in these seas, and 
the wind then prevailing is so unfavourable for sailing from 
Japan to the southward, that a vessel with the weak steam- 
power of the Vega cruising between Japan and Hong Kong 
in a head-wind might readily have lost the days saved by an 
earlier departure. On the other hand, in the end of October 
and the beginning of November we could, during our passage 
to Hong Kong, count on a fresh and always favourable breeze. 
This took place too, so that, leaving Nagasaki on the 27th 
October, we were able to anchor in the harbour of Hong Kong 

« 

as early as the 2nd November. 

There was of course no prospect of being able to accomplish 
anything for the benefit of science during a few days' stay in 
a region which had been examined by naturalists innumerable 
times before, but I at all events touched at this harbour that I 
might meet the expressed wish of one of the members of the 
expedition not to leave eastern Asia without having, during the 
voyage of the Vega, seen something of the so much talked of 
" heavenly kingdom " so different from all other lands. 
• For this purpose, however, Hong Kong is an unsuitable place. 
This rich and flourishing commercial town, which has been 
created by England's Chinese politics and opium trade, is a 
British colony with a European stamp, which has little to show 
of the original Chinese folk -life, although the principal part of 
its population consists of Chinese. But at the distance of a 
few hours by steamer from Hong Kong lies the large old 



398 THE VOYAGE OF THE VEGA. [chap. 



commercial city of Canton, which, though it has long teen open 
to Europeans, is still purely Chinese, with its peatstack-like 
architecture, its countless population, its temples, prisons, 
flower-junks, mandarins, pig-tailed street-boys, &c. Most of the 
members of the expedition made an excursion thither, and were 
rewarded with innumerable indescribable impressions from 
Chinese city life. We were everywhere received by the 
natives in a friendly way,^ and short as our visit was, it was 
yet sufficient to dissipate the erroneous impressions which a 
number of European authors have been pleased to give of the 
most populous nation. One soon saw that he has to do with 
an earnest and industrious people, who, indeed, apprehend much 
— virtue and vice, joy and sorrow — in quite a diflFerent way 
from us, but towards whom we, on that account, by no means 
have the right to assume the position of superiority which the 
European is so ready to claim towards coloured races. 

The greater portion of my short stay in Canton I employed 
in wandering about, carried in a sedan-chair — horses cannot be 
used in the city itself — through the streets, which are partly 
covered and are lined with open shops, forming, undoubtedly, the 
most remarkable of the many remarkable things that are to be 
seen here. The recollection I have of these hours forms, as 
often happens when one > sees much that is new at once, a 
variegated confusion in which I can now only with diificulty 
distinguish a connected picture or two. But even if the im- 
pressions were clearer and sharper it would be out of the 

* Yet with one very laughable exception. I wished for zoological pur- 
poses to get one of the common Chinese rats, and with this object in view 
made inquiries through my interpreter at a shed in the street, where rata 
were said to be cooked for Chinese epicures. But scarcely had the question 
been put, when the old, grave host broke out in a furious storm of abuse, 
especially against the interpreter, w^ho was overwhelmed with bitter 
reproaches for helping a ** foreign devil" to make a fool of his own 
countrymen. All my protestations were in vain, and I had to go away 
with my object unaccomplished. 



XIX.] ORIENTAL POLISHING. 399 



qaestion to occupy space with a statement of my own super- 
ficial observations. If any one wishes to acquire a knowledge 
of Chinese manners and customs, he will not want for books on 
the country, his studies will rather be impeded by their enormous 
number, and often enough by the inferior nature of their con- 
tents. Here I shall only touch upon a single subject, because 
it especially interested me as a mineralogist, namely, the 
stone-polishing works of Canton. 

It is natural that in a country so populous and rich as China, 
in which home and home life play so great a rdle, much money 
should be spent on ornaments. We might therefore have 
expected that precious stones cut and polished would be used 
liere on a great scale, but from what I saw at Canton, the 
Chinese appear to set much less value on them than either the 
Hindoo or the European. It appears besides as if the Chinese 
still set greater value on stones with old ** oriental polishing," 
i.e. with polished rownded surfaces, than on stones formed ac- 
cording to the mode of polishing now common in Europe with 
plane facets. . Instead the Chinese have a great liking for pecu- 
liar, often very well executed, carvings in a great number of 
different kinds of stones, among which they set the greatest 
value on nephrite, or, as they themselves call it, " Yii." It is 
made into rings, bracelets, ornaments of all kinds, vases, small 
vessels for the table, &c. In Canton there are numerous lapi- 
daries and merchants, whose main business is to make and sell 
ornaments of this species of stone, which is often valued higher 
than true precious stones. It was long so important an article 
of commerce that the place where it was found formed the goal 
of special caravan roads which entered China by the Yii gate. 
Amber also appears to have a high value put upon it, especially 
pieces which inclose insects. Amber is not found in China, but 
is brought from Europe, is often fictitious, and contains large 
Chinese beetles with marks of the needles on which they have 
been impaled. Other less valuable minerals, native or foreign, 



400 THE VOYAGE OF THE VEGA. [chap. 



are also used, among others, compact varieties of talc or soap- 
stone and of pyrophyllite. But works executed in these minerals 
do not fetch a price at all comparable to that of nephrite. In 
the same shop in which I purchased pieces of nephrite carefully- 
placed in separate boxes, I found at the bottom of a dusty chest, 
along with pieces of quartz and old refuse of various kinds, large 
crystals, some of which were exceedingly well formed, of trans- 
lucent topaz. They were sold as quartz for a trifle. I bought 
besides two pieces of carved topaz, one of which was a large and 
very fine natural crystal, with a Chinese inscription engraved on 
its terminal surface, which when translated runs thus : " Literary 
studies confer honour and distinction and render a man suitable 
for the court." The other was a somewhat bluish inch-long 
crystal, at one end of which a human figure, perhaps some 
Buddhist saint, was sculptured. The polishing of stones is 
carried on as a home industry, principally in a special part of 
the town. The workshop is commonly at the side of a small 
sale counter, in a room on the ground-floor, open to the street. 
The cutting and polishing of the stones is done, as at home, 
with metal discs and emery or comminuted corundum, which 
is said to be found in large quantities in the neighbourhood 
of Canton. 

Large, commodious, well fitted up, but in their exterior very 
unwieldy river steamers, built after American designs, now run 
between Hong Kong and Canton. They are commanded by 
Europeans. The dietary on board is European, and exceedingly 
good. There are separate saloons for Europeans and Chinese. 
All over the poop and the after-saloon weapons are hung up so 
as to be at hand, in case the vessel should be attacked by 
pirates, or, as happened some years ago, a number of them 
should mix themselves up with the Chinese passengers with 
the intention of plundering the vessel. 

Hong Kong was ceded to England in consequence of the war 
of 1842. The then inconsiderable fishing village is now one of 



XIX.] HONG KONG. 401 



the most important commercial cities of the globe. The har- 
bour is spacious, aflfording good anchorage, and is well protected 
by a number of large and small granite islands. The city is 
built On the largest of these on slopes which rise from the 
shore towards the interior of the island. On the highest points 
the wealthiest foreign residents have built their summer houses 
which are surrounded by beautiful gardens. In winter they live 
in the city. We here met with a very gratifying reception both 
from the Governor, Mr. Pope Hennessy, and from the other in- 
habitants of the town. The former invited Captain Palander and 
me to live in the beautiful Governor's residence, gave a dinner, 
arranged a stately official reception in our honour, and pre- 
sented to the Expedition a fine collection of dried plants from 
the exceedingly well-kept botanical garden of the city, which is 
under the charge of Mr. Charles Foud ; the latter presented 
me with an address of welcome at a festive meeting in the 
City Hall, specially arranged for the purpose and numerously 
attended by the principal men of the town. The meeting was 
opened by the Chairman, Mr. Keswick, with a speech of wel- 
come, after which Mr. J. B. Coughtrie read and presented the 
address, bound in red silk and beautifully illuminated in black, 
gold, and red, with 414 signatures, among which many were by 
Chinese. The address ended with a hearty congratulation to 
us all and a promise of a memorial of our visit to Hong Kong 
which should indicate the way in which the Vega expedition 
was appreciated there. Some time after our return home 
Palander and I received from members of the community of 
Hong Kong a splendid silver vase each. 

I here embraced with great interest the opportunity, which 
my coming in contact with the principal men of the place 
afforded, of getting a glance into the political relations which 
prevailed in this vigorous and promising colony. At first sight 
they appeared to be by no means satisfactory. Peace and 
unanimity evidently did not prevail; for dissatisfaction with 
VOL. u. D D 



402 THE VOYAGE OF THE VEGA. [nHAP. 



the Governor was loudly expressed by many of the Europeans 
settled in Hong Kong. He favoured, they said, the Chinese in 
an exceedingly partial way, and mitigated their punishments to 
such a degree that Hong Kong would soon become a place of 
refuge for all the robbers and thieves of Canton. At the time 
of our visit an instructive parliamentary debate on a small 
scale was proceeding in the Legislative Council of the city. 
The controversy was carried on with a certain bitterness, but 
with a proper observance of the parliamentary procedure cus- 
tomary in the mother country. The eloquent leader of the 
opposition had evidently, as is usual in such cases, the general 
feeling of the Europeans on his side. For they appeared to be 
pretty well agreed that the only means of protecting themselves 
against the evil-doers from the great heavenly empire would be 
to punish them in an inhuman way when they were taken in 
the act. 

To an outsider it appeared, however, that the Governor not 
only had humanity and justice on his side, but also acted with 
a true insight into the future. When he came to the colony 
the corporal punishments to which the Chinese were con- 
demned were exceeding barbarous, although mild in comparison 
with those common in China — a state of things which the op- 
position brought forward in defence of the severer punishments. 
Prisoners were repeatedly flogged with " the cat," often with the 
result that they were attacked by incurable consumption ; 
they were prepared for the punishment by being subjected for 
some time to a starvation-diet of rice and water; they were 
branded when they left the prison, &c. Proceeding on the view 
that the greatest security for a colony such as Hong Kong lies 
in the affection which is cherished for it by the numerous 
native population, the Governor had sought to protect it from 
unjust attacks by Europeans. Considering that too barbarous 
punishments are likely rather to promote than to deter firom 
the commission of crimes, in consequence of the protection the 



XIX.] POLITICAL LIFE AT HONG KONG. 403 

criminal in such a case may reckon upon from sympathising 
fellow-creatures, and that mild punishments are the first con- 
dition of a good protective police, the Governor had diminished 
the floggings, forbidden the public infliction of the punishment, 
given a reprimand in cases where "by mistake" or by an 
evasion of the letter of the law extra strokes had been given 
to criminals, exchanged "the regulation cat" for the rattan, 
abolished the preliminary starvation-diet and the branding, 
improved the prisons, &c. All this was now loudly complained 
of by the European merchants, but was approved by the Chinese 
subjects in the colony, who were however dissuaded from making 
any contrary demonstrations. 

When we came afterwards to other English possessions, we 
found that the inhabitants were often more or less in conflict 
with the authorities, but nowhere was there anything to pre- 
vent the opposition from endeavouring to promote their views 
by public meetings, by addresses in newspapers and pamphlets. 
In this way a pretty active political life arises early, and this 
is probably one of the main conditions of the capacity of the 
English colonies for self-government, and of their vigour and 
influence on the surrounding country. 

It will in truth be highly interesting to see what influence 
will be exerted on the great neighbouring empire if Mr. 
Hennessy's politics with reference to the Chinese settled in 
Hong Kong be carried out, and they be converted into fellow- 
citizens conscious that they are protected by law in person and 
property, that they do not require to crawl in the dust before 
any authority, and that so long as they keep within the limits 
of the law they are quite safe from the oppressions of all officials, 
and in the enjoyment of all the rights and privileges which the 
English law confers upon the citizen. 

Many of the Europeans settled at Hong Kong were convinced 
that for another thousand years one would be justified in using 
the expression regarding China : " Thou art what thou wast, and 

D D 2 



404 THE VOYAGE OF THE VEGA. [chap. 



thou wilt be what thou art." Others again stated that contact 
with Europeans at Shanghai, Hong Kong, and Singapore, and 
the accounts given by the emigrants returning to China in 
thousands from California and Australia are by slow degrees 
changing the aspect of the world in the " heavenly empire,** and 
thereby preparing for a revolution less violent, but as thorough 
as that which has recently taken place in Japan. If this conies 
about, China will be a state that must enter into the calculation 
when the aflfairs of the world are settled, and whose power will 
weigh very heavy in the scales, at least when the fate of Asia 
is concerned. At Hong Kong and Canton the report was 
current that the far-sighted Chancellor of the German Empire 
had taken this factor into calculation in settling his plans 
for the future. 

Already the Chinese took part in the European life. A 
number of Chinese names, as I have already said, were attached 
to the address that was presented to me; at the Governor's 
reception many stout, smiling heads provided with pigtails were 
seen ; and Chinese had taken part in the meetings at which 
the Governor's scheme of reform was under discussion. There 
have also existed in the country from time immemorial secret 
societies, which are said only to wait for a favourable opportunity 
to endeavour to link their fates to the new paths.^ The observa- 
tions that I made at Hong Kong and Canton are, however, too 
superficial for me to wish to detain my reader with these 
matters. I accordingly point to the numerous works on these 
cities published by authors who have lived there as many 
months or years as I have days, and proceed to sketch the 
continuation of the voyage of the Vega. 

Accompanied by the good wishes of many newly acquired 
friends, we left the harbour of Hong Kong on the morning of 
the 9th November. It was my original intention to steer our 

* See on this subject W. A. Pickering, " Chinese Secret Societies " {Journal 
of the Straits Branch of the R. Asiatic Society, 1878, No. 1, pp. 63-84). 



XXX.] LABUAN. 405 



course to Manilla, but the loss of time duriug our long stay in 
Japan compelled me to give up that plan. The course was 
shaped, however, not directly for Singapore, but for Labuan, a 
small English possession on the north side of Borneo. Its 
northern extremity (the coal mine) Ues in 5° 33' N.L. and 
115° 12' E.Li. England took possession of Labuan on account 
of the coal-seams which are found there, which are of special 
importance on account of the situation of the island nearly 
in the midst of the large, numerous, and fertile islands of 
south-eastern Asia. It was the coal-seams too that attracted 
me to the place. For I wished to see whether I could not, 
in the neighbourhood of the equator itself, collect valuable 
contributions towards ascertaining the nature of the former 
equatorial climate. 

We at first made rapid progress, thanks to a fresh and 
favourable monsoon wind. But when we reached the so-called 
belt of calms, the wind ceased completely, and we had now to 
avail ourselves of steam, which, in consequence of the low 
power of the Veya's engine and a strong counter current, carried 
us forward so slowly that it was not until the 17th November 
tliat we could anchor in the harbour of Labuan. 

The largest of the islands belonging to the colony has, with 
a pretty considerable breadth, a length of 10' from N.E. to S.W. 
It is inhabited by some thousands (3,300 in 1863) of Chinese 
and Malays, together with a few Englishmen, who are either 
crown officials or employed at the coal mine. The north part 
of the island has a height 'of 140 metres above the sea, but 
towards the south the land sinks to an extensive sandy plain, 
closely overgrown with bushy thickets and traversed by low 
marshes. Most of the inhabitants live along the shore of the 
harbour which bears the now, or perhaps only for the present, 
indispensable name for English colonies (which on that account 
conveys little information) of Victoria. The Governor's fine 
residence lies at a little distance from the haibour town in the 



406 THE VOYAGE OF THE VEGA. [chap. 



interior of the island, the ooal mine on its north side. At the 
time of our visit the coal company had recently gone into 
liquidation, and work had therefore been stopped at the mine, 
but it was hoped that it would soon be resumed. The sandy 
plain is of little fertility in comparison with the neighbouring 
tropical lands. It had recently been burned, and was therefore 
for the most part covered only with bushes, among which stems 
of high, dried-up, half-burned trees raised themselves, giving to 
the landscape a resemblance to a northern forest devastated by 
an accidental fire. In consequence of the fire which had thus 
passed over the island the plain which, when looked at from a 
distance appeared to be completely even, was seen everywhere 
to be studded with crater-formed depressions in the sand, quite 
similar to the os-pits in the osar of Scandinavia.^ On the north 
side there was sandstone rock rising from the sea with a steep 
slope six to fifteen metres high. Here tropical nature appeared 
in all its luxuriance, principally in the valleys which the small 
streams had excavated in the sandstone strata. 

The coal mine is sunk on coal-seams, which come to the surface 
on the north side of the island. The seams, according to the 
information I received on the spot, are four in number, with a 
thickness of 3*3, 0*9, 04 and 10 metre. They dip at an angle 
of 30"* towards the horizon, and are separated from each other by 
strata of clay and hard sandstone, which together have a thickness 
of about fifty metres. Above the uppermost coal-seam there are 
besides very thick strata of black clay-slate, white hard sandstone 
with bands of clay, loose sandstone, sandstone mixed with coal, 
and finally considerable layers of clay-slate and sandstone, which 
contain fossil marine Crustacea, resembling those of the present 
time. The strata which lie between or in the immediate 
neighbourhood of the coal seams do not contain any other fossils 
than those vegetable remains, which are to be described farther 

^ Concerning their formation and origin see a paper by K. NordenskioUl 
in 'Ofirraigt af Vet-ahul Forh. 1870, p. 29. 



XIX.] THE COAL-SEAMS OF LABUAN. 407 



on. Thirty kilometres south of the mine a nearly vertical coal- 
seam comes to the surface near the harbour, probably belonging 
to a much older period than that referred to above ; and out in 
the sea, eighteen kilometres from the shore north of the harbour, 
petroleum rises from the sea-bottom. The manager of the mine 
supposed from this that the coal-seams came to the surface again 
at this place. The coal-seams of Labuan are besides, notwith- 
standing their position in the middle of an enormous, circular, 
volcanic chain, remarkably free from faults, which shows that 
the region, during the immense time which has elapsed since 
these strata have been deposited, has been protected from 
earthquakes. Even now, according to Wallace, earthquakes 
are scarcely known in this part of Borneo. 

From what has been stated above we may conclude that the 
coal, sand, and clay strafa were deposited in a valley-depression 
occupied by luxuriant marshy grounds, cut off from the sea, in 
the extensive land which formly occupied considerable spaces 
of the sea between the Australian Islands and the continent 
of Asia. A similar state of things must besides have prevailed 
over a considerable portion of Borneo. On that island there are 
coal-seams under approximately similar circumstances to those 
on Labuan. So far as I know, however, they have not hitherto 
been closely examined with respect to vegetable palaeontology. 

At Labuan fossil plants are found, though very sparingly, 
imbedded in balls of clav ironstone from strata above the two 
lowermost coal-seams. The upper coal-seams are besides ex- 
ceedingly rich in resin, which crosses the coal in large veins. 
From the thickness and conversion into a hard sandstone of the 
layers of sand lying between and above the coal-seams we may 
conclude that a very long time, probably hundreds of thousands 
or millions of years have passed since these coal-seams were 
formed. They also belong to a quite recent period, during which 
the vegetation in these regions varied perhaps only to a slight 
extent from tliat of the juesoiit tiine. It is, however, too curly 



408 THE VOYAGE OF THE VEGA. [chap. 

to express one's self on this subject, before the fossils which we 
brought home have been examined by Dr. Nathorst. 

Coal mining was stopped for the time, but orders were 
expected by every post to resume work. The road between the 
mine and the harbour town was at all events pretty well kept, 
and Mr. CooKE, one of the directors of the company, still lived 
at the place. He showed me all possible hospitality during the 
time I remained on the north side of the island for the purpose 
of collecting fossils. The rest of the time I was the guest of the 
acting Governor, Mr. Treacher, a young and amiable man, who 
showed me several collections in natural history from Labuan 
and the neighbouring parts of Borneo, and after our return to 
Europe sent me a collection of leaves and fruit of the kinds of 
trees which now grow on the island. I expect that this 
collection will be very instructive in the 'study of the fossil plants 
we brought home with us. 

At the steep shore banks on the north coast very fine sections 
of the sandstone strata, which lie under and above the coal, are 
visible. While I went along the shore in order to examine 
these, I visited some Malay huts built on poles. They were 
surrounded at flood tide by water, at ebb by the dry beach, bare 
of all vegetation. In order to get inside these huts one must 
climb a ladder two to two and a half metres high, standing 
towards the sea. The houses have the same appearance as a 
warehouse by the seaside at home, and are built very slightly. 
The floor consisted of a few rattling. bamboo splints lying loose, 
and so thin that I feared they would give way when I stepped 
upon them. The household articles consisted only of some mats 
and a pair of cooking vessels. I saw no fireplace ; probably fire 
was lighted on the beach. I could see no reason why this place 
should be chosen as a dwelling in preference to the neighbouring 
shore with its luxuriant vegetation, which at the same time was 
not at all swampy, unless it was for the coolness which arises 
from the airy situation on the beach, and the protection which 



XIX.] EXCURSION TO THE KALTAS. 409 



the poles give from the thousands of crawUng animals which 
swann in the grassy meadows of tropical regions. It is 
probahle also that the mosquitos are less troublesome along 
the sea-shore than farther into the interior of the country. 

Some of my companions saw similar huts during an excursion, 
wliich they undertook in the steam launch, to the mouth of 
a large river debouching on the neighbouring coast of Borneo. 
Regarding this excursion Dr. Stuxberg gives the following 
report : 

"On the 19th November Palander, Bove, and I, together with 
two men, undertook an excursion in the steam launch of the 
Vega to the river Kalias debouching right opposite to Labuan. 
We started at dawn, a little after six o'clock. The course was 
shaped first north of Pappan Island, then between the many 
shoals that lie between it and the considerably larger Daat 
Island, and finally south of the latter island. 

" Pappan Island is a small beautiful island, clothed down to 
high-water mark with a dark green primeval forest. On Daat 
Island, on the contrary, the primeval forest on the east side has 
been cut down, and has given place to a new plantation of cocoa- 
nut trees, the work of a former physician on Labuan, which 
yields its present owner a considerable revenue. 

" We had no little difficulty in finding a way over the sandy 
bar, which is deposited in front of the river mouth at a distance 
of a nautical mile and a half to three miles from the coast 
of Borneo. After several attempts in the course of an hour 
we at last succeeded in finding the deep channel which leads to 
the river. It runs close to the mainland on the north side, from 
KaJias Point to the river mouth proper. At the bar the depth 
was only a metre, in the deep channel, it varied between 3*5 and 
7 metres, in the river mouth it was fourteen to eighteen metres 
and sometimes more. 

" On the south side of the tongue of land, which projects north 
of the mouth of the Kalias, were found two Malay villages, 
whose inhabitants appeared to view our passage up the river 
with curious glances. A crowd of half or wholly naked children 
began a race along the shore, as soon as they set eyes upon the 
fast steam launch, probably in order to keep us in sight as long 
as possible. We now had deep water and steamed up the river 
without delay. The longed-for visit to some of the Malay 
villages we thus reser\'cd till our return. 



410 THE VOYAGE OF THE VEG^A. [chap. 

" We steamed about ten or twelve English miles up one of the 
many winding river arms, when the limited depth compelled us 
to turn. The vegetation on the mainland, as on the shores of 
the islands lying near the river-mouth, was everywhere so close 
that it was nearly impossible to find a place where we could 
land ; everywhere there was the impenetrable primeval forest. 
Next the mouth of the river this consisted of tall, shady broad- 
leaved trees, which all had dark green, lustrous, large leaves. 
Some were in flower, others bore fruit. The greater number 
consisted of fig trees, whose numerous air-roots twining close 
on each other formed an impenetrable fence at the river bank. 
These air-root-bearing trees play an important role in increasing 
the area of the land and diminishing that of the water. They 
send their strong air-roots from the branches and stem far out 
into the water, and when the roots have reached the bottom, 
and pushed their way into the mud, they make, by the close 
basket-work they form, an excellent binding medium for all the 
new mud which the river carries with it from the higher ground 
in the interior. It has struck me that the air-root-bearing trees 
form one of the most important means for the rapid increase of 
the alluvial land on Borneo. Farther up the river there com- 
menced large stretches of a species of palm, which with its 
somewhat lighter green and its long sheath-formed leaves was 
sharply distinguished from the rest of the forest. Sometimes 
the banks on one side were covered with palms only, on the 
other with fig-trees only. The palm jungles were not so 
impenetrable as the fig-tree thickets ; the latter preferred the 
more swampy hollows, while the palms on the other hand grew 
on the more sandy and less marshy places. Of herbs and 
underwood there was nowhere any trace. 

" During the river voyage we saw now and then single green- 
coloured kingfishers flying about, and a honeysucker or two, but 
they were not nearly so numerous as might have been expected 
in this purely tropical zone. We saw some apes leaping in pairs 
among the trees, and Palander succeeded in shooting a male. 
Alligators from one to one and a half metre in length, frightened 
by the noise of the propeller, throw themselves suddenly into the 
water. Small land lizards with web-feet jumped forward with 
surprising rapidity on the water near the banks. This was all 
we saw of the higher animals. 

"After a nm of two hours, during which we examined the 
banks carefully in order to find a landing place, we lay to at the 
best possible place for seeing what the lower fauna had to offer. 
It was no onsy matter to cn't t(» land. The i^round was so nuiddv 



XIX.] VISIT TO MALAY VILLAGES. 411 



that we sank to the knees, and could make our way through the 
wood only by walking on an intermediate layer of palm leaves 
and fallen branches. The search for evertebrates did not yield 
very much. A half-score mollusca, among them a very re- 
markable naked leech of quite the same colour-marking and 
raggedness as the bark of tree on which it lived, was all that 
we could find here. It struck me as very peculiar not to find 
a single insect group represented. The remarkable poverty in 
animals must be ascribed, I believe, to the complete absence 
of herbs and underwood. Animal life was as poor as vegetation 
was luxuriant and various in diflferent places. Over the landscape 
a peculiar quietness and stillness rested. 

" During our return we visited one of the two Malay villages 
mentioned ^above. It consisted of ten different houses, which 
were built on tall and stout poles out in the water at the mouth 
of the river, about six to ten metres from the shore. All the 
houses were built on a common large platform of thick bamboo, 
which was about a man's height above the water. At right 
angles to the beach there floated long beams, one end being 
connected with the land, while the other was anchored close to 
the platform. From this anchored end a plank rose at a steep 
angle to the platform. Communication with land was kept up in 
this way. The houses were nearly all quadrangular, and contained 
a single room, had raised, not flat roofs, and were provided at 
one of the shorter sides, near one comer, with a high rectangular 
door opening, which certainly was not intended to be closed, and 
on one of the long sides with a square window-opening. The 
building material was bamboo, from eight to eleven centimetres 
in thickness, mostly whole, but sometimes cleft. The roof had 
a thin layer of palm leaves upon it to keep out the rain. The 
house in its entirety resembled a cage of spills to which the 
least puff of wind had always free entrance. The floor bent 
and yielded much, and at the same time was so weak that one 
could not walk upon it without being afraid of falling through. 
One half, right opposite the door opening, was overlaid with a 
thin mat of some plant ; it was evidently the sleeping place of 
the family. Some pieces of cloth was all the clothing we could 
discover. Of household articles there was scarcely any trace. 
Nor were there any weapons, arrows, or bows. The fireplace 
was in one comer of the room ; it consisted of an immense ash- 
heap on some low stones. Beside it stood a rather dirty iron 
pot. All refuse from meals, bones and mollusc-shells, had been 
thrown into the water under the floor ; there lay now a regular 
rnltiirc-laycr, a coiipk' of i'avX lii^^^luT tliuii the ^^urroundin^i^ 



412 THE VOYAGE OF THE VEGA- [.:HAr. 

sea-bottom, consisting for the most part of mussel shells. The 
floor of the room* was very dirty and black ; it looked as if it 
had never been in contact with a drop of water. The interior 
of the whole house struck one as being as poor and wretched as 
that of a Chukch tent. Its inhabitants appeared scarcely to own 
more than they stood or walked in, i.e. for every person a large 
piece of cloth round the waist. Small boats lay moored to the 
platform. They were nothing else than tree-stems hollowed 
out, without any separate planks at the sides, at most two t<> 
two and a half metres long, and capable of carrying only two 
men. We had met such a boat a little way up the river, rowed 
by two youths, and laden with palm-leaves ; it was not more 
than five to eight centimetres above the water, and appeared as 
if it would capsize with the least indiscreet movement on the 
part of the boatmen. Some dogs of middle size went about 
loose on the platform ; they were at first shy and suspicious 
of us, and growled a little, but soon allowed themselves to be 
caressed. 

" Of the natives, the Malays, unfortunately we saw at chjse 
quarters only some middle-aged men. When we approached the 
long floating beams which led to the platform, the women and 
children fled precipitately out of the nearest houses, and by the 
time we got to the platform, they had fortified themselves in a 
distant house, where they sat motionless and cast curious glances 
at us through a hole. The children showed their fear of us by 
loud crying, kept up the whole time. When we attempted to 
approach the fugitives, they hastened farther away. We won 
their favour with some cigarettes, which Palander distributed 
among them, and with which they were evidently delighted. 
They had a serious, reserved, perhaps rather indifferent appear- 
ance. A physiognomist would perhaps have had ditiiculty in 
saying whether their countenances expressed ferocity, determi- 
nation, or indifference. It appeared as if it would not be 
easy to bring forth a look of mirth or gladness on their faces. 

" At the Malay villages which we visited, some Chinese had a 
sago plantation. With some Malays as workmen in their 
service, they were now employed in loading a vessel of light 
draught with sago meal, of which they appeared to have a large 
quantity in store. Another vessel had just taken on board its 
cargo and was starting. The Chinese here made the same favour- 
able impression on me as their countrymen, whom I had seen 
before in Japan and Hong Kong, and whom I was afterwards to 
see at Singapore — the impression of an exceedingly industrious, 
thriving, contented, and cleanly race." 



XIX.] BORNEO. 413 



Labuan strikes me as a very suitable starting-point for a 
naturalist who may wish to explore Borneo. Surrounded by 
Europeans, but undisturbed by the distractions of a large city, 
he would have an opportunity of accustoming himself to the 
climate, which, though rather warm for a dweller in the North, 
is by no means unhealthy, to get acquainted with the manners 
and customs of the natives, to acquire a knowledge of the com- 
monest forms of the luxuriant nature, which would otherwise be 
apt to overwhelm the northern naturalist ; in a word, to make 
such preparations for the journey as are necessary to secure its 
success. This region of Borneo appears to be one of the least 
known parts of the Indian Archipelago, and one need not go 
far from the coast to come to places which are never visited 
by Europeans. Labuan itself and its immediate neighbourhood 
have much that is interesting to offer to the observer, and from 
thence short excursions may be made with ease and without 
excessive cost to the territory of the Sultan of Bruni, who is 
favourable to foreigners, and to the mountain Kini Balu, near the 
northern extremity of Borneo, which is 4,175 metres high, and 
visible from Labuan. When, before our arrival at Japan, I 
arranged the plan of our voyage home, I included in it a visit 
to this mountain, at whose summit a comparatively severe 
climate must prevail, and whose flora and fauna, therefore, not- 
withstanding its equatorial position, must offer many points of 
comparison with those of the lands of the north. But when I 
was told that the excursion would require weeks, I had to give 
it up. 

On the 12th November, the Vega again weighed anchor to 
continue her voyage by Singapore to Point de Galle in Ceylon. 
Between Labuan and Singapore our progress was but slow, in 
consequence of the calm which, as might have been foreseen, 
prevailed in the sea west of Borneo. 

Singapore is situated exactly halfway, when a vessel, starting 
from Sweden, circumnavigates Asia and Europe. We staid here 



414 THE VOYAGE OF THE VEGA. [chap. 



from the 28th November to the 4th December, very hospitably 
received by the citizens of the town, both European and Asiatic, 
who seemed to vie with the inhabitants of Hong Kong in 
enthusiasm for the voyage of the Vega. A Babel-like confusion 
of speech prevails in the town from the men of so many different 
nationalities who live here : Chinese, Malays, Klings, Bengalees, 
Parsees, Singhalese, Negroes, Arabs, &c. But our stay was all 
too short for independent studies, of the customs and mode of 
life of these different races, or of the rich vegetable and animal 
worlds in the neighbourhood of the town. I must refer those 
who are interested in these subjects to previous descriptions of 
that region, and to the abundant contributions to a knowledge 
of it which have been published by the Straits Branch of 
the Asiatic Society, which was founded here on the 4th 
November, 1877. 

We arrived at Galle on the 15th December, having during 
our passage from Singapore had a pretty steady and favourable 
monsoon. While sailing through the Straits of Malacca strong 
ball-lightning was often seen a little after sunset. The electrical 
discharges appeared to go on principally from the mountain 
heights on both sides of the Straits. 

I allowed the Vega to remain in the harbour of Point de 
Galle, partly to wait for the mail, partly to give Dr. Almquist 
an opportunity of collecting lichens on some of the high moun- 
tain summits in the interior of the island, and Dr. Ejellman 
of examining its algae, while I myself would have time to 
visit the famous gem-diggings of Ceylon. The return was as 
good as could have been expected considering our short stay 
at the place. Dr. Almquist's collection of lichens from the 
highest mountain of Ceylon, Pedrotalagalla, 2,500 metres high, 
was very large ; Kjellman, by the help of a diver, made a not 
inconsiderable collection of algae from the neighbourhood of the 
harbour ; and from an excursion which I undertook in company 
with Mr. Alexander C. Dixon, of Colombo, to Ratnapoora, 



XIX.] GEM DIGGINGS IN CEYLON. 415 



the town of gems, where we were received with special kindness 
by Mr. CoLiN MuRitA.Y, assistant government agent, I brought 
home a fine collection of the minerals of Oeylon. 

Precious stones occur in Ceylon mainly in sand beds, especially 
at places where streams of water have flowed which have rolled, 
crumbled down, and washed away a large part of the softer 
constituents of the sand, so that a gravel has been left remaining 
which contains considerably more of the harder precious stone 
layer than the original sandy strata, or the rock from which they 
originated. Where this natural washing ends, the gem collector 
begins. He searches for a suitable valley, digs do>^n a greater 
or less depth from the surface to the layer of clay mixed with 
coarse sand resting on the rock, which experience has taught 
him to contain gems.^ At the washings which I saw, the 
clayey gravel was taken out of this layer and laid by the side of 
the hole until three or four cubic metres of it were collected. 
It was then carried, in shallow, bowl-formed baskets from half 
a metre to a metre in diameter, to a neighbouring river, where 
it was washed until all the clay was carried away from the sand. 
The gems were then picked out, a person with a glance of 
the eye examining the wet surface of the sand and collecting 

* Emerson Tennent says on the subject : — The gem collectors penetrate 
through the recent strata of gravel to tlie depth of from ten to twenty 
feet in order to reach a lower deposit, distinguished by the name of Nellan, 
in which the objects of their search are found. This is of so early a 
formation that it underlies tlie present beds of riverp, and is generally 
separated from ihem or from the superincumbent gravel by a hard crust 
(called Kadua)j a few inches in thickness, and so consolidated as to have 
somewhat the appearance of laterite or sun-burnt brick. The nellan is for 
the most part horizontal, but occasionally it is raised into an incline as it 
approaches the base of the hills. It appears to have been deposited pre- 
vious to the eruption of the basalt, on which in some places it reclines, 
and to have undergone some alteration from the contact. It consists of 
water-worn pebbles firmly imbedded in clay, and occasionally there occur 
large lumps of granite and gneiss, in the hollows under which, as well as 
in ** pockets " in the clay (which from their shape the natives denominate 
•* elephants' footsteps **), gems are frequently found in groups, as if washed 
in by the current. (E. Tennent, Ceylon. London, 18G0, i. p. 34.) 



416 THE VOYAGE OF THE VEGA. [chap. xix. 



whatever had more or less appearance of a precious stone. He 
then skimmed away with the palm of the hand the upper stratum 
of sand, and went on in the same way with that below it until 
the whole mass was examined. The certainty with which he 
judged in a moment whether there was anything of value among 
the many thousand grains of sand was wonderful. I endeavoured 
in a very considerable heap of the gravel thus hastily examined, 
to find a single small piece of precious stone which had escaped 
the glance of the examiner, but without success. 

The yield is very variable, sometimes abundant, sometimes 
very small, aud though precious stones found in Ceylon are 
yearly sold for large sums, the industry on the whole is 
unprofitable, although now and then a favourite of fortune has 
been enriched by it. The English authorities, therefore, with 
full justification, consider it demoralising and unfavourable to 
the development of the otherwise abundant natural resources 
of the region. For the numerous loose population devotes itself 
rather to the easy search for precious stones, which is as exciting 
as play, than to the severer but surer labours of agriculture, and 
when at any time a rich JiTid is made, it is speedily squandered, 
without a thought of saving for the times when the yield is 
little or nothing. A large number of the precious stones are 
polished at special polishing places at Ratnapoora, but the woric 
is very bad, so that the stones which come into the market are 
often irregular, and have uneven, curved, ill-polished surfaces. 
Most of them perhaps are sold in the Eastern and Western 
Indian peninsulas and other parts of Asia, but many are also 
exported to Europe. The precious stones which are principally 
found at Hatnapoora, consist of sapphires, commonly blue, but 
sometimes yellow or violet, sometimes even completely colour- 
less. In the last case they have a lustre resembling that of the 
diamond.^ Rubies I saw here only in limited numbers. 

^ Diamonds are wanting in Ceylon. And neither gold nor platinum 
appears to occur in noteworthy quantity in the gem gravel. 



CHAP. XIX.] THE PRECIOUS STONES OF CEYLON. 419 



The precious stones occur in nearly every river valley which 
runs from the mountain heights in the interior of the island 
down to the low land. According to a statement by 
Mr. Tennent (i. p. 33), the river-sand at many places contains 
so much of the harder minerals that it may be used directly 
for the polishing of other stones. The same writer, or more 
correctly Dr. Gygax, who appears to have written the rather 
scanty mineralogical contributions to Tennent's famous work, 
states that a more abundant yield ought to be obtained by 
working in the solid rock than by the usual method. This idea 
is completely oppcjsed to the experience of mineralogy. The 
finest gems, the largest gold nuggets, as is well known, are 
never, or almost never, found in solid rock, but in loose earthy 
layers. In such layers in Ceylon the abundance of precious 
stones, that is to say, of minerals which are hard, tranducent, 
and strongly lusti'ous, is very great, and enormous sums would 
be obtained if we could add up the value of the mass of 
precious stones ¥rhich have been found here for thousands of 
years back. Already Marco Polo says of Ceylon : " In ista 
insula nascuntur boni et nobiles rubini et non nascuntur in 
aliquo loco plus. Et hie nascuntur zafiri et topazii, ametisti, 
et aliquse alise petrse pretiosse, et rex istius insulae habet 
pulcriorem rubinum de numdo." 

But some one perhaps will ask, where is the mother-rock of 
all these treasures in the soil of Ceylon? The question is 
easily answered. All these minerals have once been imbedded 
in the granitic gneiss, which is the principal rock of the region. 

In speaking of granite or gneiss in southern lands, or at least 
in the southern lands we now visited, I must, in the first place, 
point out that these rocks next the surface of the earth in the 
south have a much greater resemblance to strata of sand, gravel, 
and clay than to our granite or gneiss rocks, the type of what 
is lasting, hard, and unchangeable. The high coast hiUs, which 
surroimd the Inland Sea of Japan, resemble, when seen from 

£ £ 2 



423 THE VOYJIQE OP THK VEGA. [chap. 

the sea, ridges of sand (psar) with sides partly clothed with 
wood, partly sandy slopes of a light yellow colour, covered by 
no vegetation. On a closer examination, however, we find that 
the supposed sandy ridges consist of weathered granitic rocks, 
in which all possible intermediate stages may be seen between 
the solid rock and the loose sand. The sand is not stratified, 
and contains large, loose, rounded blocks ifi situ, completely 
resembling the erratic blocks in Sweden, although with a more 
rugged surface. The boundary between the unweathered 
granite and that which has been converted into sand is often 
so sharp that a stroke of the hanuner separates the crust of 
granitic sand from the granite blocks. They have an almost 
fresh surface, and a couple of millimetres within the boundary 
the rock is quite unaltered. No formation of clay takes place, 
and the alteration to which the rocks are subjected therefore 
consists in a crumbling or formation of sand, and not, or at 
least only to a very small extent, in a chemical change. Even 
at Hong Kong the principal rock consisted of granite. Here 
too the surface of the granite rock was quite altered to a very 
considerable depth, not however to sand, but to a fine, often 
reddish, clay, thus in quite a different way from that on the 
coast of the Inland Sea of Japan. Here too one could at many 
places follow completely the change of the hard granite mass 
to a clay which still lay in situ, but without ite being possible 
to draw so sharp a boundary between the primitive rock and 
the newly-formed loose earthy layers as at the first-named 
place. We had opportunities of observing a similar crumbling 
down of the hard granite at every road-section between Galle, 
Colombo, and Ratnapoora, with the difference that the granite 
and gneiss here crumbled down to a coarse sand, which was 
again bound together by newly-formed hydrated peroxide of 
iron to a peculiar porous sandstone, called by the natives 
cabook. This sandstone forms the layer lying next the rock in 
nearly all the hills on that part of the island which we visited. 



xn] THK CABOOK OF CEYLON. 421 



It evidently belongs to an earlier geological period than the 
Quaternary, for it is older than the recent formation of valleys 
and rivers. The cdbook often contains large, rounded, un- 
weathered granite blocks, quite resembling the rolled-stone 
blocks in Sweden. In this way there arise at places where the 
edbook stratum has again been broken up and washed away by 
currents of water, formations which are so bewilderingly like 
the ridges {psar) and hills with erratic blocks in Sweden and 
Finland that I was astonished when I saw them. I was com- 
pelled to resort to the evidence of the palms to convince myself 
that it was not an illusion which unrolled before me the well- 
known contours from the downs of my native land. An accurate 
study of the sandy hills on the Inland Sea of Japan, of the clay 
cliffs of Hong Kong, and the eabook of Ceylon would certainly 
yield very unexpected contributions to an explanation of the 
way in which the sand and rolled-stone osar of Scandinavia 
have first arisen. It would show that much which the Swedish 
geologists still consider to be glacial gravel transported by water 
and ice, is only the product of a process of weathering or, more 
correctly, falling asunder, which has gone on in Sweden also on 
an enormous scale. Even a portion of our Quaternary clays 
have perhaps had a similar origin, and we find here a simple 
explanation of the important circumstance, which is not . suffi- 
ciently attended *to by our geologists, that often all the erratic 
blocks at a place are of the same kind, and resemble in their 
nature the underlying or neighbouring rocks. 

It is this weathering process which has originated the gem 
sand of Ceylon. Precious stones have been found disseminated 
in limited numbers in the granite converted into cahook. In 
weathering, the difficultly decomposable precious stones have 
not been attacked, or attacked only to a limited extent. They 
have therefore retained their original form and hardness. 
When in the course of thousands of years streams of water 
have flowed over the layers of cdbook, their soft, already half- 



422 THE VOYAGE OF THE VEGA. [chap. 



weathered constituents have been for the most part changed 
into a fine mud, and as such washed away, while the hard gems 
have only been inconsiderably rounded and little diminished in 
size. The current of water therefore has not been able to wash 
them far away from the place where they were originally im- 
bedded in the rock, and we now find them collected in the 
gravel-bed, resting for the most part on the fundamental rock 
which the stream has left behind, and which afterwards, when 
the water has changed its course, has been again covered by 
new layers of mud, clay, and sand. It is this gravel-bed which 
the natives call ncllan, and from which they chiefly get their 
treasures of precious stones. 

Of all the kinds of stones which are used as ornaments there 
are both noble and common varieties, without there being any 
perceptible difference in their chemical composition. The most 
skilful chemist would thus have diflBculty in finding in their 
chemical composition the least difference between conindum and 
sapphire or ruby, between common beryl and emerald, between 
the precious and the common topaz, between the hyacinth and 
the conunon zircon, between precious and common spinel ; and 
every mineralogist knows that there are innumerable inter- 
mediate stages between these minerals which are so dissimilar 
though absolutely identical in composition. This gave the old 
naturalists occasion to speak of ripe and unripe precious stones. 
They said that in order to ripen precious stones the heat of the 
south was required. This transference of well-known circum- 
stances from the vegetable to the mineral kingdom is certainly 
without justification. It points however to a remarkable and 
hitherto unexplained circumstance, namely, that the occurrence 
of precious stones is, with few exceptions, confined to southern 
regions.^ Diamonds are found in noteworthy number only in 



^ The only considerable exceptions from this are two localities for pre- 
cious stones in Southern Siberia and the occurrence of precious opal in 



XIX.] COMMON AND PRECIOUS STONES. 423 



India, Borneo, Brazil, and the Transvaal. Tropical America is 
the home-land of the emerald, Brazil of the topaz, Ceylon of 
the sapphire and the hyacinth, Pegu of the ruby, and Persia of 
the turquoise. With the exception of the diamond the same 
stones are found also in the north, but in a common form. 
Thus common sapphire (corundum) is found in Gellivare iron 
ore so plentifully that the ore from certain openings is difficult 
to smelt, Common topaz is found in masses by the hundred- 
weight in the neighbourhood of Falun ; common emerald is 
found in thick crystals several feet in length in felspar quarries, 
in Roslagen, and in Tammela and Kisko parishes in Finland ; 
common spinel occurs abundantly in Aker limestone quarry; 
common zircon at Brevig in Norway, and turquoise-like but 
badly coloured stones at Vestana in Skane. True precious 
stones, on the other hand, are not found at any of these places. 
Another remarkable fact in connection with precious stones is 
that most of those that come into the market are not found in 
the solid rock, but as loose grains in sand-beds. True jewel 
mines are few, unproductive, and easily exhausted. From this 
one would be inclined to suppose that precious stones actually 
undergo an ennobling process in the warm soil of the south. 

During the excursion I undertook from Galle to Ratnapoora, I 
visited a number of temples in order to procure Pali, Singhalese, 
and Sanscrit manuscripts ; and I put myself in communication 
with various natives who were supposed to possess such manu- 
scripts. They are now very difficult to get at, and the collection 
I made was not very large. The books which the temples 
wished to dispose of have long ago been eagerly brought up 
by private collectors or handed over to public museums, for 
example, to the Ceylon Government Oriental Library estab- 



Hungary. The latter, however, in consequence of defective hardness 
and translucency, can scarcely be reckoned among the true precious 
stones. 



424 THE VOYAGE OF THE VEGA. [chap. 



lished at Colombo.^ The collector who remams a considerable 
time in the region, may however be able to reap a rich after- 
harvest, less of the classical works preserved in the temples 
than of the smaller popular writings in the hands of private 
persons. 

We see in Ceylon innumerable descendants of the races 
who repeatedly subdued larger or smaller portions of the island, 
or carried on traffic there, as Moormen (Arabs), Hindoos, Jews, 
Portuguese, Dutchmen, Englishmen, &c., but the main body of 
the people at all events varies very little, and still consists of 
the two allied races, Tamils and Singhalese, who for thousands 
of years back have been settled here. The colour of their 
skin is very dark, almost black, their hair is not woolly, their 
features are regular, and their build is exceedingly fine. The 
children especially, who, while they are small, often go completely 
naked, with their regular features, their large eyes, and fresh 
plump bodies, are veritable types of beauty, and the same holds 
true of most of the youths. Instead of buying in one of the 
capitals of Europe the right to draw models, often enough with 
forms which leave much to desire, and which must be used 
without distinction for Greek or Northern divinities, for heroes 
or savants of the present or former times, an artist ought to 
make tours of study to the lands of the south, where man does 

^ The Catalogue of Pali, Singhalese, and Sanscrit Manuscripts in the 
Ceylon Government Oriental Library, Colombo, 1876, includes : — 

41 Buddhist canonical books. 
71 Other religious writings. 
25 Historical works, traditions. 
29 Philological works. 
16 Literary works. 
6 Works on Medicine, Astronomy, &c. 

According to Emerson Tennent (i. p. 515), the Rev. R. Spence Hardy has 
in the Journal of the Ceylon Branch of the Asiatic Society for 1848 given 
the titles of 467 works in Pali, Sanskrit, and Elu, collected by himself 
during his residence in Ceylon. Of these about eighty are in Sanskrit, 150 
in Elu or Singhalese, and the remainder in Pali. 



XIX ] THE INHABITANTS OF CEYLON. 426 



not need to protect himself from the cold with clothes, and 
where accordingly nakedness is the rule, at least among the 
poorer classes. The dress which is worn here is commonly 
convenient and tasteful. Among the Singhalese it consists of a 
piece of cloth wound round the middle, which hangs down to 
the knees. The men, who still prefer the convenient national 
dress to the European, go with the upper part of the body bare. 
The long hair is held together with a comb which goes right 
over the head, and among the rich has a large four-cornered 
projection at the crown. The women protect the upper part 
of the body with a thin cotton jacket. The priests wear a 
yellow piece of cloth diagonally over one shoulder. The naked 
children are ornamented with metal bracelets and with a metal 
chain round the waist, from which a little plate hangs down 
between the legs. This plate is often of silver or gold, and is 
looked upon as an amulet. 

The huts of the working men are in general very small, built 
of earth or cabook-hncks, and are rather to be considered as sheds 
for protection from the rain and sunshine than as houses in the 
European sense. The richer Singhalese live in extensive 
" verandas " which are almost open, and are divided into rooms 
by thin panels, resembling in this respect the Japanese houses. 
The Japanese genius for ornament, their excellent taste and 
skill in execution, are however wanting here, but it must also 
be admitted that in these respects the Japanese stand first 
among all the peoples of the earth. 

In the seaport towns the Singhalese are insufferable by their 
begging, their loquacity, and the unpleasant custom they have of 
asking up to ten times as much, while making a bargain, as they 
are pleased to accept in the end. In the interior of the country 
the state of things in this respect is much better. 

Among the temples which I visited in order to procure Pali 
books was the so-called "devil's" temple at Batnapoora, the 
stateliest idol-house I saw in Ceylon. Most of the temples 



426 THE VOYAGE OP THE VEGA. [chap. 

were built of wood ; all were exceedingly unpretentious, an<l 
without the least trace of style. The numerous priests and 
temple attendants lived in rather squalid and disorderly dwellings 
in the neighbourhood of the temple. They recoived me in a 
friendly way and showed me their books, of which they occa- 
sionally sold some. The negotiation several times ended by the 



priest presenting me with the book I wished to purchase and 
positively refusing to receive compensation in any form. On 
one occasion the priest stated that he himself was prevented by 
the precepts of his religion from receiving the purchase-money 
agreed upon, but said tiiat I might hand -it over to some of the 



XIX.] TEMPLES IN CEYLON. 427 



persons standing round. At two of the priests' houses there was 
a swarm of school-children, who ran busily about with their 
palm-leaf writing books and writing implements. 

The temples were very different in their arrangements, pro- 
bably on account of the dissimilar usages of the various Buddhist 
sects to which they belonged. A temple near Colombo contained 
a large number of wooden images and paintings of gods, or men 
of more than human size. Most of them stood upright like a 
guard round a sitting Buddha. I could not observe any dislike 
on the part of the priests to take the foreigner round their 
t.emples. The key, however, was sometimes wanting to some 
repository, whose contents they were perhaps unwilling to 
desecrate by showing them to the unbeliever. This was, for 
instance, the case with the press which contained the devil's 
bow and arrows, in the temple at Batnapoora. The temple 
vessels besides were exceedingly ugly, tasteless, and ill-kept. I 
seldom saw anything that showed any sign of taste, art, and 
orderliness. How different from Japan, where all the swords, 
lacquer work, braziers, teacups, &c., kept in the better temples 
would deserve a place in some of the ail; museums of Europe. 

In the sketch of the first voyage from Novaya Zemlya to 
Ceylon, a countryman of Lidner can scarcely avoid giving a 
picture of " Ceylon's burned up vales." In this respect the 
following extract from a letter from Dr. Almquist, sketching his 
journey to the interior of the island may be instructive : — 

" Three hours after our arrival at Point de Galle I sat properly 
stowed away in the mail-coach en rctUe for Colombo. As 
travelling companions I had a European and two Singhalese. 
As it was already pretty dusk in the evening there was not much 
of the surrounding landscape visible. We went on the whole 
night through a forest of tall coco-nut trees whose dark tops 
were visible far up in the air against the somewhat lighter sky. 
It was peculiar to see the number of fire-flies flying in every 
direction, and at every wing-stroke emiting a bright flash. The 
night air had the warm moistness which is so agreeable in the 



428 THE VOYAGE OF THE VEGA. [chap. xix. 



tropics. Now and then the sound of the sea penetrated to our 
ears. For we followed the west coast in a northerly direction. 
More could not be observed in the course of the night, and all 
the passengers were soon sunk in deep sleep. 

" After seven hours' brisk trot we came to a railway station 
and continued our journey by rail to Colombo, the capital of 
Ceylon. As there was nothing special to see or do there, I went 
on without stopping by the railway, which here bends from the 
coast to Kandy and other places. The landscape now soon 
became grander and grander. We had indeed before seen 
tropical vegetation at several places, but of the luxuriance which 
here struck the eye we had no conception. The pity was that 
men had come hither, had cleared and planted. 

" In the lowlands I saw some cinnamon plantations. Ceylon 
cinnamon is very dear; in Europe cheaper and inferior sorts 
are used almost exclusively, and most of- the plantations in 
Ceylon have been abandoned many years ago. Soon the train 
leaves the lowland and begins to ascend rapidly. The patch of 
coast country, where the coco-nut trees prevail, is exchanged for 
a very mountainous landscape ; first hills with large open valleys 
between, then higher continuous mountains with narrow, deep, 
kettle-like valleys, or open hilly plateaus. In the valleys rice is 
principally cultivated. The hills and mountain sides were pro- 
bably originally covered with the most luxuriant primitive forest, 
but now on all the slopes up to the mountain summits it is cut 
down, and they are covered with cofiFee plantations. The coflFee- 
plant is indeed very pretty, but grows at such a distance apart 
that the ground is everywhere visible between, and this is a 
wretched covering for luxuriant Ceylon. 

"At two o'clock in the afternoon we arrived at the station, 
Perideniya, the nearest one to Kandy. The famous botanical 
garden lies in its neighbourhood, and there I had to visit the 
superintendent of the garden. Dr. Thwaites. This elderly, but 
still active and enthusiastic naturalist is exceedingly interested 
in botanical research, and very obliging to all who work in that 
department. He received me in a very friendly manner, and 
it was due to him that the programme of my visit there was 
so full. 

"A botanic garden in Ceylon must naturally be something 
extraordinary. Nowhere else can grander or more luxuriant 
vegetation be seen than here. The garden has been especially 
famous for the number of different varieties of trees of immense 
size which it can show. Besides, all possible better known plants 
are to be found here, cultivated in the finest specimens. Spices 



CHAP, xix.] THR BOTANIC GARDEN NEAR KANDV. 



aod drugs were specially well representeil. Here long t«ndrilsof 
the black pepper-plant wound themselves up the thick tree- 
stems, here the cardamon and the ginger flourished, here the 



Coffee FlaotBtlDni ; Aduo'i Fuk In the back-gramid. 

pretty cinnamon, camphor, cinchona, nutmeg, and cocoa trees 
made a splendid show, here I saw a newly gathered harvest of 
vanilla. The abundance of things to be seen, learned, and 



432 THE VOYAGE OF THE VEGA. [chap. 



enjoyed here was incredible. However, the next day I deter- 
mined on the advice of Dr. Thwaites to make a tour up to the 
mountain localities proper, in order there to get a better sight of 
the lichen flora of Ceylon. 

" I now travelled south partly by rail, partly by coach, until in 
the evening I found myself lodged at a * rest-house ' at Ram- 
bodde, a thousand metres above the sea, at about the same height 
accordingly as that at which trees cease to grow in southern 
Norway. This tropical mountain land reminds one a little, in 
respect of the contours of the landscape, of the fells of Norway. 
Here too are found league-long deep valleys, surrounded by 
high mountain summits and ranges with outlines sharply 
marked against the horizon. But here they were everywhere 
overgrown with coffee bushes, or possibly with cinchona plants. 
The mountain slopes were so laid bare from the bottom ail the 
way up that scarce a tree was left in sight ; everywhere so far as 
the eye could reach only coffee. 

" Next day, attended by a Singhalese, I went, or to speak more 
correctly, climbed farther up the steep coffee plantations. At a 
height of 1,300 metres above the sea coffee ceases to grow, and 
we now found some not very extensive tea plantations, and above 
these the primitive forest commences. At a height of 1,900 
metres above the sea there is an extensive open plateau. Up 
here there is a not inconsiderable place, Novara EUiya, where 
the governor has a residence, and part of the troops are in 
barracks during the summer heat. One of the mountains 
which surround this plateau is Pedrotalegalla, the loftiest 
mountain of Ceylon, which reaches a height of 2,500 metres 
above the sea. 

" I have ascended not so few mountains, but of none has the 
ascent been so easy as of this, for a broad footpath ran all the 
way to the top. Without this path the ascent had been impos- 
sible, for an hour's time would have been required for every foot 
made good through the jungle, so closely is the ground under 
the lofty trees covered to the top of the mountain with bushes, 
creepers, or the bamboo. In the evening I returned to my 
former nisrht-quarters, where I slept well after a walk of 
thirty-six English miles. 

'' As I felt myself altogether unable the following day to make 
any further excursion on foot, I travelled back to Peradeniya by 
mail-coach. During this journey I had as my travelling com- 
panion a Singhalese, whom it was a special pleasure to see at 
close quarters. One of his big toes was ornamented with a 
broad ring of silver, both his ears were pierced above, and 



XIX.] A SINGHALESE DANDY. 433 



provided with some pendulous ornament, and one side of the 
nose was likewise perforated, in order that at that place too might 
he adorn himself with apiece of grandeur. On his head he had, 
like all Singhalese, a comb by which the hair drawn right 
upwards is kept in position, as little girls at home are wont to 
have their hair arranged. As the man did not appear to know 
a word of English, it was impossible to enter into any closer 
acquaintance with him. 

" At noon on the following day I found myself compelled, by 
a quite unexpected occurrence, to return precipitately to the 
coast again. Dr. Thwaites and I had been invited to dinner by 
his Excellency the Governor. As I was still limping after my 
long excursion on foot, and besides had not had the forethought 
to take a dress-suit with me, I considered that, vexatious as it 
was to decline, I could not accept this gracious invitation, but 
instead went my way. Thus after six exceedingly pleasant days 
I came back to Point de Galle and the VegaJ' 




VOL. II. F F 



CHAPTER XX. 

The Voyage Home — Christmas, 1879 — Aden — Suez — Cairo — Excursion to 
the Pyramids and the Mokattam Mountains —Petrified Tree-stems — The 
Suez C&nal — Landing on Sicily by night — Naples — Rome — ^The Members 
of the Expedition separate — Lisbon — England — Paris — Copenhagen — 
Festive Entry into Stockholm — Files there — Conclusion. 

During our stay in Japan and our voyage thence to Ceylon I had 
endeavoured at least in some degree to preserve the character 
of the voyage of the Vega as a scientific expedition, an attempt 
which, considering the short time the Veffa remained at each 
place, could not yield any very important results, and which 
besides was rendered difficult, though in a way that was 
agreeable and flattering to us, by I may almost say the tem- 
pestuous hospitality with which the Vega men were every- 
where received during their visits to the ports of Japan and 
East Asia. It was besides difficult to find any new untouched 
field of research in regions which were the seat of culture and 
civilisation long before the time when the forest began to be 
cut down and seed to be sown in the Scandinavian North, 
and which for centuries have formed the goal of exploratory 
expeditions from all the countries of Europe. I hope how- 
ever that the Vega will leave lasting memorials even of 
this part of her voyage through the contributions of Stux- 
berg, Nordquist, Ejellman, and Almquist to the evertebrate 
fauna and the sea-weed and lichen flora of East Asia» and by 
my collections of Japanese books, of fossil plants from Mogi 
and Labuan, &c. 



CHAP. XX.] CHRISTMAS AND NEW YEAR'S EVE. 437 



With the new overpowering impression which nature and 
people exerted on those of us, who now for the first time 
visited Japan, China, India, Borneo, and Ceylon, it was how- 
ever specially difficult, during a stay of a few days at each place, 
to preserve this side of the Vega expedition. I therefore 
determined after leaving Ceylon to let it drop completely, 
that is, from that point merely to travel home. Regarding 
this part of the voyage of the Vega I would thus have very 
little to say, were it not that an obligation of gratitude compels 
me to express in a few words the thanks of the Vega men for 
all the honours bestowed upon them, and all the goodwill they 
enjoyed during the last part of the voyage. For many of my 
readers this sketch may perhaps be of interest as reminding 
them of some happy days which they themselves have lived 
through, and it may even happen that it will not be unwelcome 
to the Mends of geography in a future time to read this 
description of the way in which the first circumnavigators of 
Asia and Europe were fSUd in the ports and capitals of the 
civilised countries. In this sketch however I am compelled 
to be as brief as possible, and I must therefore sue for pardon 
if every instance of hospitality shown us cannot be mentioned. 

We started from Point de Galle on the 22nd December, and 
arrived at Aden on the 7th January. The passage was tedious 
in consequence of light winds or calms. Christmas Eve we 
did not celebrate on this occasion, tired as we were of 
entertainments, in such a festive way as at Pitlekaj, but 
only with a few Christmas-boxes and some extra treating. 
On New Year's Eve, on the other hand, the officers in the gun- 
room were surprised by a deputation from the forecastle 
clad in peeks as Chukches, who came, in good Swedish, mixed 
with a few words of the Pitlekaj ling^ia franca not yet forgotten, 
to bring us a salutation from our friends among the ice of the 
north, thanks for the past and good wishes for the coming year, 
mixed with Chukch complaints of the great heat hereaway 



438 THE VOYACiE OF THE VEGA. [chap. 



in the neighbourhood of the equator, which for fur-clad men 
was said to be altogether unendurable. 

We remained at Aden only a couple of days, received in 
a friendly manner by the then acting Swedish-Norwegian 
consul, who took us round to the most remarkable points of 
the desolate environs of this important haven, among others 
to the immense, but then and generally empty water reservoirs 
which the English have made in the neighbourhood of the 
town. No place in the high north, not the granite cliffs of 
the Seven Islands, or the pebble rocks of Low Island on 
Spitzbergen, not the mountain sides on the east coast of 
Novaya 2^mlya, or the figure-marked ground at Cape 
Chelyuskin is so bare of vegetation as the environs of Aden 
and the parts of the east coast of the Red Sea which we saw. 
Nor can there be any comparison in respect of the abundance 
of animal life between the equatorial countries and the Polar 
regions we have, named. On the whole animal life in the 
coast lands of the highest north, where the mountains are 
high and surrounded by deep water, appesu^ to be richer in 
individuals than in the south, and this depends not . only on 
the populousness of the fowl-colonies and the number of large 
animals of the chase that we find there, but also on the 
abundance of evertebrates in the sea. At least the 
dredgings made from the Vega during the voyage between 
Japan and Ceylon gave an exceedingly scanty yield in 
comparison with our dredgings north of Cape Chelyuskin. 

Aden is now an important port of call for the vessels which 
pass through the Suez Canal from European waters to the 
Indian Ocean, and also one of the chief places for the export of 
the productions of Yemen or Arabia Felix. In the latter 
respect the harbour was of importance as far back as about 
four hundred years ago, when the Italian, LuDOVico I>R 
Vakthema, was for a considerable time kept a prisoner by the 
Arab tribes at the place. 



XX.] THE VEGA AT ADEN. 439 



In the harbour of Aden the Vega was saluted by the firing of 
twenty-one guns and the hoisting of the Swedish flag at the main- 
top of an Italian war vessel, the despatch steamer JSsploratore 
under the command of Captain Amezaoa. The Hsploratore took 
part in an expedition, consisting of three war vessels, charged 
with founding an Italian colony at Assab Bay, which cuts into 
the east coast of Africa, north of Bab-el-Mandeb, on a tract of 
land purchased for the purpose by Bubbattino, an Italian 
commercial company. On board was Professor Sapetto, an 
elderly man, who had concluded the bargain and had lived at 
the place for forty years. It was settled that he should be the 
administrator of the new colony. On board the Exploratory 
were also the aavarUs Beccari and the Marquis DOBIA, famous 
for their extensive travels in the tropics and their valuable 
scientific labours. The officers of the Italian vessel invited us 
to a dinner which was one of the pleasantest and gayest of 
the many entertainments we were present at during our 
homeward journey. When at the close of it we parted from 
our hosts they lighted up the way by which we rowed forward 
over the tranquil waves of the Bay of Aden with blue lights, 
and the desert mountain sides of the Arabian coast resounded 
with the hurrahs which were exchanged in the clear, calm 
night between the representatives pi the south and north 
of Europe. 

The Vega left Aden, or more correctly its port-town, Steamer 
Point, on the 9th January, and sailed the following day through 
Bab-el-Mandeb into the Red Sea. The passage of this sea, 
which is narrow, but 2,200 kilometres long, was tedious, 
especially in its northern part, where a strong head wind 
blew. This caused so great a lowering of the temperature that 
a film of ice was formed on the fresh-water pools in Cairo, 
and that we. Polar travellers as we were, had again to put on 
winter clothes in Egypt itself. 

The Vega anchored on the 27th January at the now 



440 THE VOYAGE OF THE VEGA. Tchap. 



inconsiderable port, Suez, situated at the southern entrance to 
the Suez Canal. Most of the scientific men and officers of 
the Vega expedition made an excursion thence to Cairo and the 
Pyramids, and were everywhere received in a 'very kind way. 
Among other things the Egyptian Geographical Society sent 
a deputation to welcome us under the leadership of the 
President of the Society, the American, Stone Pacha. He 
had in his youth visited Sweden, and appeared to have a 
very pleasant recollection of it. The Geographical Society 
gave a stately banquet in honour of the Vega expedition. 
An excursion was made to the Great Pyramids, and, as far as 
the short time permitted, to other remarkable places in and 
around the heap of ruins of all kinds and from all periods, 
which forms the capital of the Egypt of to-day. During our 
visit to the Pyramids the Swedish-Norwegian consul-general, 
BOdtker, gave us a dinner in the European hotel there, and 
the same evening a ball was given us by the Italian consul- 
general, De Martino. a day was besides devoted by some of 
us, in company with M. Guiseppe Haimann, to a short excursion 
to the Mokattam Mountains, famous for the silicified tree- 
stems found there. I hoped along with the petrified wood to 
find some strata of clay-slate or schist with leaf-impressions. 
I was however unsuccessful in this, but I loaded heavily a 
carriage drawn by a pair of horses with large and small tree- 
stems converted into hard flint. These lie spread about in the 
des3rt in incredible masses, partly broken up into small pieces, 
partly as long fallen stems, without root or branches, but in 
a wonderfully good state of preservation. Probably they had 
originally lain imbedded in a layer of sand above the present 
surface of the desert. This layer has afterwards been carried 
away by storms, leaving the heavy masses of stone as a peculiar 
stratum upon the desert sand, which is not covered by any 
grassy sward. No root-stumps were found, and it thus ap- 
peared as if the stems had been earned by currents of Water 



XX.] THE SUEZ CANAL. 441 



to the place where they were imbedded in the sandy layers 
and silicified. In their exterior all these petrifactions resemble 
each other, and by the microscopical examination which has 
hitherto been made naturalists have only succeeded in dis- 
linguishiDg two species belonging to the family Nicolia, and a 
palm, a pine, and a leguminous plant, all now extinct. It is 
possible that among the abundant materials I brought home 
with me some other types may be discovered by polishing 
and microscopical examination. Such at least was my 
expectation in bringing home this large quantity of stones, 
the transport of which to the Vega was attended with a 
heavy expenditure. 

From Cairo we returned, on the 2nd February, to Suez, and 
the following day the Vega weighed anchor to steam through the 
Suez Canal into the Mediterranean. This gigantic work, created 
by the genius and perseverance of Lesseps, which is unsur- 
passed by the many marvels of construction in the land of the 
Pharaohs, has not a very striking appearance, for the famous 
canal runs, like a small river with low banks, through the mono- 
tonously yellow plain of the desert. There are no sluices. No 
bold rock -blastings stand as monuments of difficulties overcome. 
Sut proud mu8t every child of our century be when he gazes on 
this proof that private enterprise can in our day accomplish 
what world-empires in former times were unable to carry into 
execution. We touched at Port Said for a few hours on the 
5th February, after which we continued our voyage to Naples, 
the first European port we were to visit. 

At Aden and in Egypt I had received several letters and 
telegrams informing me that great preparations were being 
made at Naples for our reception, and that repeated inquiries 
had been addressed to the Swedish eonsnl-general regarding 
the day of our arrival, questions which naturally it was not so 
easy to answer, as our vessel, with its weak steam<-power, was 
very dependent on wind and weather. It was hoped that the 



442 THE VOYAGE OF THE VEGA. [chap. 



Vtgd might be signalled from the Straits of Mesdina, but we did 
not come to the entrance to the Straits until after sunset. I 
therefore ordered the Vega to lie to there for some hours, while 
Lieut. Bove and I rowed ashore to send off telegrams announc- 
ing our arrival in Europe to Sweden, Naples, Bome, and other 
places. The shore, however, was farther off than we had calcu- 
lated, and it was quite dark before it was reached. It was not 
without difficulty that in these circumstances we could get to 
land through the breakers in the open road quite unknown to 
us, and then, in coal-black darkness, find our way thrcfligh 
thickets of prickly bushes to the railway which here runs along 
the^oast. We had then to go along the railway for a con- 
siderable distance before we reached a station from which our 
telegrams could be despatched. Scarcely had we entered the 
station when we were surrounded by suspicious railway and 
coast-guard men, and we considered ourselves fortunate that 
they had not observed us on the way thither, for they would 
certainly have taken us for smugglers, whom the coast-guard 
have the right to salute with sharp shot. Even now we were 
overwhelmed with questions in a loud and commanding tone^ 
but when they saw to what high personages our telegrams were 
addressed, and were informed by their countryman Bove, who 
wore his uniform, to what vessel we belonged, they became very 
obliging. One of them accompanied us back to our boat, after 
providing us with excellent torches which spread abundant light 
around our footsteps. They were much needed, for we were 
now compelled to share the astonishment of our guide that in 
the darkness we had succeeded in making our way over the 
rugged hills covered with cactus plants and bushy thickets 
between the railway and the coast, and along a railway viaduct 
which we had passed on our way to the station without having 
any idea of it It was the last adventure of the voyage of the 
Vtgay and my first landing on the glorious soU of Italy. 
Onvthe 14th February, at 1 P.M., the Vega arrived at Naples. 



XX.] RECEPTION AT NAPLES. 443 



At Capri a fiag-omamented steamer from Sorrento met us; 
somewhat later, another from Naples, both of which accom- 
panied us to the harbour. Here the Swedish expedition was 
saluted by an American war-vessel, the Wyoming, with twenty- 
one guns. The harbour swarmed with boats adorned with 
flags. ' Scarcely had the Vega anchored — or more correctly 
been moored to a buoy — when the envoy Lindstrand, the 
Swedish-Norwegian consul Clausen, Prince Teano, president 
of the Geographical Society, Commander Mabtin Franklin, 
Commendatore Negri, and others came on board. The last- 
named, who nearly two years before had made a special journey 
to Sweden to be present at the departure of the Vega, now 
came firom Turin commissioned by the Italian government, and 
deputed by the municipalities of Florence and Venice, the 
Turin Academy of Sciences, and several Italian and foreign 
geographical societies, to welcome the Expedition, which had 
now brought its labours to a happy issue. 

After Herr Lindstrand, as King Oscar's representative, had 
welcomed the Expedition to Europe, and pubUcly conferred 
Swedish decorations on Palander and me, and two adjutants of 
the Italian Ministry of Marine had likewise distributed Italian 
orders to some of the Vega men, some short speeches were 
exchanged, on which the members of the Expedition, accom- 
panied by the persons enumerated above, landed in the 
Admiral's steam-launch under a salute of twenty-one guns 
from the Italian guard-ship. On the landing-quay, where 
a large crowd of the inhabitants of the city was assembled, 
the Swedish seafarers were received by the Syndic of Naples, 
Count Giusso, accompanied by a deputation from the munici- 
pality, &c. Here we were taken, between rows of enthusiastic 
students, in the gala carriages of the municipality, to the Hotel 
Royal des £trangeres, where a handsome suite of apartments, 
along with equipages and numerous attendants, was placed at 
our disposal. We were there received by the committee in 



444 THE VOYAGE OF THE VEGA. [chap. 



charge of the festivities, Prince Belmonte and Cavalier Riccio, 
who afterwards, during our stay in the city, in the kindest 
way arranged everything to make our stay there festive and 
agreeable. 

On Sunday the 15th several deputations were received, 
among them one from the University. A beautifully-bound 
address was presented by "Ateneo Benjamino Franklin," and 
a number of official visits were made and received. We dined 
with the Swedish-Norwegian consul, Clausen. On Monday 
the 16th an address was presented from " Scuola d'Applicazione 
per gl'Ingenieri," and from " Neapolitana Archseologise, Litter- 
arum et Artium Academia," a song of welcome in Latin, 
written by Professor Antonio Mirabelli. Then followed a 
grand dinner given by the municipality of the city in a hall of 
the hotel, which was now inaugurated and was named the 
Vega Hall, and was on this occasion ornamented with the 
royal cipher, the Swedish and Italian flags, &c. In [the' even- 
ing there was a gala representation at San Carlo, where the 
members of the Expedition scattered among the different boxes 
were saluted with repeated loud cries of " Bravo I " — On Tuesday 
the 17th the Committee had arranged an excursion to Lake 
Avemo, the Temple of Serapis, and other places famous in a 
geological and historical respect, situated to the north-west of 
Naples. Prince Urusov entertained some of the members of 
the Expedition to dinner. There was an afternoon musical en- 
tertainment at the " Societi Filarmonica," where there was a 
numerous attendance of persons moving in the first circles in 
the city. — Wednesday the 18th, excursion along with the Com- 
mittee to Pompeii, where the Swedish guests were received by 
the famous superintendent of the excavations. Director 
RuGGiERi. Breakfast was eaten with merry jests and gay 
speeches in a splendid Roman bath, still in good preservation, 
excavations were undertaken, &c. In the afternoon there was 
a grand dinner, followed by a reception by. the admiral in 



XX.3 RECEPTION AT NAPLES. 446 

command, and a festive representation at the Bellini Theatre. — 
Thursday the 19th, Dr. Franz KChn, arrived from Vienna, 
deputed by the Geographical Society there to welcome us. 
Excursion in company with Professor Falmieri and the Com- 
mittee to Vesuvius, which at the time of our visit was emitting 
thick columns of smoke, was pouring out a stream of lava, and 
casting out masses of glowing stone. We ascended the border 
of the crater, not without inconvenience from the heat of the 
haif-solidified lava streams over which we walked, from the 
gases escaping from the crater, and from the red-hot stones 
flung out of it. The new railway, not then ready, was inspected, 
and the observatory visited. We dined with the Committee at 
the hotel. — Friday the 20th, journey to Kome, where the 
members of the Expedition arrived at 2 P'M., and were, in the 
same way as at Naples, received in a festive manner by the 
Syndic of the city, Prince RusPOLi, president and director of 
the Geographical Society, by members of the University, 
the Scandinavian Union, Ac. Carriages met the Swedish 
guests, in which they were taken past the Swedish-Norwegian 
minister's hotel, decked with innumerable flags, to Albergo di 
Roma in the Corso, where a splendid suite of apartments, along 
with equipages, was placed at the disposal of the Expedition. 
In the evening we dined with the Swedish minister, and were 
afterwards received by Prince Pallavicini at his magnificent 
{Kdace. — Saturday the 21st, visit to the Chamber of Deputies, 
private excursions, dinner given by the Duke Nicolas of 
Leuchtenberg, to Nordenskiold and Nordquist. — Sunday the 
22nd, public meeting of the Qeograpical Society, at which its 
grand gold medal was presented to Nordenskiold. In the 
evening a grand dinner, given by the Geographical Society, in 
the Continental Hotel. Among the toasts which were drunk 
may be mentioned one to the King of Sweden and Norway, 
proposed in a very warm and eloquent speech by the Premier, 
Cairoli; to Nordenskiold, by Prince Teano; to Palander, by 



446 THE VOYAGE OF THE VEGA. [chap. 



the Minister of Marine, Admiral Acton ; to the other members 
of the Expedition, to its munificent patrons, Oscar Dickson, 
and Alexander Sibinakoff, to Bove, the Italian officer, who 
took part in it, &c. — Monday the 23rd. Audience of the King. 
In the evening a grand reception at the Palazzo Teano, where 
almost all that was distinguished and splendid of Roman 
society appeared to be assembled. — ^Tuesday the 24th. Dined 
at the Quirinal with King Humbert. There were present^ 
besides the King and his suite, the Swedish minister, the 
members of the Vtga expedition. Prince Teano, President of 
the Oeographical Society ; Commendatore Negri ; Cairoli, 
Premier; Acton, Minister of Marine; Malvano, Secretary of 
the Cabinet; Major Baratieri, and the Italian naval officer, 
EuGENio Parent, a member of the Swedish Polar expedition 
of 1872-3, and others. In the evening, reception by the English 
minister, Sir A. B. Paget, and a beautifully arranged feu at 
the Scandinavian Union, at which a number of enthusiastic 
speeches were made, and flowers and printed verses were dis- 
tributed. — Wednesday the 25th. Farewell visits. Some of the 
members of the Expedition travelled north by rail. Captain 
Palander made an excursion to Spezzia to take part in a cruise 
on the large ironclad DuUio. The others remained some days 
longer in Rome in order to see its lions, undisturbed by 
official fites. 

While the Vega lay in the harbour of Naples she was literally 
exposed to storming by visitors. The crew were on several 
occasions invited to the theatres there by the managers. Ex- 
cursions to Pompeii had besides been arranged for them by the 
consul for the united kingdoms, Clausen, who spared no pains to 
make the stay of the expedition at Naples honouring to the 
mother-country and as pleasant as possible to the guests, as well 
as in arranging the more formal details of the visit. We 
had besides the joy of meeting in Italy our comrade from 
the severe wintering of 1872-3, Eugenie Parent, who soon 



XX.] ARRIVAL AT LISBON. 447 



ckfter had the misfortune to be in the tower of the ironclad 
Duilio, when the large Armstrong cannon placed there burst, 
and the wonderful good fortune to escape with life and without 
being seriously hurt from this dreadful accident. The only 
mishap on board the Vega during the latter part of her long 
voyage home occurred besides in the harbour of Naples, one of 
the sailors who was keeping back an enthusiastic crowd of 
people who stormed the Vega, being thrown down from the 
bulwarks with the result that he broke an arm.^ 

On the 29th February the Vega left the harbour of Naples, 
but no longer with her staff complete. Doctors Ejellman, 
Almquist, and Stuxberg, and Lieut. Nordquist had preferred 
the land route from Italy to Stockholm to the long detour by 
sea, and Lieut. Bove was obliged, by fandly circumstances, to 
leave the Vega at Naples. We, however, all met again at 
Stockholm. At our departure from Naples the gunroom per- 
sonnel thus consisted only of me, Captain Palander, and Lieuts. 
Brusewitz and Hovgaard. 

Through M. A. Rabaut, President of the young, but already 
so well known Geographical Society of Marseilles, I had re- 
ceived repeated invitations to visit along with my companions 
the birthplace of Pytheas, the first Polar explorer and the 
discoverer of the Scandinavian Peninsula. With great reluct- 
ance I was compelled to decline this invitation. We had to 
hasten home, and I wished to save some days for a visit to the 
fatherland of Henry the Navigator and Vasco da Gama. 

We sailed through the Straits of Gibraltar on the 9th March, 
and anchored in the harbour of Lisbon on the 11th March at 
2 P.M. The following day we made an excursion to the 
beautiful palace of Cintra, situated about five Portuguese miles 
from the capital. On Saturday we were received in audience 

' An accident also happened during the first half of the expedition, the 
steersman, in backing among drift-ice, having been thrown over the wheel 
nnd hurt very seriously. 



448 THE VOYAGE OF THE VEGA. [chap. xx. 



by the King, Dom Luiz, of Portugal, who, a seaman himself, 
appeared to take a great interest in the voyage of the Ve^a. 
Later in the day the Swedish minister in Lisbon gave a 
dinner, to which were invited the President of the Portuguese 
Council, the Minister of Foreign Affairs, the members of the 
Diplomatic Corps, and others, ending in the evening with a 
grand reception. On Monday the 15th we were present by 
special invitation at a meeting of the Geographical Society, at 
which the newly-returned African travellers, Brito-Capello 
and IVEN, gave addresses. Here I had besides the great pleasure 
of meeting the famous African traveller, Major Serpa Pinto. 
The King at the same time honoured us with decorations, and 
at its meeting on the 10th March the Portuguese Chamber of 
Deputies resolved, on the motion of the Deputies Ennes 
and Alfredo, to express its welcome and good wishes in a 
congratulatory address to the Ve^a men. 

We weighed anchor again on the 15th March. We were 
favoured at first with a fresh breeze and made rapid progress, 
but at the entrance to the Channel we met with a steady head- 
wind, so that it was not until the evening of the 25th March, 
considerably later than we had counted on, that we could 
anchor in the harbour of Falmouth, not, as was first intend^, 
in that of Portsmouth. We thus- missed some preparations 
which had been made at the latter place to welcome us to the 
land which stands first in the line of those that have sent 
out explorers to the Polar Seas. We besides missed a banquet 
which the Royal Geographical .Society had arranged in honour 
of the Vega expedition^ at which the Prince of Wales was to 
have presided, and which now, in the midst of the Easter 
holidays and a keenly-contested parliamentary election, could 
not be held.^ Our stay in England, at all events, was exceedingly 

^ Further particulars on this point are given in the Annual Address on 
the Progress of Geography by the Bight Hon. tlie Earl of Northbrook 
(Proceedings of the Royal Geographical Society, 1880, p. 401). 



CHAP. XX.] LONDON. 451 

pleasant. Palander and I travelled on the night before 
Good Friday to London, where we were received at the railway 
station by the Swedish minister, Count Piper, and a large 
number of our countrymen living in London. Count Piper 
carried me to my future host, the distinguished Secretiiry of 
the Geographical Society and famous Arctician and geographical 
writer, Clements R. Markham, who did everything to make 
my stay in London as pleasant and instructive as possible. 
Saturday was spent in paying visits. On Easter Sunday Consul- 
General RiCHTER gave a lunch in the Continental Hotel, to 
which a considerable number of Scandinavians and Englishmen 
were invited. The same evening we dined with the famous 
Arctic traveller. Sir Allen Young. On Monday we were 
invited by the Earl of Northbrook, President of the 
Geographical Society,* to his country seat, Stratton, near Win- 
chester. Here we saw the way — an exceedingly quiet one — in 
which an English parliamentary election goes on. The same 
day we paid a visit to Mr. Spottiswoode, the President of the 
Royal Society, at his magnificent country seat, in the neighbour- 
hood of London. Here I saw several instructive experiments 
with very large machines for the production of light by 
electric discharges in highly rarified air. Wednesday the 31st, 
grand dinner at the Swedish minister's, and in the evening of the 
same day a Scandinavian ftit in the Freemasons* Hall, at which 
there were great rejoicings according to old northern usages. 

We started for Paris on the night before the 1st April. We 
went by Boulogne-sur-Mer, whose Chamber of Commerce had 
invited us to a file to celebrate the first landing of the Vega 
men on the soil of France after the North-east Passage was 
achieved. Several of the authorities of the town and 

1 During our visit to London we had no opportunity of taking part in 
any of the meetings of the Society, but some time after the Society gave 
Palander the Founder's Gold Medal (I had in 1869 obtained the same 
distinction) and elected me an Honorary CoiTOpponding Member. 

G G 2 



452 THE VOYAGE OF THE VEGA. [cuap. 



Dr. Hamt, a delegate from the Geographical Society of Paris 
met us in the waiting-room at the station. Here a break- 
fast had been arranged, in the course of which we were 
presented to a number of eminent persons of the place, with 
whom we afterwards passed the greater part of the day in the 
most agreeable way. After making several excursions in the 
neighbourhood of the town and paying the necessary official 
visits, we partook of a festive dinner arranged by the munici- 
pality. From Boulogne we travelled by night to Paris, arriving 
there on the 2nd April at 7 A.M. 

Notwithstanding the early morning hour we were received 
here at the station in a festive way by the Swedish-Norwegian 
minister and the personnel of the Legation, a deputation from 
the Geographical Society of Paris, and a considerable number 
of the members of the Scandinavian colony in the capital of 
France. The famous Madagascar traveller, Grandidieb, Pre- 
sident of the Geographical Society's Central Committee, 
welcomed us, with lively expressions of assent from the sur- 
rounding crowd. We were invited during our stay in the 
city to live with our countryman, A. Nobel, in a very 
comfortable villa belonging to him, Rue Malakoff, No. 53, and 
I cannot sufficiently commend the liberal way in which he here 
discharged the duties of a host and assisted us during our stay 
in Paris, which, though very agreeable and honouring to us, 
demanded an extraordinary amount of exertion. 

Our reception in Paris was magnificent, and it appeared as 
if the metropolis of the world wished to show by the way in 
which she honoured a feat of navigation that it is not without 
reason that she bears on her shield a vessel surrounded by 
swelling billows. It is a pleasant duty for me here to oflTer 
my thanks for all the goodwill we, during those memorable 
days, enjoyed on the part of the President of the Republic, of 
Admiral La Ronciere le Noxjry, President of the Geographical 
Society, his colleague, M. Hecht, M. MaunoiH, the Secretary of 



XX.] PARIS. 463 

^^ _ - III J, I ■ I 

the Society, M. Quatbefage, and M. DAUBRfeE, members of the 
Institute, not to forget many other Frenchmen and Scandi- 
navians. Among the fUes of Paris I must confine myself to 
an enumeration of the principal ones. 

Friday, the 2nd April. Public stance de reception by the 
Geographical Society in the Cirque des Champs Elys^e in the 
presence of a very large and select audience. Admiral La 
Ronci^re delivered the speech on this occasion, which I 
replied to by giving a pretty fall account of the Swedish 
Arctic expeditions, on which the President handed me the 
large gold medal of the Society "as a proof of the interest 
which the public and the geographers of France take in the 
voyage of the Vega." Dined the same day with the Swedish- 
Norwegian minister, Sibbebn. — Saturday the 3rd. Invitation 
to a festive meeting of delegates from twenty-eight learned 
societies in France in the amphitheatre of the Sorbonne.^ We 
were greeted by the Minister of Education in a masterly and 
eloquent speech, after which he conferred upon us, on the part 
of the Republic, Commander's and Officer s Insignia of the 
French Legion of Honour. " A reward," as the Minister of the 
Bepublic expressed himself, "for the blood of the brave and 
the sleepless nights of the learned." After that an official 
dinner and reception by M. Jules Ferry. — On Sunday the 4th, 
an address was presented from the Scandinavian Union, under 
the presidency of Herr Fortmeijer. In the evening a brilliant 
entertainment on a large scale given by the Scandinavian 
Union in the Hotel Continental. Among those present may 
be mentioned Prince OscAB of Sweden, the President of the 
FUe Committee, Herr Jensen, Fru Kbistina Nilson-Rouzeaud 
the Danish minister, the Swedish embassy, members of the 
Russian embassy, a large number of Scandinavian artists, many 

' These are enumerated in the Bulletin de la SocieU de Geographie, Mai, 
1880, p. 463. In the same part (p. 450) there is also a report of the 
speeches made at the stance de ricepHoji, 



454 THE VOYAGE OF THE VEGA. [chap. 



of the principal representatives of the French and foreign 
press, and lastly, what ought perhaps to have been mentioned 
first, a flower-garden of ladies, of which every dweller in the 
north might feel proud. — Monday the 5th. Meeting of the 
Institute in its well-known hall, with speeches of welcome. 
Hence we were conducted to a grand festive reception, arranged 
beforehand to the minutest details by the Municipal Council, 
in " la Salle des fitats," situated in that part of the Tuileries 
where the Geographical Congress was held in 1878. The hall 
and the ascent to it were richly ornamented with French tri- 
colours and Swedish flags, beautiful Gobelins, and living plants- 
A number of speeches were made, after which the President of 
the Municipal Council, on the part of the City of Paris, pre- 
sented to me a large, artistically executed medal as a memorial 
of the voyage of the Vega} In the evening a grand dinner 
was given by the Soci(5t^ de Geographic, with several eloquent 
speeches : for King Oscar (Genenil Pittie), for President Gr<5vy, 
for the prosperity of France (Prince Oscar), for the Vqja ex- 
pedition (M. Quatrefage), and so on. — Tuesday the 6th. Dinner 
given by the President of the Republic, M. Qrevy, to Prince 
Oscar and the Vega men then in Paris. — Wednesday the 7th. 
Dinner given to a numerous and select company of French 
savants by the then President of the Geographical Society and 
of the Institute, M. A. Daubree. — Thursday the 8th. Dinner 
to a small circle at Victor Hugo's house, where the elderly poet 
and youthful-minded enthusiast in very warm, and I need not 
say eloquent, words congratulated me on the accomplishment of 
my task. Eeception there the same evening. 

Here ended our visit to the capital of France. Thoroughly 

1 The medal was accompanied by an "extrait du registre de proces- 
verbaiix du conseil municipal de la vilJe de Paris," a caligrapliic master- 
piece illuminated in various colours and gold. The Cangeil municipal also 
ordered a detailed description of the fete to be printed, with the title 
Relation officielle de le reception de 3f, le Professeur Nordenskiold par le 
conseil municipal de Farxs le lundi 5 Avril 1880. 



XX.] COPENHAGEN. 455 



exhausted, but bringing with us memories which shall never 
pass away, we travelled the following day to Vlissingen, whither 
the Vega had gone from Falmouth, under the command of 
Brusewitz. We had been compelled to decline warm and 
hearty invitations to Holland and Belgium from want of time 
and strength to take part in any more festivities. The anchor 
was weighed immediately after we came on board, and the 
course shaped for Copenhagen. At noon on the 15th we passed 
Helsingborg, which was richly ornamented with flags for the 
occasion. Already at KuUaberg we had been met by the 
steamer H. F. Pi^ior, with Lund students on board, and eight 
other steamers with deputations of welcome and enthusiasts for 
the voyage of the Vega, from Copenhagen, Malmo, Helsingborg, 
and Elsinore. The number of passengers was stated to be 1,500, 
including a number of ladies. Songs were sung, speeches made, 
fireworks let off, &c. At night we lay at anchor in the outer 
road of Copenhagen, so that it was not until the following fore- 
noon that we steamed into the harbour, saluting the fort with 
nine shots of our little cannon, and saluted in turn by as many. 
While the Vega was sailing into the harbour, and after she had 
anchored, there came on board the Swedish Minister, Baron 
Beck-Friis, the Swedish consul-general EverlOf, the re- 
presentatives of the University, of the merchants, and of the 
Geographical Society under the presidency of the former President 
of the Council, Count HoLSTEiN-HoLSTEmBORG, to bring us a 
welcome from the corporations they represented, and accompany 
us to the Toldbod, where we were received by the President-in- 
chief, the Presidents of the Communal Authority, and the Bourse, 
and the Swedish Unions of Copenhagen. We then drove through 
the festively ornamented city, saluted by resounding hurrahs, 
from a countless throng of human beings, to the H6tel 
d' Angleterre, where apartments had been prepared for ys. On 
the 17th a file was given by the Geographical Society in the 
Casino Hall, which was attended by the King, the Crown Prince, 



466 THE VOYAGE OF THE VEGA. [chap. 

and Prince John of Glucksborg, and nearly all the distinguished 
men of Copenhagen in the fields of science, business, and politics. 
The speech of the fite was delivered by Professor Erslev. 
Thereafter a gay and lively banquet was given, at which the 
Crown Prince of Denmark presided. 

The 18th April. Grand entertainment given by the King. — 
The 19th April. Magnificent banquet given by the* Society of 
Merchants to the members of the Vega expedition at the Bourse, 
the rooms being richly ornamented with flowers and flags, and 
with busts and paintings executed for the occasion by eminent 
artists. Councillor of state Melchior presided, and amongst 
those present, were observed the Crown Prince, the ministers, 
the speakers and vice-speakers of the folke- and lands-ting, and 
a number of the principal scientific and military men and 
officials. Speeches were delivered by the Crown Prince, State- 
councillor Teiigen, Manager of the Great Northern Telegraph 
Company, Admiral Bille, Professor Mabvig, State-councillor 
Melchior, &c. At another place, an entertainment was given at 
the same time to the crew. In the evening, /(^/<? of the Students' 
Union, the Swedish National Union, and the Norwegian Union. 

I was obliged to decline an invitation to Lund, because his 
Majesty, King Oscar, had expressed the wish that we should first 
set foot on Swedish ground at the Palace of Stockholm. 

It was settled that our entry into Stockholm should take place 
in the evening of the 24th April, but we started from Copen- 
hagen as early as the night before the 20th in order to be sure 
that we would not, in consequence of head winds or other 
unforeseen hindrances, arrive too late for the festivities in the 
capital of Sweden. In consequence of this precaution we 
arrived at the archipelago of Stockholm as early as the 23rd, so 
that we were compelled during the night between the 23rd and 
24th to lie still at Dalaro. Here we were met by Commander 
LAGEKCfiANTZ, who by the King's orders brought our families on 
the steamer Skoldmon to meet us. 



ciiAP. XX.] STOCKHOLM. 459 



On the 24th at 8 A.M. the Vega again weighed anchor in 
order to steam on slowly, past Vaxholm into Stockholm. We 
met innumerable flag-decked steamers by the way, fully laden 
ivith friends, known and unknown, who with shouts of rejoicing 
"welcomed the Vega men home. The nearer we came to 
Stockholm, the greater became the number of steamers, that, 
arranged in a double line and headed by the Vega, slowly 
approached the harbour. Lanterns in variegated colours were 
lighted on the vessels, fireworks were let off, and the roar of 
cannon mingled with the loud hurrahs of thousands of spectators. 
After being greeted at Kastelholmen with one salute more the 
Vega anchored in the stream in Stockholm at 10 P.M. 

The queen of the Malar had clothed herself for the occasion 
in a festive dress of incomparable splendour. The city was 
illuminated, the buildings round the harbour being in the first 
rank. Specially had the King done everything to make the 
reception of the Vega expedition, which he had so warmly 
cherished from the first moment, as magnificent as possible. 
The whole of the Royal Palace was radiant with a sea of lights 
and flames, and was ornamented with symbols and ciphers in 
which the name of the youngest sailor on the Vega was not 
omitted. 

An estrade had been erected from Logaorden to the land- 
ing-place. Here we were received by the town councillors, 
whose president, the Governor, welcomed us in a short speech ; 
we were then conducted to the Palace, where, in the presence 
of her Majesty the Queen of Sweden, the members of the 
Royal House, the highest ofiicials of the State and Court, &c., 
we were in the grandest manner welcomed in the name of the 
fatherland by the King of Sweden, who at the same time con- 
ferred upon us further marks of his favour and goodwill.^ It 

1 Among others to all wlio took part in the Expedition a Vega medal, 
specially struck, to be worn on a blue-yellow riband on the breast. It may 



460 THE VOYAGE OF THE VEGA. [chap. xx. 



was also at the Royal Palace that the series of festivities com- 
menoed with a grand gala dinner, on the 25th of April, at 
which the King in a few magnanimous words praised the 
exploit of the Vega. Then fSte followed f4te for several 
weeks. 

On the 26th the Swedish Yacht Club gave an entertainment 
in the Grand Hotel under the presidency of Admiral Lager- 
crantz. Among those who were present may be mentioned 
his Majesty the King, the Crown Prince, Prince Oscar, Oscar 
Dickson, and Baron von Otter, Minister of Marine. On the 
evening of the same day there was a torchlight procession by 
pupils of the Technical High School. On the 27th there was a 
gala-play, to which all the Vega men were invited. On the 28th 
at a festive meeting of the Academy of the Sciences, a medal 
struck on account of the Vega expedition was distributed, 
the meeting being followed by a dinner given at the Hotel 
Phoenix by the Academy under the presidency of the Crown 
Prince. On the 30th April and 5th May banquets were 
given by the Publicist Club, and by the Idun Society, by 
the Naval Officers' Society to the officers of the Vega, and 
by the Stockholm Workman's Union to the crew. On the 7th 
and 8th May there were festivities at TJpsala, the principal 
attraction of which consisted of gay, lively, and ingenious 
carnival representations, in which we received jocular addresses 
and homage from fantastically dressed representatives of the 
peoples of diflFerent countries and periods. 

During this time there were daily received deputations 



perhaps he of interest for numismatists to know that the medals distributed 
on account of the Vega expedition are to be found delineated in the eighth 
and ninth parts of the Swedish Family Journal for 1880. To those that 
are there delineated there have since been added a medal struck by the 
Finnish Society of Sciences, and the Anthropological-Geographical Society's 
medal. 



CHAP. XX.] THE WELCOME HOME. 4G3 



addresses, and telegrams of welcome, among others from the 
riksdag of Sweden, the storting of Norway, and the principal 
towns of Norway and Finland, from the student corps at Upsala 
and Helsingborg, from the St. Petersburg Geographical Society, 
from women in Northern Russia (the address accompanied by 
a laurel wreath in silver), &c. In a word, the Stockholm 
fHes formed the climax of the remarkable triumphal pro- 
cession from Japan to Stockholm, which stands unique in the 
history of festivities. Even after the Expedition was broken 
up in Stockholm, and the Vega had sailed on the 9th May for 
Karlskrona and Gothenburg, where she was again taken over by 
the whaling company that previously owned her, the files were 
repeated at these towns. They commenced anew when the 
Vega exhibition was opened with appropriate solemnities by 
His Majesty the King in one of the wings of the Royal Palace, 
and when some months after I visited Berlin, St. Petersburg, 
and my old dear fatherland, Finland. 

But I may not weary my reader with more notes of festivities. 

It is my wish yet once again to offer my comrades' and my 

own thanks for all the honours conferred upon us both in 

foreign lands and in the Scandinavian North. And in conclusion 

I wish to express the hope that the way in which the accounts 

of the successful voyage of the Vega have been received in all 

countries will give encouragement to new campaigns in the 

service of research, until the natural history of the Siberian 

Polar Sea be completely investigated and till the veil that 

still conceals the enormous areas of land and sea at the 

north and south poles be completely removed, until man at 

last knows at least the main features of the whole of the 

planet which has been assigned him as a dwelling-place in 

the depths of the universe. 

Hearty thanks last of all to my companions during the 
voyage of the Vega; to her distinguished commander Louis 



464 THE VOYAGR OF THE VEJA. [chap, Xx. 

Falauder, her scientific men and officers, her petty officers and 
crew. Without their courage and the devotion they showed to 
the task that lay hefore us, the problem of the North-East 
Passage would perhaps still be waiting for its solution. 



I 



I 



I 



^: 



■i 



■^ 



( 



X 



( 



/> 



i^ 









**^^S 



^i?*«! 







^ 



■t^ty / 












i-r; 









^^r-.^. 



THE NBW YORK PUBUG UBRARY 
RBFBRBNGB DBFARTMBNT 



This book it under no oiroamttanoes to be 
teken from the Building 



fiiriii 4t» 






-^v - ■ '35 


^■^ 


iHI 




m 


i 


* ' *B^ 


*t ' "J 


'.».'W 



^%^-:^- V 







. » 



^1 



: i 

'• 'i 



t 



i 

I. 
t 

* 
f 

s 



f 
