The True Prophecies or Prognostications of Michael Nostradamus (Michel de Nostredame (trans. Theophilus de Garencières), 1672)
==============================================================
Garencières's 1672 English translation — the first complete English Nostradamus, with the famous biographical preface; the version that made him an English prophet. Public domain. Source: Internet Archive (https://archive.org/details/b30334494).

re EIRE Er ee
aan lus alas ine erate À eur


NCE RO Pe


ae lb nt pn la à an tT ab RE i i A EE 2 SS LOS nitro


ER En AR otre


a SI à


PRES


Sa LT


EY SO AAT TR ease pine SEL


'
H
i
|
Î
‘
i


Gallica ALLEAML ie
Celli Mein


linetqus Mr. fe lus


mel  Puiequid UL Whe pe.


PROGNOSTICATIONS
PHYSICIAN


and


of


And one of the beft


that ever were,


Tranflated and Commentgd bi! FF ee
» 7 ge
ei Door in Phyfick Golleg. Lond.


a


yy


y


TS mm |


Ee ne att EAN SE Soares


NR Spe TPP ey SB DT rat


BEEP RRP PLUM EPRPET RUPP
IN
E #7 à dodiflimo ve imog; Viro Domino


FAMOSI
Noftradami Vaticiniym,


Bdita qui medici legit prafagia Vatis,
Non valet hoc quifquam pandere carmen, ait.
Falleris, en Medicus merito quoque nomine Vates,
Invia luminibus permeat antra nov.


Sed minus ingenio tantum mirere laboren:


Id fuccifivo tempore fecit opus.


GARENCIERES |}


Petrus Cottereau.


Aliud.


Reteritos in vate tuo cognofcere cafus
Vix licet ; aft ettam nota future tibi,
Si potes à mediis lucem proferre tenebris ;
Tpf{a metallornm femina te-ne latent ?
Nulla tuum fuginat nature arcana cerebrum,
Per quem Noftradami Pythica werba patent.


RARE RENTE UT |
|


| Perenni Famæ Doétiffimi Viri Theophil de Garencieres
| Dottoris Medici Colleg. Lond. de Interpretatione N O-
ST RAD A MI Fatidici Tetraftichon hoc dicavit,


Dudleyus, dimidia pars ipfins anime.
: Q.. primus fecit, facitilla fecundus Apollo,


Conjyngens medicis oracula facra triumphis.
Quis mayor, rogitas ? facile eft difcerncre noris


Si Latonigena. ceffare oracula Phoebi.


By the fame,
To the Author of this, and a more Excellent Work.
Myfiically.


a ‘He God of Arts that gives thee Light, as clear
2. As-his, chat thou might’{t. be his Agent here
In all his Secrets ; courts.thee to go on,


Till thou haft made thy felf another Sun.


Æternum vivant fi wera Oracula Pheli
Noftradami vivent.; ‘go Patris illa mei. ;


Petrus.


Ww
7


we


—= >

NS NT cJ Es) Bye
0 = à NA | (
. = \ dy

S Fy yd
à EN
SN
NY < N Ÿ
1 ———_>


PROPHECIES


PROGNOSTICATIONS


Michael N oftradamus ,


| Phyfician to HENRY IL FRANCIS (i.
And CHARLES IX. Kings of FRANCE ,:and


one of the’ molt excellént Aftronomers that ever were,


CENTORYL
MR à
EN French.
= < etant ein de; nuit fecrètte cftude,
ay Seul, repolé fur la-felle d’airain,
4 aide exigue, fortant'de folitude;
“Fait per qui tt ‘eft 4 croiré Vain,


Re Fo Ænglih..
a Sitting by Night in my ficher Study |

var Alone, refling upow tbe Brazen Stool,
ow flight flame. breaking. forth out of that folitude,


il near mevutter what is not invain to believe:


3 | ANNOTA T 1 ON.
Nika Stanza, Noftradames expreffeth thofe Humane difpofitions which he made
ufe of to be favoured of God, for the knowledge of future things, to the benefit
of the Hors rs | th
B PER! The


2 The true Propbecies


The firft Difpofition, was the tranquility of Mind , when he faith, Sitsing by night;
Becaufe atroubled Mind cannot fee clearly the Things it is bufie about, no more than
tofled Waters can diftinétly reprefent the Objeéts that are oppofedto them. Thus we
read in the Scripture, that the Prophet Blifbah, being tranfported with Zeal againft
Foram King of Ifrael, and neverthelefs willing to confult God concerning the event
of the Warragainft che Moabites, called for a Minftrel, that the Harmony of the-In-
ftrument migt quiet his Mind, asit did happen. And it came to pafs when the Minftrel
played, that the Hand of the Lord came upon bim, 2Kingschap. 3. ver. 15,

The Author in his Deticatory Epiftle to his Son Cefar, calleth this Tranquility of
Mind, 4 long Melancholick Infpiration; becaufe the Melancholick Humour and Mind
fequeftreth aMan from the concerns of worldly things, and maketh him prefent fo
fimfélf, fo that his Underftanding is not darkned by a multitude of Species chat croubles
its Operation, | à

The Second Difpofition, was, the Silence of the Night; For Man who is com-
pounded of Body and Soul, doth notably intricate himfelfin Excernal things by the
commerce of the Senfes with the Obje@s; which obligeth himto withdraw himfelf
from vifible things, when he intendsto apply himfelf to fome ferious Study. And as
the filence of the Night caufeth in the Univerfe aceffation of noifesand clafhings in
Bufinefs, Vifits and Colloquies, the Mind is them more at reft, .Befides that, Nighit
covering with her Darknefs our Hemifphere, Our Senfes are léfs diftraéted, and our
Internal Faculties are more united to ferve the Operations of the Underftanding,

Therefore the Author in his two Liminar Epifiles ; makes often mention of his
continual Nocturnal Watchings, of his Sweet-fmelling nocturnal Studies, and of his
Nocturnal and Ptophetical Calculations.

The Third Difpofition, was Solitarinefs, that is, having no other Converfation
then that of his Books, being retired in his Study, Alone, For itfeemeth that God
commonly maketh ufe of Solitarinefs when he doth impart himfelf toMen, and-re-
vealeth them his Oracles: And the Sydils.were chofen to be Prophets, as much for
their Solitarinefs, as for their Chaftity.

The Author faich, that with thofe three. Difpofitions. he raifed himfelf to the
knowledge of future things; which is fignified by thofe words, Re/fing upon the Brazen
Stool, Servins in his Commentaries upon Virgil, {peaking of this Brazen Stool , faith
two things of it, The Firft, that thisStool wasa Table fec upon a 7revet, called by
the Greeks roms, and by the Latines Tripass The Second is, chat the Sy/é/s,.or the
Priefts of the De/phick Temple of Apollo, pot upon that Table, when they went abourto
pronounce their Oracles. .‘ Pay, in his 33, Book, Chap,'3. faith, that chey called
thofe Tables Cortinas, and that fomé,weremade of Brafs forthe ufe aforefaid,

From the ufe of that Brazen Trevetiscomethe Proyerb, Ex tripode loqui, When
one {peaketh like an Oracle. Thus the Author willing toexprefs, that being in ‘his
Study in the folitarinefs of the Night, he raifed himifelf to the Knowledge of Fürüte
things, to writethem, and tranfmit them'to Pofterity ; he faith, He was fitting or reft-
ing upon the BraXen Stool, Oe oe | (

Thus raifing himfelf, and taking his Pen in hand towrité what he fhould learn, he
faith in the Third Verfe, that A flight Flame , ‘or fmall Light did infinuste it felf
in his underftahäing, by whofe fplendor and brightnefs hefaw future things,

The Author in\his Epiftle toCefar:his Son, -expoundeth always this Prophetical
Light, by che comparifos of a fhining Flame, and calleth it rather a Flame than a pure

Light, becaufe this Light doth noc) dnly diféovet-thé Myfteries, but more-over it
lightens in us a certain Heat and Prophetical Power,as himfelf cerms it; as if we fhould
fay a Sacred Enchufiafm, even (faith he). as the Sun Coming neat us with his Ligh
hor only dartech upon all Elementary things the brightnels of his Bears, but witha
infufeth in them a certain quickning heat, which caufeth the Vegetables to grow, and
upholdeth


EEE


of Michael Noftradamus. | 3


upholdeth the,,Being, of.all other natural chings; Even fo (faith hey: this good Ge-
#ius,as the Ancients,term it: or as we Chriftians fay, that Divine Spirit of Prophe-
cy coming near our underftandings, not only importetha Light cothem,. but more-
over acertain heat and Prophetical Power, which ftrenghteneth them in the know-
ledge. of, she aforefaid chings|, and caufeth chem to breath out , asby a Sacred Ea-
thufiafm fome;Prophetical: Verfes, |

Which happenech co them.(faich the Author) coming-out of Solitude, thatis to
fay,when their Spirit Roopeth down, and by.degrees cometh down from that fublime
Region and high elevation,,taking the Pen to-write down thefuture time, There=
fore he with, his difpofitions participaring of that (light flans ,. coming.out.of his {oli-
sade, began to write and. to utter, What is not dn vain to believe,

The things that the Auchor hath.writcen ; (hall nor be unprofitable as we have
proved already. and che cime will come ,-when by themeans of Divine Providence
the Church fhall receive che fruit thereof; ac which we ought not to wonder, feeing
that God faith of himfelf in Yfaiah Chap. 48. Ver, 17. Lam the  Lordthy God, which
seacheth shee to profit,

The Author foretelleth many wonders , of which we ought tobe certain by. the
Hi 80e 1 of thofe chat.are already paft; feeing chac it isthe fame Spirit chat fhewed
them all. :

The fame Prophecies are al(o profitable ; in that every, where che. Author con-
demneth Seditiousiand Rebéllious perfons, and Prophecieth che Churches Viétory
over her Enemies,

They aréalfo profitable for particalar Mem that underftaad the meaning of chem,
for by ic they may provide for their own bufinefs, according tothe form, under-
taking nothing buc upon furé grounds ;, following always the beft party ; and difpo-
fing themfelvesto patience, when the calamities are general, and involve together
the guilty and guiltlefs:. ‘Therefore our Author faith well , «4 /light flamse breaking
forth out of that [olitude, makes me utter what is not in vainte believe,


I I.
French.


La Verge en main, mife au milieu des Branches,
De l'Onde je moüille 8 le Limbe 8 le Pied,
En peur j'eferts fremilfant par les manches 5


Splendeur Divine : le Divine prez s'aflied.


Englih.
With Rod in band, fet in'the middle of the Branches,
With water 1 wet the Limb and the Foot,
In fear I writ , quaking in my, fleeves,
Divine fplendor ! the Divine fitteth by.


i a tena ANN OT, ps Seon
Amoneft-che .ciftoms, the Ancients ,obferved, before: they pronounced their
Oracles; one wasto take a Tuffie Branch of Laurel jand witHitdipt im water, to
fprinkle the edges'and Golurans ofthe Table; that was upon the Brazen Trevet, by


. which ceremonies they procured credit to their Oracles,


The Author willing tolet us know , that his rig were not only à fimple —
2 ing,


The true Prophecies


ing, but alfo Prophetical and full of Oracles, doth reprefent them tous by this Me-
taphore of the Ancients, when they did amufe the people with their ambiguous, and
many times fallacious Oracles,

Being then fitting and quiet in his folitarinefs ; coming out of that great devotion
of mind, animated by the virtueof his good Genius, he purteth firft the. Red into his
handy that is the Pen, and pucteth it in the middle of the Branches, putting it between
his Fingers. Secondly he dippeth this Rod iste Water, dipping his Pen in his Ink ;
with this Pen diptinInk , be werteth the Limb and the Foot , writing upon his paper
from one end to the other, and from the top to the bottom,

Which we mutt underftand by this word Lyme , which isa Latin word, fignify-
ing the long and narrow pieces of ftuffe, which women wore at the bottom of theit
Petticoats, therefore the Latins called them Zymbes , fromthe Latin Verbe Lambo,
which in matter of cloths fignifieth, to leek or {weeps and becaufe thofe pieces of
cloath were in the bottom of their Garments, ‘the word hath been afterwards em-
ployed to fignifie the brims of fome things , fo that che Lymbs of a fheer of paper,
are the two margines, and the topand the bottom, as ifit were the four ends of a
Quadrangular Figure.

The third Verfe theweth the internal difpofition of the Author, after he hath
defcribed his external one; that difpofition was a Sacred quaking, which puttiog his


heart intoa palpitation, caufed his hands and arms to fhake , as if he had been taken


with fome fit ofan Ague, This quaking isthe difpofition which the good Genias
caufeth in Prophets, chat they may be humbled, and not be puffed up with pride,
when they come near the Majefty of God , as we read in Daniel, St, Fohn, and the
4th. of Efdras, Therefore the Author faith:

In fear I write, quaking in my fleeves, And becaufe the Divine Spirit after he hath
caft down thofe, to whom he will impart himfelf, dothafterwards quiet them; the
Author therefore addeth, hata Divine (plendor did fit by him,


Ill
French.
Quand fa littiere da tourbillon verfée,
Et feront faces de leurs Manteaux couvers,


La Republique par gens nouveaux vexée ,
Lors blancs & rouges jugeront a l'envers.


Englifh.
When the litter fball be overthrown by a guft of wind,
And faces fhall be covered with Cloaks ,
The Common-wealth fhall be troubled with a new kind of men
Then white and red fhall judge amifs. À


ANNOT.


The two firft Verfes fignifie that a great tempeftuous wind was to ha i
which 2 litter fhould be overturned, and =e one thoald muffle his face in bar Cloak,
for the fiercenefs of che wind, Y

And that prefently after the Common-wealth fhouldbe troubled with new Se@s
and Opinions, which may be underftood of the beginaing of Reformation by Luther
and Calvin, which was about that time,


The


nn D oo mm _


of Michael Noftradamus. 5


The laft Verfe by the white and red fignifieth here (as ic doth thorough all the
Book) the French and the Spaniards, becaufe the French wear white Scarfes, and the
Spaniards red ones: and confequently che troubles and jars that happened prefently
between thofe two Nations,


IV.
French.


Par l'Univers {era fait un Monarque,
Qu’en paix & vie ne fera longuement,
Lors fe perdra la Pifcature Barque,
Sera regie en plus grand detriment.


Englith.
Inthe World fhall be one Monarch, |
Who fall be not long alive, nor in peace, |


Then. fhall be loft the Fifbing Boat, E :
And be governed with worfe detriment.


ANNOT.


That Monarch was Henry the II, King of Francé, who did not Reign long, but
was unfortunately flain, running at Tilt againft the Earl of Montgomery, (as we thall
fee hereafter) and almoft during all his Reign had Wars with Charles the V. Empe-
rour, and his Son Phsiip the II. King of Sp4» ; the faid Emperour in that time did
fack Rome, took the Pope Clement the VII. prifoner,which is fignified here; as alfo
in feveral other places by the lofs of the F/hing Boas ; the Roman Church being of-
ten compared to a Ship or Boat.


Vv.
French.
Chafiez feront fans faire long combat;
Par Ie Pais feront plus fort grevez,
Bourg & Cite auront plus grand debat,


Carcas, Narbonne auront cœurs efprouvez.


Englifh.
They fhall be driven away without great fighting,
Thofe of the Countrey foall be more grieved,
Town and City fhall have a greater debate,
Carcas, Narbonne fball bave their hearts, tryed.


ANNOT.


Herein is nothing myftical ; the meaning isthaefome of che Proteftant party ia-
tending to take or vex the Cities of Carcaffone and Narbonne in Langwedoc,thall be ea-
fily repulfed, and fhall afterward fall upon the Countrey rourd about , which fhall
fuffer for. L:
French,


ee D i


| The true Prophecies


Vi.
| dre French.
L'œil de Ravenne fera deftitué ,
Quand a fes pieds les aifles failliront ;
Les deux de Breffe auront conftitué,
Turin, Verceil, que Gaulois fouleront,


Englifh.
The eye of Ravenna fball be forfaken ,
When the wings [hall rife at bis feet,
The two of Brefcia fball have conftituted,
Turin, Verceil, which the French fball tread upon.


ANNOT.


This is a confirmation of the fourth Stanza, concerning the lof of the Pope,
Clement the VAI. who is called here the eye of Ravenne , becaufehe is Lord of chat
famous City, which was once an Exarchat of the Empire,


The wings that fhall rife at, or againft his feet, (hall be thofe of the Eagle , which
are the Arms of the Emperour.


Thetwo of Bre(cia were the Governour and Proveditor of Venice in that place;
who would at that time have endeavoured to {eize upon Turin and Verceil, che twe
chiefeft Towns of Pemont, but were prevented by the French,

VIL.
French.
Tard arrive, l’execution faite,
Le Vent contrare, Lettres au.chemin prinfes,
Les Conjurez quatorze d’une Seéte,
Par le Rouffeau feront les entreprinfes.


Englifh.
One coming too late, the execution [hall be done,
The Wind being contrary, and Letters intercepted by the way,
The Confpirators fourteen of a Sect,
By the Red-bair’d Man the undertaking [ball be made.


ANN OT,

The fenfe of the whole is this ; chere fhall be fourteen Confpirators of one mind,
and their Ring-leader, a Red-haired man» who fhall be put to death, becaufe their
Reprieve could not come timely enought,’ being hindered by crofs winds, and Let-
ers intercepced,: I could find no particularthings in Hiftory:concerning this,


French.


Of Michael Noftradamus,


VIII.
French.


Combien de fois prinfe Cité Solaire

Seras, changeant les Loix barbares & vaines;
Ton mal s'approche, plus feras tributaire,
Le grand Adrie recouvrira tes veines.


Englifh.
How often taken O folar City, ,
Shait thon be? changing the barbarian and vain Laws,


‘Thy evil groweth nigh, thou fbalt be more tributary,
The great Adria fball recover thy veins,


| . ANNOT, ;
{ris hard. to.judge what he meaneth by the Solar City that fhall be fo often
taken... : ¥. ' |
As: by. Adria, itis certain he meaneth Menace, that was fo called anciently, becaufe
of its fcituation in the Adriatick Sea,


BX,
French:
De l'Orient viendra le cœur punique,
‘Fafcher Adrie, & les hoirs Romulides, : "©
Accompagne de la claffe Libique
Trembler Melites, & proches files vuides:
| ~ Englifh:
From the Eaft fball come the African heart,
To vex Adria, and thé Heirs of Romulus,
Accompanied with the Libian feet’,
Melites ball tremble, and the Neighbouring Iflands be empty.
ar É  ANNOT,
“Ris was a clearand true Progaofticatioh of that famobs Thvafion misde upon
“Maltha, by the grand Signor Somar the magnificent, in the year of our Lord 1565.
and juft:ten years after the writing of this Prophecy , wherein that Ifland; and fome
ofthe Neighbouring ons were wholly depopulated by the ‘Yarks, to the terror of
Venice, called here Adria, and ofallthe Hands of the Adrjatick'Sea. For the better
under ftanding of this, the Reader muft obferve that Paniers in Latin fignifiech 4fr7-
sa, Jo chat the African heart figaifierh the help the Tark had trom Tunis, Trépoly;
and Algier, Cities feated in Africa, and underthe Turkith Dominions by which
not only a4altha (which in Latin is Melita) "but enice ahd Rome’ were plitinto a
great fright, the conclufion of this Siege was, that after fix weekstime, and the lofs
of 26000, Men, the T#rks were conftrained fhametully toretire, Wide the Turkil
Hiflory. 3 2 pias’ | French,


\


Nu


ce NN iy narra Reenion memmeniont
2 dea =


ag


Thetrue Prophecies


X:
French.


Sergens tranfmis dans la Cage de Fer,
Ou les Enfans feptains du Roy font pris,
Les vieux & Peres fortiront bas d’Enfer,
Ains mourir voir de fon fruit mort & cris.


Englith.
Sergeants fent into an Iron Cage,
Where the feven Children of the King are,


The old Men\and Fathers [hall come out of Hell ,
And before they die foall fee the death and cries of their fruit,


ANNOT.


This Prophecy fignifieth , chat fome Sergeants of Execurioners fhall be fent into
a Prifon , to-put to death {even Children, . fervants of a King that were Imprifoned
there, and that fome old Men their Fathers, fhall fée their deach,and hear their cries.


XL
French.


Lé mouvement de Sens, Cœur, Pieds, & Mains,
Seront d'accord, Naples, Leon, Sicile,

Glaives, Feux, Eaux, puisau Noble. Romains,
Plongez, Tuez, Morts, par cerveau debile.


Englith.
The motion of .the Senfe Heart, Feet and Hands


Shall agree, Naples, eon, Sicily, ch
Swords, Fires, Waters, then to the noble Romans,


Dipt,\ Killed, Dead, by a weak-brain,


AN-NOT.


The two firft: Verfes fignifie the concord that fhall be among the Spanifh domi-
nions,: exprefied here by Sesfe, Heart, Feet, and Hands. After which, the Romans
or chote of Rome,(hall be evilly intreated, being drowned, killed, and put to death by «
weak-brain. Lguels.this,to have come to pafs,when the Emperour Charles the V. his
Army.facked Rome, under the command of the Duke of Berton, who was killed ac
the. Affault ; and of the Prince of Orange, who permitted licentioufnefs to his Soul-
diers,-and {uffered them to commit more violence » than evet the Goths or Vandales
did,sand therefore js called here weak drain, This Prince of Orange was of the Houfe


of Chalon, alter, which came that of Naljaw,


Of Michael Noftradamus,


XII.
French.


Dans peu ira fauce brute fragile,
De bas en haut eflevé promptement,
Puis en eftant defloyal & labile,
Qui de Verone aura gouvernment.


Englifp.
Within :a little while à falfe frail brute [ball go,
Frown. low to high, being quickly raifed,
By reafou that he fball have the Government of Verona,


Shall be unfaithful and flippery.


ANN OT.


This foretelleth of a wicked perfon, whoina hort time thall be f;
gree exalted toa high one,by reafon that thofe chat have the Governm
fhall be unfaithful and flippery. That perfon feemeth to be fome Po
a low degree fhall be exalted to that dignity, by the unfaithfulnefs and
che Venetians, who are now Lords of the City Verona in Italy,


om a low de-


pe, whofrom


OL LT:
French,


Les exiles, par ire, haine inteftine,
Feront. au Roy grand conjuration,
Secret mettront ennemis par la mine,
Et les vieux fiens, contre eux {edition.


Englifh.
The banifbed, by choler, and inteftine hatred
Shall make againS£ the King a great confpiracy,
They fball put fecret enemies in the mine,
And the old his own againft them fedition,


C2


ANNOT.


Although this Prophecie feemech to be indefinitely fpoken, becaufe in every
Countrey or Kingdom where there is banifhed people, they moft commonly plot
againft their King and Countrey ; neverthelefs I find twotemarkable Hiftories to
make this good, one in Frasce, and the other inEneland, That of France is thus.

The Cardinal of Lorrain, and the Duke of Guife his Brother, being in great fa-
vour with Henry II. the Queen Mother promoted them in tke beginning of the
Reign of Franc# IT, his fucceflor, fo that the Cardinal was made Lord high Trea-
farer, and the Duke General of the Armies, to the prejudice of the Conftable of
Montmorency, — Thofe two favourites, fearing the perfecution that is raifed by envy,

C


did


ent of Verona,


flipperinefs of


en RR Ree en Tne pate AEP an


LE I LIA


10 , T be true Prophecies


did remove all the great ones from the Court, whether they were commanded to do
fo, or whether they had any other precences.

The Princes of Cond, and of la Roche {ur yon, were fent into Flanders to Philip
II. Cond, to confirm the alliance between the two Crowns, and la Roche {ur yen
ro carry the Order of France, rel Bons

Diana of Poitiers Dutchefs of F'alentenois,. was banifhed from Courts! and icompel-
led to furrender to the Queen all the Jewels fhe had.extorted fromthe King, be-
fides the Caftle of Chenonceaux, which the Queen took for her felt.

The Marfhal St. Andrew was likewife banithed fromthe Courr. * Thé King of
Navarre was in Bearn,

The Conftable took alfo his leave, and furrendred tothe King the Seal of his
Office. On the other fide, the Proteftants began toifir notably, having on their
part many Princes, as that of Condé, of Porcien, Ga(pard, of Coligny, Admiral of
France, a’ Andelot, andthe Cardinal of Chaftillon his brothers, Magdalene of Mailly,
their Sifter, Lady of Raye, the King of Navarre, ~All thefe difcontented perfons,
and the Proteftants made a great confpiracy under: pretence of, Religion, and of
freeing the King from the tyranny of the Guéfians.

They did by Choler, the Proteftants becaufethey had been foill ufed, in the time
of Franeis L.and Henry LI. and lately by the Guifians. ; And the difcontented, for to
pulldowntheirpower, it was alfo by an éntéffine hatred, becaufe the Conftable could
not brook to be difpoffeffed of his Office of great Mafter, which was given tothe
Duke of Guile; and the others to fee themfelves from the management of Affairs,
and the Proteftants by the fpirit of a contrary Religion.

Their con{piracy tended to expel the Guifians, and to feife upon the Queen, the
King, and his Brothers.

To compafs their end, they fecretly fent fome trufty perfons of their own, who ne=
verthele(s feigned to be their Enemies;infomuch that the King of Navarre fent them
word, that he would be always of their. party, though apparently he took the
Courts part.

But the old his own, faith the fourth Verfe,that is to fay, the Kings old friends fhall
raile Sedition againft them, which happened im the: year 1650 :whenithie Guifians
having difcovered theconfpiracy that was made at Nantes, the 1, of February 15 60,
whofe chief Ring-leader was the Lord La Renaudie; they prefently got the King
out of Blow, and carryed him to eAmleife, caufed the Town tobe fortified, and fer
ftrong Guards uponall the paffages.

The day appointed for theexecution of the confpiracy at 3loé,wasthé roth of
March: But the King being got to Amboife, the Gonfpirators went thither in fuch
eteat numbers, and under {uch fpecious pretences, that had they not been betrayed,
no body would have fufpeéted them, All the Suburbs and the Countrey Towns
thereabouts were full of them, the Prince of Condé; the Admiral, a’ Andelot, and
his Brother the Cardinal, were all chere.

; Then the Guifians began to fall to work, andito fet upon the Confpirators onall
ides,

Abundance were taken, fome in the City, fome inthe Suburbs, others in the
Countrey round about.

Mot of chefe were flain before they could come to Town, or be carriedto Pri-
fon. And their procefs was fo fhorc that they were hanged in their Bootsand
Spurs,

The Scouts did every where kill thofe they met withall, Toconclude, it proved
a very Bloody Tragedy,

La Renaudie the Chief of the Confpirators, was met with by the Lord Pardaillam
a Gafcon, Ac che firft approach La Renawdie killedhim ; but himfelf was killed


by


|
|


of Michael Noftradamus. es


by; Pardeillan’s Servant’, ‘and his dead body brought and hanged at «Amboife,

The fecond Hiftory is:concerning England, which palpably makes this Prophecie
good, if we make reflection upon what hach happened in chislaft Century of years,
concerning banifhed people that have confpired againft their King and Countrey,
as we may fee through all the Life of Queen Elizabeth, and by that famous Ploc
of the Gun-powder- Treafon in King Fames’s time, which muft be underftood here
by the AZine;


XIV,
| French. |
De gens efclave, chanfons, chants, & requeftes,
Captifs par Princes, & Seigneurs aux prilons,
A l’aduenir par Idiots fans teftes,
Seront receus par divins oraifons.


Englifh. |
From flavifb people, Songs, Tunes and requefts,
Being kept Prifoners by Prinees and Lords,


For the future by headlefs Idiots,
Shall be admitted by divine prayers.


ANNOT. ,

This is a prognoftication of the beginning and intreafe of the Proteftants in
France: who began to fing their Pfalmsin French, and from time to time prefent-
ed thei requeft for tolleration. The Author being a zealous Papift calleth them
Idiots; and that notwithftanding the perfecution that fhould be againft them, being
put in Prifon by Princes and Lords, they fhould at laft be admitted by reafon of their
often praying to God,

X V.
French.
Mars nous menace par la force bellique,
Septante fois fera le {ang refpandre,
“Auge & ruine de l'Ecclefaftique,
7 Étpar ceux qui d'eux riénine voudront entendre,
| | Engli fh.
~~ Mars threatneth ns of a Warlike force,
… Seventy tames he [hall canfe blood to be fled.
The:flourifhing. and ruine of the, Clergy, .
1 And by thofethat will bear nothing fromthens.

The Author having premonithéd us in his Preface; that God having imparted to

him the knowledge of many future things, he was cutious to kaow if his Divine


Majefty


————


EE cree +" ages pombe tO P


SSS 55555 ee ees


12 T be true Prophecies


Majefty had written the fame thing in the Coeleftial Book,as concerning the States,
Empires, Monarchies, Provinces and Cities, and he found chat it was even foasir
had been revealed to him, fo that the Book of Heaven, written with Gods own
hand, in fo many (hining Characters, might ferve co ftudious men for a lightand a
Torch'to difcover very near the common eftate of the world,

He then having learned fromGod in his folitarinefs,the profperities and afflictions
of theClergy,‘rom the beginning of the year 1555.tO the end of the worldshe found
that there was an agreement between his prophetical Knowledge, and the motion of
the Heavenly Bodies; becaufe having made the Syfteme ot the years after 1550,
he found that AZars wasin a dangerous Afpedt to the Ecclefiaftical eftate, and found
chat this Planet by its pofition did prefagea long, bloody and horrid Cataftrophe in
the world, by which the Ecclefiaftical eftate fhould fuffer much.

To make good this prediction, the Author doth affureus in his Preface, that he
had confidered the difpofition of this Planet, not only inthe year 1555: but alfoin
the years following, and joyning together all that he had found in his Ephemerides,
he tound that this Planet did on all fides prefage moft bloody actions. Although,
faith he, the Planet of ars maketh an end of itscourfe, and is come to its laft
Period : neverthele(s it will begin icagain, butfome gathered in Aquarius for many
years, and others by longand continual years,

As if he would fay that his prediction ought notto berejected; becaufe Mars
ended his courfe, and comethto its late periods’ for it would take again its Exaltati-
on and Dominion with a worfe conjunction, having his Aftronomical dignities,
with the Conjanétion of other Planets in the Sign of Aquarine during many years,
and in the Sign of Cawcer for many years more.

Which maketh the Author conclude, that within the fpace of 177. years, three
months and elevendayes, the world fhall be sided with Wars, Plagues, Famines
and Innundations, that fcarce any body fhall be leit to Tillthe Ground, . By which
predi@ionwe learn that thofe evils began in the year 1555. the firft of March, which
is the dateof the Authors Book, and fhall Jaft till the fecond of Fune1732, abating
the ten days of the Gregorian Calender,

During which time, he faith, chat Mars threatneth us with bloody Wars that
{hall be reiterated 70 times.

This word feventy doth not fignifie a determinate number, but a great number
indeterminated according to the Phrafe of the Scripture, which by the number of
feven fignifieth many times,and by that of feventy incomparably many times more:
Thus the Scripture faith, that the juft man faliech feven times in one day, that is
many times, and our Saviour faith to St. Peter, that we ought to forgive our Ene-

mies, not only feven times, but feventytimes feven; that is innumerable times.

We have found the truth of this Prophecie to this very day. 1. In France, by
the Wars between Henry 11. and Charles V. and Philip 11. 2. By the Warsof
Charles UX. againft the Proteftants, whereinfo much blood was fpilt on both fides.
3. By Henry LIL againft the fame Proteftants, and factions ofhis time, andthen
againft the Parifians and others.of. their league, 4, Between Henry 1 V: and thofe
of the leagne in hisrevolted Kingdom, 5. By the Wars of Lewes X I I I, againft the
Proteftants, againft the Duke of Savoy, in the Palteline, in Piemont, in Lorrain,
in Alfatia, in Catalonia, in Franche-Conty, in Flanders, and for the defence of
Portugal, which have been continued by his fucceffor Lewis X1'V- now Rega-


ing.

ads did alfo find the ctruthof thisiprophiecie, by the Wars between PasilV.
anid the Spaniard, between Pins V.and the 7: urks,, between Clement V ILI. andthe
Duke of Ferrara; between, the Emperour and the Duke ‘of ctMantus,, between
Grbast VALI. and the Duke of Parma, ‘between the Penettansand the Florentines,


by


EE


of Michael Noftradanits, 13


by the revole of the Kingdom of Naples, under the conduét of the Duke of
Guife, ‘

| Fe hath had its fhare of itunder Queen Elizabeth, by the revole of York-
fre, and fome other Provinces, by the Spanifh fleet of 88. |

By che death of Queen Mary, by therevolt of the Kingdom agairift Charles I,
Andby the horrid perfidioufnefs of Crommel. |

Germany hath madeit good by the War againft the Twrks, the Proteftants and the
Swedes,

Poland hath done the fame againft the Rwfsians , Tartars | Turks, Caffaks and
Swedes; |

And Venice againft che Turk, for the Iflands of Cypras and Canaia, the Battle of
Lepasto, and the Wars of Dalmatia.

This Adars befides prefageth two contrary things, one is the Awge or Exaltation,
the other the rudwe of the clerey: where itis tobe obferved, the Auge in tearms of
Aftrology fignifieth mounting or afcending, and cometh from the Latin verbe 44.
gere, which fignifiech to augment orincreafe. This augmentation and ruine of the
Clergy is made good by the feveral changes that have beenin the Ecclefiattical
éftate, in France, Englana, Low-Gountreys, Denmark, Swede, Poland, Hungcry,
Valachia, Tranfylvania, Moldavia, Dalmatia, Geneva, Switzerland, Sc,

The fourth Verfe faith. By thofe that will hear nothing from them : that is;
by che Proteftants that will hear nothing from the Roman Catholicks,


xT
French.


Faux a l'Eftang, joint vers la Sagittaire,
En fon haut Auge de l'Exaltation,
Pefte, Famine, mort dé main Militaire,


Le Siecle approcher de renovation. :
Englifh.

The Sith to the Fifb-pond, joyned to Sagittarius

Ia the highest Auge of the Exaltation,

Plague, Famine; Death by a Military band.


The age groweth near to its renovation.


ANNOT. ‘


The fenfe of all chisis, chat when a Meadow that wasa Fifb-pond before, (hall

‘be Mowed, the Sign of Sagittarius being in its Auge or a(cendant, then fhall Plague,

Famine, and War Reign, and that age( which a Ceatary of years fhall be near its end
and renovation vz, of another Century, ) .


 XVIL
French.


Par quarante ans lIris n'apparoiftra,
Par quarante ans tous les jours {era veu,
La Terre aride en'ficcité croiftra,

Et grand deluge quand fera apparceu.


Englifh.


PE NS ed Méier su


> The true Prophecies»


| : During fourty. years the Rainbow fball not appear, at 7 ‘
Hi 1. During fourty years it foall be feen every day. | %
Al The parched Earth fball wax dryer and dryer, 1 Cs:
Hh And great Flouds foall be when it foall appear. i if
| ANNOT, |
The {nterpretation of this iseafie, and fignifieth nothing elfe but that during 40,

yearsthe Rainbow fhall not be feen, and during that time chere (hall be an exceeding |


great drought upon the Earth, and that for 40. years after the Rainbow fhall be
{een every day, which fhall caufe great flouds and innundations.


XVIIL |
French. 7


Pai la difcorde négligence Gaunloife,

Sera paflagea Mahomet ouvert,

De fang trempé la Terre & Mer Senoi/e,
Le Port Phocex de Voiles & Nefs couvert.


Englifb.
Through the difcord and negligence of the French,
A pafsage (ball be opened to Mahomet,
The Land and Sea of Sienna fball be bloody,
The Phocen Haven fball be covered with Sails and Ships.


ANNOT.


In the year 1559. Sultan Solyman called Leonclavius, according to the alliance
made between him and Francés I, King of France, was defired by Henry IT, his
Son to fend him fome fuccours : Whereupon he fent fome of his Gallies to {cour
the Tyrrhenean Sea (otherwife the Sea of Twfcany ). to give a diverfion to the
Spanifb forces in Italy, while the King by the means of the Marfhal of Briffac, fhould
continue his Conquefts in the Piemoat and Milane/e,

All what this Turkifb Fleet did, wasto plunder and over-run the Ifland of Elbe,
and to attempt Pronsbino without effects and becaufe thefe places were feated upon
ithe Sea’ of Sema, called in Latin Mare Tirrhenam, the Author faith that borh the

Pandand Sex of Sienna (hall be diedwith Blood, ‘and at that time the Haven of AZar-
èfeikes }* Which was called by’ the Ancients, Port- Phocen was full of Sales and Ships,

as well to go into the Ifland of Cor{e,as for other defigns: This Hiftory makes good
that Stanzawhich faith, that through the difcord and negligence of the French, a paf-
face fhall be opened to Mahomet, wherein it is to be obferved that che Marfhal of
Briffac doing wonders for the King in Péemont, his virtue got him abundance of
enviers and enemies in the Kings Councel, which was the caufe of a great difcord
among them, by the diverfity of opinions, and this diverfity was the caufe of a pro-
digious negligence in fending to him relief, as Turpin witneffech in his Hiftory
of Naples, and Paradin in the continuation of his Hiftory.


ee


By


of Michael Noftradamus. 15


By this difcord and negligence , 4 palfage was openedto Mahomet, his Fleet going
freely upon the cMediserranean Sea near the Coafts of France, _ And thereafon of it
was, becaufe this difcord and negligence did compel Henry the I. toask fuccours of
Solyman, that the Spaniard might be compelled to divide his Forces in fending fome
to the Sea- Towns, and fo fhould not be fo ftrong in Piemont ; and thus muft be un-
derftood the French difcord and-megligence, inthe firft and fecond.Verfe, . As for the
many Sails and Ships that were then in the Haven of Marfes/les , to go into the
Ifland of Corfica , the following Stanza’s are full of prediétions concerning it,


XIX,
French.
Lots que Serpens'viendront circuir l'Air,
Le fang Troien verlé par les Efpagnes,
Par eux: grand nombre en Îera fait tare,
Chef fuit, caché aux Marets dans les faignes.


Englifh.
When Serpents [ball come to encompafs the Are,
The Trojan blood [ball be vexed by Spain,
By them , agreat number fball perifb,
Chief runneth away, and is bid in the rufbes of the Marifbes.


AN NOT,

By the Serpents, the Author being a Roman Catholick, meaneth the Proteftants,
who then began to appear numerous in the Reigns of Francis the land Henry the II.
in whofe time ‘the Admiral Col/ieay was che chiefamongthem, for his great feats in
War. :

Thefe Serpents or Proteftants begun to encompals the dre, that isto fay , the
Chürchand the Altar, which in Latin is called Ara,

And that happened when the Trojan-blood was vexed by Spain. By the Trojan-blood,
tlie Author meatieth the French blood, according to the vulgar opinion, chat the
Frenchate defcended from the Trojans, The French were then vexed by the Spaniards,
at the Battle of St. Ganrence,andat the taking of St, Quentin, and other places in the
Year 1557.

The third Verfe faith dy them, that is by the Proteftants.a great number {hall peri{b,
that is to fay,a great number of French, Among whom the Admiral of Chatillon
having done what was poffible to be doneat thedefenceof St, Quentin , and feeing
the Town taken, run away with three more, and hid himfelf amo ng the Rufhes chat
are in the Boggs about the Town , where he was found, and carried Prifoner to the
Duke of Savoy, who received him very honorably; according to his valour and
deferts.

Obferve that the word Saignes here fignifieth in old Proven al a Marifb.


X X.
French.


Tours, Orleans, Blois, Angers, Renes & Nantes,
Cités vexées par foudain changement,
Par Langues eftranges feront tendues Tentes,


Fleuves, Darts, Rennes, Terre &.Mer tremblement.
| Englith,


a seine


The true Propbecies
| Englifh.


Tours, Orleans, Blois, Angers, Renes, and Nantes,
Cities vexed by a fudden change,

By ffrange Languages Tents fball be fet up,

Rivers, Darts, Rennes, Land, and Sea [hall quake.


ANN OT.


All the Cities mentioned in the firft Verfeare feated by che River of Letre, and are
threatned here of a fudden change, and that fome ftrangers fhall fet up cheir Tents
againftthem, and chiefly at Rennes , there fhall be an Earth-quake felt both by Sea


and Land,
XL


French.
Profonde argile blanche nourrit rocher,
Qui d’un aby{me iftra l’aéticineufe,
En vain troublez ne l’oferont toucher,
Ignorant eltreau fond terre argileufe.


Englith.


A deep white clay feedeth a Rock,
Which clay fball break out of the deep like milk ,
In vain people [ball be troubled not daring to touch it,


Being ignorant that in the bottom there is a milky clay.


ANN OT.


It isa Rock in the middle of the Sea, whofe Roots arefed by a white clay, which
is at the foot of thisRock,in the bottom of the Sea, and therefore called deep,

This clay being foftned, and diffolved by ché Sea-water , fhall appear upon the
luperficies of it like milk about the Rock. Thofethat thall fee this wonder, being
ignorant that in the bottom there is a milky clay, (hall in vain be troëbled atic, and fhall
not dare to touch it.


XXII.
French.
Ce qui vivra & n'aura aucun fens,
Viendra le Fer a mort fon artifice,


Autun, Chalons, Langres & les deux Sens,
La Guerre & la Glaffe fera grand malefice.


Englifh.
That which fhall liue, and fball have no fence,
The Lion fhall deftroy the art of it,
Autun, Chalons, Langres, and both Sens,
The War and the Ice fhall do great harin.
LA


of Michael Noftradamüs. ee


ANNOT:

This is agreat Riddle, which was never found out till now; and had I not been
born in the Countrey where the Hiftory did happen , it might have been unknown
to this day,and buried in oblivion, | |

Inthe year of the Lord 1613. which was that of my Birth, There was in the
Town of Sens a Taylors Wife named Columba Chatry , who prefently after her mar-
riage conceived. and for the {pace of 28, years perfuaded her felf ro be wich Child,
had all the figns.of it in the beginning of her impregnation , and ha- 7}, mp, of «
ving gone her compleat time, fhe begun to feel che pains of a woman oP, Lg or
in Labour, with great gripings in the Guts, The Urine was fup- P#ifcd child.
preffed for a while, but at lat ic broke outwithaftrongcarrent, This quantity
of water not coming fo much out of che Bladd. ras was fuppofed.as from the womb,
by the breaking of the Membrane, called Ammon, feeing that with thofe ferous ex-
crements, (he avoided fome conjealed blood. After chatger breaft began to fall,
and the Child had little or no motion, her pains being lefs than they were » which
cau(ed no finall admiration to che Midwifes, who expected fafedeliverance. . For
the {pace of three years after, this woman kept her Bed, and was brought to Deaths
door, complaining of gripings and a hard {welling , which fhe defired all the Phy fi-
tians and Chyrurgeons to feel, having loft all appetite, but that little which the reco-
vered by theufe of (harp things, as Verjuice, Lemmons, dc. the was wont to fay
coher Neighbours,that the bare a Child that fhould be thecaufe of her death, After
the was dead,her Husband got two experienced Chyrurgeons to open her body, wha
having opened the belly, and taken away the Peritoneum, {aw the Womb of feveral
colours, as the flefh that is about the head and-neck of a Turky-eock, but asit were
of a Horny fubftance, They begun to make an incifion in ic with a Rafour,but find-
ing it refifted the edge,they begun toufe their Incifion knives with'all cheir ftrength 5
at laft one of them by chance hit the Scull, and after that fome Ribs, and thea the
Shoulder bone, by which, knowing that there was bones contained in chat lump;with
greater ftrength' they made a deeper Incifion, and having parted the edges of the
womb, faw in the botcom of che womb 4 Child, wrapped inthe membrane, called
Allantoides ; at which the Chyrugeons wondering , fent for the Phyficians to have
their opinion in a thing chat is almoft beyond belief; in the mean time people flock-
ing thither from all parts, and troubling the Chyrurgeonsin their operation, they
thought good to takeaway with their Inftruments all chat Lump, asa Tree from its
Roots , and to carry it home, that they might with more time and leafure examine
the whole Anatomy of it,’ In that hafty pulling out of the Child, they had fio time
to obferve what Chorion it had, what umbilical Veffels , and what connexion there
was of the Allantoides with the Womb,and with the Child, chiefly about the right
hip, the Buttocks,and the Back- bone being all grown folid together,

“The fcituation of the Child was almoft Spherical, the face leaning upon the breaft,
and the Noftrils upon the Knees; thebones of the Head were but thin, but very
hard, and fhining like Horn; theskinof the Head was hairy in many places; the
head did hang fo much upon the left arm, that the Ear,and part of the skull had givea
way to the Shoulder-bone ; the Elbow was bent towards che Shoulder. ftretching on-
ly his hand, which was fo clofe fhur, and the fingers fticking fo taft co the Palm of
it, chat alchoughthey did appear diftinét one fromanother, neverthelefs it was all
but oneand the fame ftone; theright arm did ftretch its hand towards the Navel,
which unadvifedly was broken by the wrift ; and left in the Mothers Belly; the left .
Thigh, Knceand Leg were on thetop ofthe right ones, with which they were*{0


entangled, chat the left heel,and the fole of the foot were planted apontheright foot,
; + D who


5 A ame IN RA alt
¥ e


Le RU: sente


18 T be true Prophecies


who feemed to have given place to them,and were almoft infeparably joyneds for all
(ich hardnefs of the matter, the body was not lefsthan that of other Ghildren ef the
fame.age,but kepr a perfect Fulnefs and proportion all che internal parts,as theBrains,
theHeart.the Liver,had cheir natural fhape,and were not altogether fo hard as the ex-
ternal parts, fo that to this very day this little body defieth all kind of corruption.

This Child was kept-in my time by one Mr. Aächel a Chirurgion of Sess, who
kindly fhewed it to all the ftrangers chat came far and near to fee it. The Fame
of ic was (0 great, that Doctor Mayerne coming from Switzerland to England, took
his way through Sens to fee it, and would have perfwaded King Charles I. to buy it,
as himfelf told me; fince that I hear it was fallen into the hands of the venetians,
In this Hiftory thereis two obfervable wonders, One, chat the Child dying in the
Womb, did notcorrupr, and fo caufe the death ofits Mother, The other, by whac
vertue or power ofthe body this child was petrified, feeing that the Wombis a hot
and moift place, and therefore more fubje& to putrifaction, Thofe that will fatis-
fie themfelves with the reafons ofit, and the truth of the Hiftory, may read Fohannes
Alibofius Phyfician of #ns, who was an eye witnels of it, and Sennertus in-his book
of Sympt. quam feminis in utero accidnnt.

Now this accident being fo rare, and without parallel, our Authorthought fit
to foretel it, and to cover it in abfcure tearms, that he might not appear ridiculous
in fo admirable an eveut. When therefore he faith, That which fhall live and fhall
have wo Senfe, he meaneth this Mers or child petrified, which had a Life while
it was in the Mothers belly, being tied to it by the feveral Veflels and connexions,
known to Anatomifts, and yet was fenfelefs in thac it was petrified, When in the
fecond verfe he faith, The Iron fhall deftroy the art of it, he meaneth that it fhould be
fpoiled by the rafour, in the two Jaft verfes he faith, that the Towns of eAmtun,

‘balens, Langres, and Sens the Town in which this did happen thould that fame year
fuffer much damage by Hailand Ice, which did come to pafs, as many perfons may
juftify in chat Countrey, that are alive to this day,


XXL
French.


Au mois troifiefme fe levant le Soleil,

Sanglier, Leopard, aux champs Mars pour combatre,
Leopard laffé au Ciel efttend fon ceil,

Un Aigle autour du Soleil voit fesbatre.


Englifb.
In'the third month at the rifing of the Sun,
» The Boar and Leopard in Marth camp to fight:


The Leopard weary lift bis eyes tp to Haven,
And feeip an Eagle playing about the Sun.


ANNOT.


This fignifieth a particular accident, viz, that in the third Month, whichis
that of March, at the rifing of the Sun, the Boar and the Leopard, thatJs, two perfons
of, quality hidden under thefe names, fhall go into the fields to fight a Duel. ‘The
Leopard one of them being weary, fhall lift up his eyes to Heaven,calling upon God;
and thereupon fhall fee'an Eagle playing about the Sus, that is, fhall get the Victory,
of which the Eagle is the Emblem, €

French.


ee


of Michael Noftradamus.


XXIV.
French.


A Cité nevue penfif pour condamner,

Loilel de proie au ciel fe vient offtir,

Apres Victoire a Captifs pardonner

Cremone & Mantone grands maux auront ouftert.


Exglip:
Inthe new City for to condemn a Prifoner,
The Bird of pray foall offer himfelf to Heaven;
After the Vittory, the Prifoners fhall be forgiven, |
After Cremona and Mantua bave fuffered many troubles.
| ANNOT,

This name ofnew City is appropriated to feveral ones in every Countrey. The
French have many Villeneufuas, the Germans many New/tads, the Italians and Spa-
niards many Vilanovas, {o that itis hard to guefs which of them the Auchor means
eth, The mifiing of this dore makes thereft of the Prophecie fo obfcure, that I
had rather leave it to the liberty of the Reader, than to preterid a true explication


of it. I fhall only fay, that Cremona and Mantua axe two famous Townsin italy,
which are here chreacned,


XXV,

French.
Perdu, trouvé,caché de fi long fiecle
Sera Pafteur demy-Dieu honore,


Ains que la Lune acheve fon grand Siecle,
Par autre vents fera defhonore.


Englifb. |
Loft, found again, hidden fo great a while,
A Pasior as Deme-God hall be honoured;


But before the Moon endeth her great Agé,
By other winds be fhall be difbonoured,


ANNOT.


The Prophecie is concerning the body of a famous Churchman, which was loft,
and fhall be fonnd again, and worfhiped asa Demy-Ged; but before che Moon hath


run her great age, which is of 13 Months, it fhall be vilified and difhonoured.


RSS nes
Se = —.


RÉ ee GE EE ne PE
eet gs RL uth 7 “% PE REZ
5 ‘ NOVAS ce nt ae : + ay
Ss ad + See seer RE ni at


PENSANT I


a —


Tbe true Prophecies
XX VII.
French.


, | Le grand du Foudre tombe d'heure diurne,
Mal & predit par Porteur populaire,
sil Suivant prefage tombe d’heure nocturne,

| | Conflit Rheims, Londres, Etrufque Peftifere.


Englifh.
The great Man falleth by the Lightning in the day time, ‘
An evil foretold by a common Porter ; | a
According to this foretelling another falleth in the night, u
A fight at Rhemes, and the Plague at London and Tufcany.


ANNOT.


This is concerning fome great man, who being premonifhed by a common Car: (|
rier not to travel upona certain daÿ,did flight theadvice, and was ftrucken by Light-
ning in the day time, and another inthe night’; at the fametime chere was afightat |
Rhemes,and the Plague ac London and in Tufcany, whichin Latin is called Etruria, |


XX VII,

French.
Des foubs le Chefne Guyez du Ciel frappé,
Non loin de la eft caché le Threfor, |
Qui par long Siecles avoit efté grappé , |
Trouvé mourra, l’œil.érevé derefor.


ne ee cr mn


Englifh. | |
Under the Oak Guyen firucken from Heaven, D |
Not far from it is the Treafure hidden , |
Which bath been many Ages a gathering ; |


seing found be fhall die, the eye put ont by a Vpring,


a


RE sete eo
ol


ANNOT.


The fenfe of it is, that fome body (who is named hereGsyes) being under an Oak |
fhall be fttucken with che lightning,and that near that place there isa great Treafure, À


that hath been many years a gachering and that he who fhall find it:fhall die, being
fhot in the eye with a Fire-lock. |


a


AX VIEL
French. |
La Tour de Bouk craindra fufte Barbare,


Un temps, long tempsapres Barque Hefperique ,
Beftial gens meubles tous deux feront grand tare,
Taurus & Libra, quelle mortelle pique ?


. pee RE EE e — au
NL one nl SET ats


Englife,


of Michael Noftradamus,
Englifh.
The Tower of Bouk ball be in, fear of a Barbarian F leet,
For: 4 while; avd:long after. afraid of Spanith fhippine:
Flocks, peoples, woods both foall receive great dattage.,
Taurus and Libra, Owhbat'a deadly fend. :


ANNOT,


The Tower of Bosk is a ftrong place feated by the Rhofne, where it entereth into
the Mediterranean Sea; itis faid here that it hall bein fear of a Barbarian Fleer, and
after that of a Spanz/h one, and that both the Spaniard and the French (hall have great
loffes in Cattle, People and Goods, and this fhall happen when the Sua thall be in
the Signs of Zaurus and Libra,


{
|
XXIX; he
French. 1:
e . |
Quand le Poiffon, Terreftre & Aguotique,
| Par forte vague au gravier fera mis,
Sa forme eftrange fuave & horrifique,
Par Mer aux murs bien toft les Enemies. |
W
|


Englifh.


When the Fifh that is both Terreftrial and A quatick,
By a ftrong Wave [ball be caft upon the Sand,
With bis flrange fearful fiveet borrid fori,


Soon after the enemies will come near tothe Walls by Sea.


AN NOT,


This fignifieth no more but that after,a Fith, Terreftrial and Aquatick , that is
which, liveth in Land and Water, called by the Greeks «vif, (hall be caft upon
the Sand by a form, chena little while after, chat. Town which lieth near to chat
place where the Fith was caft , fhall be Befieged by her Enemies, who fhall come by
SEA,


XXX.
La Nef eftrange par le tourment Marin ,
Abordera ptes le Port incognu,
Nonobftant figns du rameau palmerin.
Apres mort, pille, bon advis tard venu.


Englifh.
The Outlandifb Ship by a Sea ftorm,
Shall come near the unknown Haven,
Notwitftanding the figus given to it with Bows,
ft fall die be plundered, a good advice come too late.
ANNOT.


4 i alt |
2 <


Thetrue Prophecies


ANNOT. |
Itis a Forrein Ship which by a ftorm fhall be driven to an unknown Harbour, and 1 gf
Hii notwithftanding the figns that fhall be made toit with Branches, by thofe that are | €:
al upon the Land to beware of the entrance of the Harbour ; it hall be caft away, and |
MM plundered 5 thus a good advice fhall come too late, ; |


| | NN T.

al French.

A : Tant d’ans les guerres, en Gaule dureront,
Outre la courfe du Caftulon Monarque,


Victoire incerte trois grands couroneront,
Aigle, Coq, Lune, Lion Soleil en marque,


| A Englith.
So many years the Wars fball laft in France,
Beyond the courfe of the Caftulon Monarque, |


An uncertain Vi£torÿ three great ones fball Crown,
The Eagle,the Cock.the Moon,theLion having theSun in its mark “


ANNOT.


That is, the Wars {hall laft Lo long in France after the death of one King of Spain,
ill three great ones fhall challenge an uncertain Victory , thefethree great ones are
the Emperour defigned by the Aigle , the King of France by the Cock, and the
Turk by the Moon , and this (hall happen when the Sun isin the fign of the Lion.
T fuppofe chat came to pafs in the time of Charles the V. Henry the IL. and Soliman,
For the ark had no great odds upon the Emperour, nor he upon the King of


France.


Se
—


XXXII.
French.


La grand Empire fera toft tranflaté,

En lieu petit qui bien toft viendra croiftre,
Lieu bien infime d’exigue Comte,

Ou au milieu viendra pofer fon Scepter.


Englifh.


The great Empire fhall foon be tranflated,

Into a little place which fhall foon grow afterwards.

An inferiour place of a {mall County,

In the middle of which be fhall come to lay down bis Scepter,


ANNOT.
This is concernig the fame Charles the V. Emperour,who about three years before


his death, being weary of the World, refigned his Dominions of Spais and of the
Low-


of Michael Nooftradamis; 23


Low! Countries , tohis Soni Philip the Il,cand his Empire to his Brother Férdznand,
and retired himfelf intoa Monaftery of Cafile, called Ÿ'Efcurial | which after his
death, was much enlarged and beautified by his Son Philip : and that is the meaning
of our Author when he faith :


Into a little place which [hall {oom grew afterwards,
An inferionr place of a [mall Consty,


For this E[c#rial being feated ina Defert place ofa County of Spain, called Ca/ti-
lia, which the Spani/h vanity calletha Kingdom , (whofe Ufe, Fruit, or Revenues,
the faid Charles only referved for his maintenance) is now by the Spaniards accounted
to be the eight wonder of the World,


SX NEEL
French.


Pres d’un grand Pont de plaine fpacieufe, :
Le grand Lion par force, Cefarées, |
Fera abatre hors Cité rigoureule ,

Par effroy portes luy feront referrées.


Englih.
A great Bridge near à fpacious Plain,
The great Lion by Cæfarean Forces,


Shall'caufe to be pulled down, without the rigorous City,
For fear of which, the Gates fball be fout to bin.


ANNOT.


The meaning of this is, that a great Captain, Commander of the Imperial Forces,
fhall caufe a Bridge that was built near a fpacious Plain tobe thrown down. The
City neat the Bridge being tertified at.it,thall fhuc up their Gates againft him.


XXXIV,
ant + Breach;
L’ Oifeau de proye volant.a la Feneftre,
Avant conflict, fait au Francois parure,
L’un bon prendra, l'autre ambigue finiftre,
La partie foible tiendra pour bonne augure,


Englifh. *


* The Bird of Prey flying to the Window,


Before Battle, (ball appear to the French;
One {hall take a good omen of it,the other a bad one,
The weaker part fball hold it for a good fign.


ANNOT,


It isa Hawk which in prefence of rwo Armies ready to give Battle, thall fly to 2
window and perchuponic, in the prefence of them all, one of he Armies fhall take


“


*


a> TT ETO ty


=

2
LÉ ra
SES


ms ae
in NE cg, Sit
; ih


en Peon em Umer momen NNN EEN mene i yee AE a


24 The true Prophecies
it for a good fign; and the other, for an ambiguous and finifter one, In Conclufi-
on, the weaker party thall get che Victory.


XXXV:
French.


Le Lion jeune le vieux furmontera,

En champ bellique par fingulier Duelle,
Dans Cage dor Leeil il Jui crevera,

Deux playes une puis mourir mort cruelle.


Englifh.
The young Lion fhall overcome the old one,
Iz Martial field by a fingle Duel,


In a Golden Cage be fhall put out his Eye,
Two wounds from one, ther be foall die a cruel death.


ANNOT,


This is one of the Prophecies that hath put our Author in credit, as well for the
clearnefs as for the true event of it, ;

Caffar No ftradansus our Authors (on, in his Hiftory of Prevence, writeth that by
this Stazza his father intended to foretell the manner of Henry the fecond’s death.

The French Hiftories relate that chis great Prince defiring to honour the Nuptial
of his Daughter Elizabeth, married to Philip 11, King of Spain, did appoint a Toure
nament to be kept in St. Anthony's ftreet in Paré where himfelf would be one of the
Defendants againft all comers, and for that purpofe chofe for his companions and
aflociates Don Alfenfo d Efe Duke of Ferrara, and Francis of Lorrain, Duke of
Guife.

The Tornament being almoft ended, in which the King had fhewed much Valour
being mounted upon a Horfe of the Duke of Savoy, Philibert’, Emanuel his Brother in
Law, this Duke intreated the King to leave off, becaufe he had got rhe Victory ; and
the weather was hot, and the night drawing on: But this Martial King would need
break one Launce more, and commanded the Captain Gabriel de Lerges to be called,
a young and valiant Lord and Captain of the Scotti/b Guard, Being come, the King
commanded him torun againft him, whichhe refufed a great while ; but the King
waxing angry, he obeyed, and fet Spurs to his Horfe, he did hic the King in the


lower .part of his Beaver, the Launce was broken into fhivers,and the mean ftump’


lifting up the Beaver, a fplinter got in, and wounded che King alittle above the
right Eye, where finding the Bone too hard, it went very deep under the faid Eye,
and broke fome Veins belonging tothe Membrane, called: Pia Adater,

The blow was fo violent that the King bended his head towards the lifts,and fell,
into a Swound, being prefently difarmed, they perceived the fplinter ofthe Launce
in his Eye, and his face all bloody, He lived tendaysafter, and died with great
Convulfions, becaufe the Sinews were offended, whereupon he fuffered grievous
‘Torment.

His death was alfo foretold by Luke Gawrick a great Aftrologer, who being con-
ftrained by the Queen Catharine of Medicis, to tell her by what kind of death her
Husband fhould, end his days, told heritfhould-beina Dwel; which madé him to be
hiffed at, Kingsbeing exempted of chofe accidents,

~ According


Of MiichaelN oftradamus. ae


According to this Nartative, the, Author calleth the King an old Lior, andthe
Captain Lorges,.fince; Harl.of Montgomery, the young Lion; beçaufe-boch fought
like Lions, The young Lion overcame the old one in Martial field, and in a fight of
one againft one, and confequently a Dal; 7

He ovetcame him by putting his £ye out ina Golden Cage, that is, in his Gilded
Helmet,

Of which Wound there came another,: becaufe the blood of fomebroken Veins
creeping into the Brains by the vehement agitation of the head,caufed an Impoftame
there, which could not be remedied: therefore the. Author faith twa pounds from
one, that is,one wound made two : andthe King died‘ofa cruel death, as we have
faid before, i


XXXVI.
French.


Tard le Monarque fe viendra repentir,
De navoir mis a Mort fon Adverfairé,
Mais viendra bien a plus haut confentir,
Que tout fon fang par Mort fera deffaire.


| Enghith.

The Monarque fball too late repent,

That be hath not put to death bis Adverfary;

But he fhall give his conféut to a greater thing than that,
Which is to put to death all his Adverfaries Kindred,


| ANNOT:
The words of this are plain, thoughitbe quéftionable whether the thing is come
to pafs already,or nor.
XXX VAL.
French.


Un peu devant que le Soleil fabfconfe
Conflit donne, grand peuple dubieux,
Profligez, Port-Marin ne fait refponce,
Pont & Sepulchre en deux eftranges lieux.


| Englith,
A little before the Sun fetteth,’
A Battle foali be given, a great people frall be doubtful
Of being forled, the Sea-Port, maketh no anfwer,
A Bridge and Sepulchre fhall be in two Grange places.


ANNOT,


The two firft verfes I believe are concerning the Battle of Saint Demis, which
was foughe in che Evening hard by Paré, and where the Conftable of asomt-
E morency


26


The true Prophecies


morency was kill'd} which made that great people of Paré to be doubrful.
The other two Verfes I leave to the interpretation of the Reader,


XXX VIIL,
French,
Le Sol & l’Aigle Viéteur paroiftront,
Refponfe vain au vaincu lon affeure,
Par Cor ne cris, harnois narrefteront ;
Vindiéte paix, par Mort lacheve a l'heure.


Englifh.


The Sun and the Eagle fall appear to the Vi£torions,
A vain Anfwer foall be made good to the vanquifbed;
By no means Arms fhall not be ftopped,


Vengeance maketh Péace, by death he then accomplifbeth it.


ANNOT.


This Stanza being full of Figures and Equivoques, Iwill not interpofe my Judgé-


mentinit, left undertake too much,and perform too little.


XXXIX.

French,
De nuit dans le lit le fuprefme eftrang'e,
Pour avoir trop fuborne blond efleu,


Par trois l'Empire {nbroge Exancle,
A mort mettra, Carte ne Pacquet leu.


Englith.


By night in the bed the chief one [ball be flrangled.

For having 100 much fuborned fair Elett,

By tbree the Empire fubrogate Exancle.

He fhall put him to death, reading neither Card nor Packet.


ANNOT.


The Author hath purpofely obfcured this Prophecie in the third Verfe, to take
away the Knowledge of it from the: Reader; becaufe the parties concerned were
then alive, viz Philip 11, King of Spain, whocaufed his only fon Den Carlo to
be ftrangled in his bed, for fufpicion of being coo familiar with his wife E/zabeth of
France, and Daughter to Henryl. The laft Verfefaich, chat he was fo implaca-


ble, thathe would read neither Card nor Packes, chat is, no requefts,


Englith.


TS


IIS


of Michael. Noftradamus.


XL:
French.
La tourbe fauffe diflimilant folie
* Fera Bizance un changement de loix,
Iftra'd’Z¢ ypt qui veus que l’on deflie,
Ediét, changant Monnoys & alloys.
Englifh.
The falfe Troup diffembling their folly,
Shall make in Bizance an alteration of Laws.


One fhall come ont of Egypt who will have untied
The Edi, changing the Coin and allay.


ANNOT.


There is two things inthis Prognoftication, the firft that in Bizagce, which is
Conftantinople, a Treop of tummituous perfons gathered together, and diffembling


their folly, fhall caufe an alteration in the Laws,


The other, that fome Bafa come out of eZgypt, fhall perfwade them at Conftanti-
nople to alter their Coin, and the allay of it. f


XLT,
French.


Siege a Cité & de nuit affaille, |
Peu efchapez non loing de Mer conflict,
Femme de joye, retour fils, de faillie
Poifon & Lettres caché dedans le plic.


Englifh.
A Siege laid to a City, and afjaulted by night
Few efcaped, a fight not far from the Sea,


A woman fwoundeth for joy tofee ber fon returned ;
A poifon hidden in the fold of Letters,


ANN OT.
® After the taking of Palpian, the French cameto Montcalvo, and in the night
pei ars it by Scalado, and Paradin faith, that not a drop of Blood was fhed on
either fide, ee
The Town being taken, the Citadel did hold out a good while, and at laft did
farrender, Den Arbre, who was in the place of the Marques of Pefeaire, and of the
Duke of @’ 4lva, knowing chat the befieged had not made a fufficient refiftance,
caufed the Captain, and eleven more of the chief ones to be hanged ; becaufe the
place was of confequence, and thofe within had not madea fufficient refiftance,
The Author faith in the firft Verfe, Siege waslaid toa City, chatis, it was
refolved to befiege cMontcalve, asthe Martial of Briffac had advifed, Inthe exe-


cation it was affaulted by night, inthe taking few efcaped ; for they were ‘his
Due Sk an


vs cu ot |
*


mg | GSTS


23 T he true Propbecies


and yielded to the Victorious. There were none killed or wounded,all were taken,


except few who ran away, and carried che news to the Spaniards,
Atthe fametime a fight not far from the Sea , thatis, atthe fame time there was
another Battle by the Sea,between the Spaniards and the Pope,as we fhall fhew here-


after.
The third and fourth Verfesare concerning à particular accident, which happened


refently after the taking of Montcalvo,which is, that a woman feeing her Son come
back fafe, fell ina fwound, or died for joy, becaufe knowing the danger wherein he
was, fhe had loft all hopes of ever feeing him, . This fellow had brought Poifon in
a Letter to give to one that had not rewarded him according to his defire, His
wickedne(s being difcovered, his Mafter put him in Prifon , whence he efcaped, and
came back again to Mentcaluo; the Author fpeaketh of the fame in another place,


which we fhall fet down in its order,


XLII.
French.


Les dix Calendes d’ Avril de fait Gothique,
Refufcité encor par gens malins,

Le feu eftaint, aflemblée Diabolique ,
Cherchant les Os de Damant & F fellin,


Englifh.
The tenth of the Calends of April,Gothik accouat,
Raifed up again by malitions perfons,
H he fire put ont, a Diabolical affembly,
Shall feck for the Bones of Damant and P{ellin.


ANN OT.


* The tenthof the Calends of 4pril isthe 23.0f March , Gothsk account fignifieth
the old account of the Calendar , before the reformation of it by Pope Gregory the
X IIL. which old account is called here Gethik, becaufe it is kept ftill by the Nothern
Nations, which do not acknowledgethe Pope, as Sweden, Denmark, Holland, En-
gland, &c, at that time faith our Author, a Magician fhall be raifed up by malitious

erfons ; which fire or tumult being put out, that Diabolical affembly will go about
to feek the bones of two famous Magicians, viz .Dament and P/eliiw that were dead
before,

X LIII.


French.


Avant qu’aviene le changement d'Empire,
1] adviendra un cas bien merveilleux,

Le Champ mué, le Pilier de Porphyre,
Mis, tranflaté fur le Rocher Noileux.


of Michael Noftradamus.


Englifh,
Before the change of the Euspire cometh
There fball happen a firange accident,
A field fhall be changed, and a Pillar of Prophyry,
Shall be tranfported upon the Chalky Rock. ust


ANNOT.


This will not feem incredible to thofe that have read the Exglifh Chronicles, who
relates that ina County of England (I think it is Herefordfhire) there was an Earth-
quake, which tranfpofed a large piece of ground in another place with the Trees that
were init, and if I remember well, halfa Chappel , chofe that have the Books may
examine the truth of the Hiftory, and fatisfie themfelves better.


XLIYV.
French.


En bref feront de retour Sacrifices,
Contrevenans feront mis a Martyre,

Plus ne feront Moins, Abbez ne Novices,
Le Miel fera beaucoup plus cher que Cire.


Englif.


Within a litle while Sacrifices fhall come again,
Oppofers fhall be put to Martyrdom,

There fball be no more Monks, Abbots nor Novices,
Honey fhall be much dearer then Wax.


ANNOT.


This is a true Prophecy of the miferable condition of the Church and Clergy in
our Fore- fathers times, and chiefly of Hearythe II, in France, and Henry the VIII.
in England , when in the beginning of the Reformation there was {uch a confufion
of opinions, and fuch unfettlednefs in Ecclefiaftical Government, that fometimes
the Popith party prevailed , and put to death the Oppolers ; at another time the
Proteftants, who drove away the Monks, Abbots and Novices, as is expreffed here,
and proved true in Hénry the VIII. time, As for whathe faith, that Honey hall be
much dearer than wax. Jt is to be uuderftood of the downfal of the Romifh Reli-
gion, who maketh ufe of Wax Candles and Tapers in their fuperftitious ceremo-
nies, as if he would fay,chat the Romifh Religion being down, Wax fhall be cheap,
and Honey dear,


XLV,

French.
Secteur de Sectes, grand paineau Delateur,
Befte en Theatre, drefle le jeuyScenique, |


Du fait antique ennobly l'Inventeur,
_, Par Sectes, Mondg confus & Schifmatique.


T be true Prophecies


Englifh.
Follower of Setts, great troubles to the Mefsenger,,
A Beaft upon the Theatre prepareth the Scenical play,
The Inventor of that wicked faG fhall be famous,
By Sets the World ball be confounded and Schifntatik.


| ANNOT.
The Author beinga Papift , isprobable that in this Prophecy he aimed at Lasher,
after whofe coming the world hath been full of Sects and Schifms.

XLVI.
French.

Tout aupres d’ Auch, de LeStoure & Mirande,

Grand feu du Ciel en trois nuits tombera,

Chofe adviendra bien ftupende & mirande,

Bien peu apres la Terre tremblera.


Englifh,
Near Auch, Le&oure avd Mirande, :
A great fire from Heaven ball fall three nights.together,


A thing fball bappen flupendions and wonderful,
A little while aftersthe Earth fball quake.


ANNOT.


Auch, Leëtoure and Miranda are three Towns in Guyenna, à Province of France,
the chief City whereof is Bowrdeanx. The reft is eafie.


XLVIL.
French.


Du Lac Leman les Sermons fafcherant,
Des jours feront reduits par des Sepmaines,
Puis mois, puis an, puis tous defalliront,
Les Magiftrats damneront leurs Loix vaines.


Englifh.
The Sermons of the Leman Lake fball be troublefome,
Some days fhall be reduced into weeks,
Then into months, then into year,then they fhall fail,
The Magiftrates fhall condemn their vain Laws.


AN NOT.


The Leman Lake, in Latin Lecus Lensanus, isthe Lake of Geneva, therefore it
is palpable, that by this Prophecy , the Author aimeth at Calvis,and his Succeffors,
who began the Reformation in that Town, Ileave the reft tothe Readers Judge.
ment, it is enough I have opened the door,


XLVIIL
French.


Vingt ans du Regne de la Lune patlez,
Sept mil ans autre tiendra {a Monarchie,
Quand le Soleil prendra fes jours laiflez,
Lors accomplit & fine ma Prophecie.
Englith.
Twenty years of the Reign of the Moon being paft,
Seven thoufands years another fball hold bis. Monarchy,


When the Sun fhall reaffume bis days paf,
Then is fulfilled, and endeth my Prophecy.


ANNOT,
Ail this fienifieth no more, but that the Authors Prophecies extend to the end
-of che world.
| XLIX.
| French.


| Beaucoup, beaucoup avant telles menees;
Ceux d'Orient par la vertu Lunaire,
L’An mil fept cens feront grands emmences;
Subjugant prefque le coin Aquilonaire.

Lo : Englith.
A great while before thefe doings, :
Thofe of the Eaft by the virtue of the Moon,


In the year 1700. fhall carry away great droves,


| | And [ball fubdne almost the whole Northern corner:


ANNOT., - -
I defire Poftetity to take fpecial notice of this Stawza, that in cafe it fhouid come
to pafs, our Author may be admired for the fpecification of the time, which is fo
pundtually fet down, here that icadmitteth no ambiguity, ‘Phe plain meaning is,that
the Turks, which hecalleth thofe of the Eaft. By the virtue of the Moon, which


and fhall fubdue almoft the whole Northern Countrey ; which co chem is Ruffia,


Poland, Huscary, Sweden, Denemark, &C; NT
FREINER,


of Michael Noftradamus. 31


is their Enfign and Badge , fhallinthe year 1700. carry away abundance of people,


ST et


Se rey err


= wee BIE


The true Prophecies


à
French.
De l'Aquatique triplicity naiftra,
Un qui fera le Feudy pour fa fefte,
Son Bruit, Loz, Regne & puiflance croiftra,
Par Terre & Mer, aux Ofients tempeite.


Englifh.


From the Aquaticktriplicity fhall be born,

One that fball make Thurfday his Holiday,
His Fame, Praife, Reign,and Power hall grow,
By Land and Sea, and a Tempeft to the Eaft:


ANN OT.


The meaning is,that at that time, as (fuch conjunction of Planets fhall be, which
hecalleth here Aquatick triplicity, there fhall be born upon a Thar/day a famous man,
fuch as he defcribeth here, who fhall be a foeand atertour tothe Zwrks, fignified
here by the Ovients,


igh
French.


Chef d’Aries, Jupiter & Saturne,
Dieu Eternel quelles mutations !

. Puis apres long fiecle fonmalin temps retourne,
Gaule & Italy quelles emotions ?


Englih.
Heads of Aries, Jupiter and Saturn ,
O Eternal God, what changes foall there be !
After a long age bis wicked time cometh again,
France and Italy, what commotions ?


ANNOT.
This fignifieth, that when Fwpiter and Satsrs fhall be in conjunction in she head
of eAries, that then fhall be great commotionsin France and Italy,
oh at,
p's French.
Les deux malins de Scorpion conjoint,

Le grand Seigneur meurtry dedans fa falle,

Pefte a l'Eglife par le nouvéauRoyHoint,

L'Europe bafle, & Septentrionale.


Of Michael Nioftradaimus.


Englifh.


The two malignants of Scorpion being joyned,
The grand Scignor murdered in his Hall,

Plague to the Church by a King newly joyned to it,
Europe low, and Septentrional.


ANNOT.


This third pofition of the Celeftial bodies foretelleth the death of the great Tart,
who (hould be mardered in his own Chamber, as happened co Sultan Ofmaz, who
was ftrangled in bis Chamber,by the command of Daont Baffa great Vizeir, about che


year 1633. vide the Torkifh Hiftory.

The reft of the Prophecy is concerning a King , who being newly joyned to the
Chuich,(Ifuppofe of Rome) fhall bring much mifchief to it, and in his time Ewrope
fhallbe brought very low, and in a manner confined to acorner of the North; which


hath relation to the foregoing 49. Stanza, which fee inits place,
LIIL
French.


LE Las, qu'on verra grand peuple tourmente,

| Et la Loy Sainte en totale ruine,

Par autres Loix toute la Chreftiente,

Quand d’Or, d’Argent trouve nouvelle Mine.


Englith:

Alas, bow a great people fball be tormented,

And the Holy Law in an utter ruine;

By other Laws, all Chriftendom troubled,

When new Mines of Gold and Silver foall be found,

ANNOT,
This isa true Prophecy of the mifchiefs that have happened in the World by the

finding of the Minesin America 5 firft co the Indians themfelves, called here a great


People, bythe cruelty of the Spaniards, and then to all Chriftendom befides,by che


evils that this Idol Mazon hath brought into it.


LIV,
Freach.


_ Deux revolts faits du malin facigere,
De Regne & Siecles fait permutation,
Le mobil figne a fon endroit s'Ingere,
Aux deux egaux & d’ Inclination.


Énglifh.


SE re = =


SI ee rr ae
ee TETE


Sule real ds ater


T he trne Prophecies
Englifh.
Two revolts fhall be made by the wicked Link-carrier,
Which foall make a change of the Reign and the Age,
The moveable Sign doth offer it felf for it,
To the two equals in inclination,
| ANNOT.
This obfcute Stanza muf be interpreted thus.
Two revolts fhall be made Ly the wicked Link-cärrier s thatis, Pari which isthe
Link- carrier of France, and whofe example thereft of the Towns follow, fhall re-


volt twice, the firft revole was againft Henry LIL, in the time of the Barricadoes, the
fecond againft Henry 1 V. his fucceflor,


Which fhall make a change of the Reigu andthe Age: This happened when thehonfe -


of Valois was-extinguithed, and the houfe of Bourbon came in, andthat is the change
of the Reign, The change of the Age, was,becaule this did happen about the end of the
yeat 1599. and the beginning 1600, which was achange of Age.


The moveable fign offers it felf for à: Thais, the pofition of the Heavens was
fuch as to forward thefe accidents,


To the iwo equals in ambition: That is, to Henryl 11. and Henry I V: who both
intended,and went about to reduce Paris to obedience. |
L Vs
French.

Soubs loppofite climat Babilonique,

Grande fera de fang eftafion,

Que Terre, & Mer, Air, Ciel fera inique,

Sectes, Faim, Regnes, Peftes, Confufion.


Englith.
In the Climat oppofite to the Babylonian,


There fball be a great effufion of Blood.


Infomuch that the Land,andSea,Air andHeaven [hall feem un jf
Sets, Famine, Reigns, Plague, Confnfion. |


ANNOT.
Thete is nothing difficult here,but what C/mat is that is oppofite 10 she Balylonian;
of which every body may fatisfie himfelf by perufing the Globe,
LVL:
| French
Vous verrez toit ou tard faire grand change,
Horreurs extremes & vindications,
Que fila Luneconduite par fon Ange,
Le Ciel {approche des inclinations.


of Michael Noftradamus,


Englifh.
You fall fee foon or late great alterations
Extreme borrours and revenges,
The Moon léaden by her Angel,


The Heaven draeth near its inclinations.


: ANNOT.

A I conceive there is fome things omitted, and corrupted by the Prefs in this Stan-
za, which rendreth jt fo difficult, therefore I had rather leave it co the decifion of

f the impartial Reader, than venture my opinion upon it,

LVII

| French.


Par grand difcord Ja trombe.tremblera,
Accord rompu, dreffant la tefte au Ciel;
Bouche fanglante dans le fang nagera;
Au Sol la face ointe le loit & Miel.


| “ | Englifh. |
| By great difcord, the Trumpet [ball found,
Agreement broken, lifting the head to Heaven,


A bloody inouth foall fwim in blood, L
The face turned tothe Sun anointed with Milk and Honey:


| , ANNOT.
=: The words and fenceare plain,and I cannot believe chat chere is any great myfté:
ty hidden under thefe words. |


 LVIEL

French.
Trenché le.ventre,:naiftra ave deux feftes,
& quattre bras, quel qu’ans entiers vivra,
Jour qu’Aquilare celebrera fes féftes,
Foffan, Thurit, chef Ferrare fuiera.


| | Englith.
|
|


Slit in the belly, fball be born with two hedds,

And four Arms, it foall live fome years,

The day that Aquilare fhall celebrate his Feftivals,

i Foffan, Thurin, chief Ferrare fhall run away. |


Fe i. À ANNOT;


24


. The trne Prophecies


ANNOT. |

In the firft Verfe the Author fpeaketh ofa Monfter that had two heads, and four
Arms, andthe Belly flit, that is tofay, it wasafemale, _

His Son Cefer in his Hiftory of Provence, faith, that in the Town of Sevan in
Provence, a Child was born. with two heads, and that it was foretold byfome chat
were skilful in Aftronomy, by which words I guefs he fpake of his Father, fich the
Aftrologers cannot foretel the birth of a parricular Monfter, and therefore No/tra-
damus only was able to do it in thofe days,

He faith im the fame place, chat i¢was borti in February 1554. and was brought
to Salon to bé thewed twhis Father, and thence was carried to Clawdins Earl ot Savoy
Governourof Provence, who commonly had his refidence at Salon,

He maketh no mention if he had four Arms, nor what Sex it wasof, it may be
that being in fwadling cloths, no body took notice of the Arms or Sex,

The Author Prophecieth that itfhould five fome years, it may be twoor three,
and that is was preferved to fee, whether in time it fhould have the ufe of its Senfes,
of the Tongue, and underftanding of its two Heads, ‘to fee whether there were two
Souls, or onely one, and to fay the Trath, © [think thar in fach an accident both
Heads ought to be Baptized, that incafe there fliould be two Souls, both fhould
partake ofthe blood of Chrift, tor theit Eternal Salvation.

I do not find in the fame Hiftory how long it lived, it being a thing not much
Material to Hiftory, In the third Verfe he marketh, The day that Aquilare half
celebrate bis Feftivals ; andin the fourth he faith chat Foflan, Thurin, chief Ferrare
Fall run away.

Tounderftand this,” one muft fuppofe here that the Town of Cazal is called here
the chief of Ferrares becaufe itis the chief City of cMantferrat, and as Paradin {aith,
is called Cazal St. Bas, a handfom and ftrong place, honoured with many Nobles
and antient Families, as of the Earls of St: George and of Biandratte,

Secondly, We muft fuppofe that in the year 1554, the Lord Figwerol, Lieute-
nant to the Governout of Mslan did commiarid in chat place. Of this Figwerol I find
in the, Author, of the four Volumés of the States and Empires, .( whenhe fpeaketh
of Spain ) that the Houfe of Figweroas was the root of that of 4quélary which hath
feveral branches, out of which came the Duke of Feria, and the Marquefs of Pliezo,
fo that Figuerol and Aguilar is the fame thing.

If it be objected that Figuersas and Figuerel are not the fame, Paradin teacheth
us, that this Figwerol was bred upamongft the Geneefes, and checorrupted Italian
of Genoa may have named the Captain Fignerel in ftead of Figueroas.

Thirdly, We matt fuppofe here that Caza/ was taken inthe night that is between
Shrove-Tuefday and Afh-Wednefday, and that from Shrove- Sunday to that.day there
were great rejoycings, becaufe of a famous Marriage that was made between two
perfons of quality, where the Lord Figuerol was one of the chief perfons invited.

Fourthly, That thefe rejoycings were the occafion of the taking of Cazals be-
caufe the Lord Salvaifen Governour of Verrie hearing of this Feaft, refolved tobe
among them, though with adifferenciatention, |. He had before hand made him-
felf {ure of one Fontarole, whounder pretencetofell fruit, went up and down the
Town to fpie what was a doing,

Fifchly, The refolution of furprizing Caxal was agreed upon, and the time ap.
pointed to be the night between Shrove=Tae(day and Afb-wedne/day, when the Go-
vernour, Inhabitants and Souldiers fhould be buried in fleep, weary of debaucheries
committed the day before,

Sixthly, This refolution was fo happily put into execution, that Figuerol hear-


ing


aS = =—C®


©
a


of Michael Noftradamus. 3y


ing the noife of the French being in Town: came out of his houle; shaving only his
night. Gown upon him, and'a Halbert-in bis. hand; \to: quiet thofe whom he only
thought to be fomedrunken perfons ;: but hearing the-ery of France; France, he pre:
fentlyretired intothe Caftle, with all chofé that were come tothe Nuptials,

Seventhly, The Marthal of Briffac coming about feven of the Clock in the Mor:
ning, caufed the Tower of Caz4/ to be affaulted, which wastaken witha confi dera-
blelofsof the French, and after that. the Caftle which held out 12 days,

All this being {appofed, mark watthe Author iaith in the third Verfe. |

The day that Aguilare (hall celebrate his Feftivals, thacis, the day thar Fignerel
of the heufs of Aguilare [hall celebrate bis Feftivals, not only one Feftival, but his
Feftivals, that is of three days, '

Foffen, Thurin, faichche fourth Verfe, Chief Ferrare [hall rnp away,

Foffen, Thuris, doth not fignifietwo Towns, but one onely.; for alchough Fo/-
few and Thuris be two Towns, of whi€h.F ofex in the time of che Wars in Italy undet
Henry 11. belonged to che Spaniard, an ThurintotheFrench. Theletwo Towns
fignifie but one, which is that of Foffer, to whichto diftinguifh it from Afarfeidles, he
giveth the Epithete of Thurin, fo much as to fay, that hefpeaketh of Foffen a Town
of Piemont, the-chief Town of Which is Thwrin, and not of Foffex, which the Au-
thor taketh often for Marfeilles. 3

Which the Author maketh plain, when he faith in the fingularnumber, thar
Foffen, Thurin, chief Ferrare [ball run away, to fhew that itis onely one Town of
which he fpeaketh, otherwi(e if he had intended to fpeake of two, he would have
put it in the plural number, which is more manifeft by the Hiftory, wherein we
learn that Fofen belonged to the Spaniards, and Thurin to the French, and confe-
quently, being of contrary parties, they coold neither follow, nor fly from à Town
which belonged to oneofthem, va sina: ist pier kek ke

Tf any one fhould objed, that. the fenfe of the foutrh Verfeis, char the Chief
Férrare (ball fly or follow thefe two Towns, the préceding reafon is repugnant to
that fenfe; becaufe a Town chac is of one party, cannot be friend to two Towns,
one of which is of its party, and the other of the contrary. |

The reading of this work fhall convince every body, that the Author ferteth
down fometimes two Towns for one, to diftinguifh them from others, as he nameth
Paul Manfol, to diftingaifh that Town of St, Pal, which is three Leagues from the
Rhofne, over againft Pont St, Efprit, from that Sc. Paul which is ln Provence,

Now chat Foffen in Piermont hall tun ftom Cazal the chief City of Montferrat, be-
ce that being taken by che French, Foffen could not éxpeët but perpetual damages

rom it, | ig y ome

But why? will you fay, doth the Author fpeak rather of Foffer, than of other
places that held for the Spaniards ? Tanfiver, becaufe Foffen was the ftrongeft place
that the Spaniards had in Piemont,and which could not be taken by the French,thoug,,
her neighbour Saviliane was, as we fhaïl thew heréaf ter,


In the Vulgar impreffion of this Stanza, there istwo faults, oneis, that inthe


firft Verfe it puts equileya, which isa Town that isnot in Ztaly, truth itis, thac
there is Agwilee a little above Venice, but this hath no correfpondency with Foff en,
Thsrin, nor the Chief of Ferrara, | ya Be

In the fourth. ‘Verte the impreffion ferteth down fhall follow, which maketh non-
fenfe, and therefore 1 put /hall ra away, which is a word in French near the other,
anid'makecN#éompleat lenfesto which aereech che birth of that Montter in February,
dnd che taking of Coss itt the Month of arch, Ta that:year, Fobv Statius fetter!
Shrove-Twefday upon the 16 of February, and Coufequently we mutt fay, char che
joe Was not taken that year 1554. for the Citadel was taken x 2 daÿs after, which


houlhave been the 1 9 of February, and notwithftanding the Hiftory marks chat it
Was taken upon the 14 of Afarch,


Therefore


D RE Pe ete Oe
rae


PR as enr up ao
as Le FE ¥ > if


=n oe


SPOS
ERP aa —


- ‘Therefore we muft conclude, that ic was taken the year followin I
fay truth,in that year Afb-wedne day was the 27. of Febrmarj; in rie pe ahs rasa
was taken, and two days after t |


fieged che fecond
days after, which was the 14, of March, which convinceth me that Cazal was taken


in.the year 1555. Upon the 27, of February , and therefore chat this Stanza-is wholly
Prophetical: à


Thisis very plain, and fignifieth no more,
ed into Iflands, and could not hold their congues ; upon the coming of a Monarque,


more cruel than his Predeceffor, fhall be murdered,and burnt,


This Prophecy is for the future ; for fince Noffrads


Emperour was not hear
andproved morea Butcher, chan a Prince.


ae ds pen


The true Prophecies


e TowerofCazals after which the Citadel was -be-
of March, andthe firft Satarday of Lent , and was taken cwelve


LIX
French:
Les exilez deportez dans les Ifles,


Au changement d’un pl us cruel Monarque; +
Seront meurtris & mis dans les Scintilles,


Qui de parler ne feront efte parques.

Englifh. |
They banifbed that were carried into the Iflands,
At the change of ,a more cruel Monarque,


Shall be murdered, and put in the {parks of fire,
Becanfe they bad not been {paring of their tongues.


ANNOT-
but that fome perfons that were banilhé


LX.
French.


Un Empereur naiftra pres d'Italie,

Qui a l'Empire fera vendu bien cher ,
Diront avec quels gens il fe ralie,

Qu'on trouvera moins Prince que Boucher.


Englifh.


An Emperour foall be born near Italy,


Who fpall coft dear to the Empire,
They fball fay, with what people be keepeth company !


He (ball be found lefs a Prince, than a Butcher.


ANNOT. |
wusstime tillnow ,.fuch an
dof, that was bora neat saly, chat coft the Empire fodear,


French,


eer
SE Sa SS et =
meer ae

- ae ee

Sea
Se See


of Michael Noftradamus.
| | LXI.

| ms French,

La Republique miferable infelice,

Sera vaftée du nouveau Magiftrat,

Leur grand amas de l’exil malefice,

Fera Suede ravir leur grand contra.


Englifh.
The miferable and unhapoy Common-wealth
Shall be wafted by the new Magiftrate ;
Their great gathering from exiled perfons ,
Shall canfe Swedeland’ to break her Contraé.


ANNOT,


The two firft Verfes foretell what hath happened to England under the Govern-
ment of a Common-wealth, and how their new Magiftrate Cromiel made a havock
ofthem, The third and fourth Verfes, mention what great {ums they exagted from
thofe of the Kings party, and how for thatcaufe Swedeland forefook their friendfhip.


LX IT.
French:


La grande perte las que féront les Lettres,
Avant le Circle de Latona parfait,
Feu, grand Deluge, plus par ignares Sceptres,
Que de long fiecle ne fe verra refait,

Englith.
Alas what a great lofs fhall learning suffer,
Before the Circle of the Moon. be accomplifbed,


Fire, great flood,and more by ignorant Scepters,
Then can be made good again in a long age.


ANNOT. !
Here the Author bemoaneth the lofs ofone eminent petfon in Learning, be like
of Fwlius Scaliger, who lived in his time, and was once his intimate friend, the two
laft Verfes chat greac miferies, as Fire and Flood {hall happen by the ignorance of


Princes, me
LX Iff,
French. gi
= Les Fleaux paffez, diminué le,Monde,. .: R
i Long temps la Paix, Terres inhabitées, © .
7 Seur marchera par le Ciel, Terre, Mer & Onde,
~ .. Pur de nouveau les Guerres fufcitées.


Eoglifh,


pme É = Te = SS en
_ HE : ” SS SSS
4 à 10 gi: 7 4
> ‘ i iy WAS > ETS :
- TT A ; : | (
pe one . 2 ess Pa z= < Wy


= int
SRE en SE
OPAC C 2


se
SEE


sso


: The true Propbecies


Englifh,

The Scourges being paft, the World foall be dintinifbed,
Peace for a great while, Lands inhabited,
Every one fafe fall go by Heaven, L.and and Sea,
And then the Wars fball begin a frefp.


ANNOT: |


This foretelleth a great tranquillity every where,and after that, Wars again:


LXIV.
French.
De nuit Soleil penferont avoir veu,
Quand le Pourceau demy, homme on verra,
Bruit, Chant, Bataille au Ciel battre apperceu,
Et beftes brutes a parler on orra. : 3 slothen


Englifh.


They fball think to bave feen the Sun in the night,
When the Hog half a man fhall be feen,

Noife, Singing, Battles in Heaven [hall be [een to fight,
And brute beafts ball be heard to fpeak, ;


ANNOT.


This Stanza is full of prodigies that are to happen, and for that in thelaft Verfe,
it is no great wonder, for many brute beafts have {poken, fpeak now a days, and fhall


‘peak hereafter.


LXV,
French,
Enfant fans mains, jamais veu fi grand Foudre,
. L'Enfant Royal au jeu d’efteuf bleffe,


Au puy brifez, fulgures allant moudre,
Trois fur les champs par le milieu trouflez.


Englifh.
A child without bands, fo great Lightning never feen,
The Royal Child wounded at Tennis,
Bruifed at the Well, Lightnings, going to grind,
Three foall be firucken by the middle, |


.


of Michael Noftradamus, 41


| ANNOT, |
The meaning ofall this is, chat when a child fhal! be born without hands, there
fhall be fearful Lightning ; a Royal child fhall be hurt at Tennes, and by that Light-


ning fome fhall be bruifed by a Well, and ina Mill, and three in the Field {hall be
killed.


LXVL
French.
Celuy qui lors portera les nouvelles, :
Apres un peu il viendra refpirer,
. Viewers, Tournon, Montferrand & Pradelles,
Grefle & tempefte les fera foufpirer.


Englith. °
He that then foall carry the news , |
A little while after foall draw bis breath,
Viviers, Tournon, Montferrant; avd Pradelles,


Hail and form {ball make them figh.


ANNOT.


This Stanza hatha connexion with theforegoing, for the ewofirft Vétfes fignifie,
that he who fhalt carry the news of that fearful Lightning , and of che mifchief done
by it, (hall have much ado to recover his breath.


In the laft two Verfes,the Towns are named which fhall fuffer moft by chat ftorm,
and chiefly by the Hail and the Wind. 4


French.

LXVII
La grand famine que je vois approcher,
Souvent tourner puis eftre univerfelle, _
Si grande & longtfe qu’on viendra arracher,
Du Bois racine, & l'Enfant de mamelle.


Englifh.
What.a. great famine do I fee drawing near,
To turnone way, then another, and then become univerfal.


So‘great and: long, that they [ball come to pluck
The root from the Wood, andthe child from, the breast:


9 ANNO'T. : |
_ The words and fenfe of this are plain, and foretell a great famine, which being
firft in one Countrey and then in another, fhall at laft become general,and laft fo


long, that people thall pluck the Roots from the Trees , and the children from the
Vreaft to feed upon, ma


G French


eter pS SS Se SS ee
wae =.
:


Se SET
3 eae) à 'ut


CR er PERTE
Eee


SR Re as LE nr ARS
Rat 4 PS VOLS tt © $.


= age aoe


ddr NE à |


T he true Prophecies


L'XVTIL
French.


© quel horrible & malheureux tourment,
Trois innocens qu’on viendra a livrer,
Poifon fufpe&, mal garde tradiment.

Mis en horreur par Bourreaux enyvrez.


Englith.


O to what a horrid and unhappy torment,
Shall be put three Innocents. !


Poifon fhall be fufpeched, evil Keepers foall betray them, |
They fhall be put to borrour by drunken Executioners.


ANNOT.


This is very plain concerning three innocent perfons, who fhall be delivered up by
their unfaithful keepers,and fhall be put to great torments by dranken Executioners,
which torments hall be falpected to come by poifon,


LXIX.
French.


La grand Montagne ronde de fept Stades,
Apres Paix, Guerre, Faim; Inondation,
Roulera long, abifuant grand contrades,

. Mefmes antiques, & grand Fondation,


Englifh.
The great Mount in compafs fever Stades,
After Peace, War, Famine, and Innundation ,


Shall tumble a great way, finking great Countries,
Tea ancient Buildings, and great Foundation.


ANNOT.


A Stade cometh from the Greek word sudsov,da2 is asus, becaufe Hercules did
overrun fo much ground at one breath ; but what fpace of ground the Author mean-
eth by feven Stades,is unknown to me. The reft of the Prophecy may very well be
appropriated to the laft fearful eruption of Mount «4tve , which funk fo many
Towns and Buildings, and the relation of which is. fo handfomly and truly made
by the moft honourable the Earl of winchel(ey , who was an eye witnels to it, in his
return from his Embafly at Conftantinople.


French,


of Michael Nofteadamus.


LX X.
French.
Pluye, Faim, Guerre en Perfe non ceflée,
La foy trop grande trahira le Monarque;
Par la finie en Gaule commencée,
Secret augure pour a un eftre parque.


Englifh.
The Rain, Famine, War in Perfia being not ceafed,


Too great credulity [ball betray the Monarque ;
Being ended there, it fhall begin in France,


<


A fecret Omen to one that he fhall die.
ANNOT. |


The meaning of thetwo firft Verfes,is,that while the Rain, Famine,and War {hall
bein Pérfia;a Monarque fhall be betrayed by his credulity, The third Verfe fignifieth
that this Rain, Famine and War being ended in Perfia, it fhall begin in France, And
the fourth Verfe , that chis fhall be an Omen to a great Perfon of his approaching


=” “eS


LXX1
«French,
La Tour Marine troisfois prife & reprife,
Par Efpagnols, Barbares, Ligurins,
Marfeille & Aix, Arles par ceux de Piles:
Vatt, feu, fer, pille, Avignon des Thuriné.
Hee Englith. ;
The Sea-tower three times taken.and retaken,
By Spaniards, Barbarians, and Ligurians,
Marfeilles and Aix, Arles by thofe of Pifa, |
aft, fire; von; plundery Avignon of Thurinc.
es OE On Le CON CL LES
It is hard to güefs what this Sea Tower is,which was taken and retaken three timess


firft by the Spaniards,next by the Barbarians and ther by the Ligurians, chat is,either
the Genoefes,or thofe of Ligorne,unlefs he meaneth the Pignen de VeleX in Africa, firkt
taken by Charles the V. upon the Barbarians , tben retaken again by them , taken
again by the Spaniards, by the help of the Genoefes. Inthe third Verfe Mar{eille,
Aix,and Arles,are threatned by thofe of Pifs,that is the,Florentines, of being ruinated
by Fire and Sword, and to be plundered, as al(o Avignon by thofe of Piensont,


The true Prophecies


LXXTE
French.


Du rout Marfeille des habitans changee,

Courfe & pourfuite jufques pres de Lior,
Narbon, Tholoxe par Bourdeaux outragee,
Tuez, Captifs prefque d'un Milion.


Englifh.


Marfeille fhall wholly change her Inbabitants
Thefe fhall run and be purfued as far as Lion,
Narbon, Tholoze /ball wrong Bourdeaux,


There [ball be killed aud taken prifoner alntoft a Milion.


ANNOT.


Marfeilles is a Sea- Town in Provence, Narben, and Tholoxe are Cities of Langue-
doc, and Bourdeawx is the chief Town in Gafcony:; the reft is eafie to be underftood,


LX XIAI.
French.


France a cing parts par neglect aflaillie,
Tunis, Argier , e{meus par Perfiens,
Leon, Seville Barcelonne faillie,
N’aura la chafle par les Venetiens.
Englifh.
France by a negleët (hall be affaulted on five fides,
Tunis, Argier foall be moved by the Perfians,


Leon, Sevil, Barcelone fball be miffed,
And not be purfued by the Venetians


ANNOT.


‘This Stanza is concerning as many Countreys, as there are Verfes: the firft is
France, which by negle& and carelefnefs of het in Inhabitants, fball be aff austed on


five [everal fides. The fecond is concerning Tums and Argier, Cities of Barbary,
which fball be fHirred and moved (1 fappofe) to rebel. Thethird regardech Leon,


Sevil, Barfelona, Cities in Spain, and the fourth the Venetians,
‘LXXIV.
French.


Apres feyourne vogueront en Empire,
Le grand fecours viendra vers Antzoche,
Le noir poil crefpe tendra fort a l'Empire,


Barbe d’Airain fe roftira en broche.
Englift.


Ith


of Michael Noftradamus,


| Englifh.
After a Stay,they fhall Sail towards an Empire,
The great fuccours fhall come towards Antioch,
The Black Hair Curled, fall aim much to the Empire;
The Brazen Beard fball be roafted on a Spit.


ANNOT.


There is no difficulty in this, but inthe laft Verfe, which I had rather leave tothe
jndgment of the judicious Reader, than to offer any thing that might make me ri-
diculous.


LX'XV.
French.


Le Tyran Sienne occupera Savone,

Le fort gaigné tiendra claffe Marine,

Les deux Armees par la marque d’ Ancone ,
Par effrayeur le chef fen examine:


Englith.


The Tyrant Sienna fhall occupy Savona ;,,
The Fort-being won, fball bold a Fleet, |
The-fivo ‘Armies fhall goin the'markof Ancona,
By fear the chief fhall be examined.

ANNOT.

For the explication of this Stanza, you muft underftand that Siennais a City in
italy, ow under the Dominion of the Duke of Tafcany, who hall occupy Savena,
a bel not under tHe Dominion of the Commion-wealth of Genoa the telt is plain
enough,


‘


LXX VI.
French.
D'un nom farouche tel proferé fera.
Que les trois Sœurs auront Fato le nom,
Puis grand peuple par langue & fat dira,
Plus que nul autre aura bruit & renom.
Englifh.
By a wild name one fball be called,
Sothat the three Sifters fball bave the name of Fato,
Afterwards a great people by Tongue and Deeds, foal fay,


He fall have fame and renown morethan anyother,


D > —


28


Pr drag M Dares 4
= A


The trie Prophecies


ANNOT.


By the three Sifters, he meaneth the three Deftinies, wéz. Clotho, Lachefis, and
Atrepes, which the Poets have fained to Spin every mans deftiny, which he calleth
here Fato, from the Latin word Fatem, Thereft may be interpreted as weil by the
Reader, as by my felf,


LXXVIT.
French.


Entre deux Mers dreflerä promontoire,
ui puis mourra par le mors du Cheval,
Le fier Neptune pliera Voile notre,


Par Calpre, & Claffe aupres de Rocheval.


Englifh.
Between two Seas [ball a Promontory be raifed,
By him, who [ball die by the biting of a Horfe,
The proud Neptune fhall fold the black Sail.
Through Calpre,and a fleet fball be near Rocheval.


ANNOT.


{could not find what he meaneth by Calpre, nor by Rocheval, which Ifuppofe to
be the proper names of places, when he faith, that proud Neptane fhall fold the black
Sail; he maketh an allufion to the Hiftory of Thefeus , Sonof c£geas King of
Athens , who being {ent with other Children into Candia, to-becomea prey to the
cMinotaure , his Father fent the Ship with black Sails , as in a cafe of Mourning,
charging Thefews, that if he came back again fate he fhould put on white Sails, but
coming in fight.of Athens, Thefens for joy forgot to put on the white Sails, fo char
his Father Ægess thinking he had mifcarried, caft himfelf from a Rock into the Sea,
fo that he faying chat Weptine fhall fold the black Sail, he meaneth, chat chere shall
be joyful news.


LX XVIII.
French.


D'un chef vieillard naiftre fens habeté,
Degenerant par {cavoir & par Armes,

Le chef de France par fa Sœur redouté,
Champs divifez concedez aux Genfdarmes.


Englifh,
An old head fall beget an Idiot,
Who shall degenerate in Learning and in Arms,
The head of France shall befeared by bis fifter,
The fields {hall be divided,and granted to the Troopers.


ANNOT:


Of Michael Noftradamus.


| ANNOT.
The fenfe of this is fo plain;that any body may make hisinterpretation ofit.
t LXXIX,

French.


Bazas, L’Eftoure, Condom, Anch Agine,
Efmeus par Loix , querelle & Monopole;
Car Bourd, Tholofe, Bay, mettra.en ruine,
Renouveler voulant leur Tauropole,


Englifh.
Bazas, l'Eftoure, Condom, Auch, Agen;
| Being moved by Laws, quarrels and Monopoly,
For they hall put to ruine Bordeaux, Tholofe Bayonne,


| Going about to renew their Tauropole,


| ANNOT.


This Key of the fenfe of this Stanza lieth in the laft word Täwropole , which is
| compounded of the Latin word Ta#rus a Bull, andof the Greek word roaiw, thatis,
| to fell ; fo that the meaning of itis, that thofe Citiesmentioned fhall rife in Rebel-
| lion againft che Momopolites; and thofe that fhall lay a Tax upon Catrle, -
|


LXXX.
| French.
, | De la fixiefme claire fplendeur Celefte,
t 4 Viendra Tonnerre fi fort en la Bourgongne ,
- Puis naïftra monftre de trelhideufe befte,
i | | Mars, Avril; May Jnin grand charpin & rogne; .
À

| | Englifh.
| From the fixth bright Caleftial fplendour, |

Shall cou. very:great LightniaganBuréundy:: .

After that fball be born a Monfter of a moftsbideous beaSt,
In March, April,May, June fhallbe great quarelling and muttering,

: ANNOT,


The firft Verfeis of amoft dark and abftrufe fenfe', in-which Éconfefs my igno-
* sance, unlefs he meant from che fixth:of the feven Planets, che reft is plain enough,


| French,


M ml Beasts
D An mm


C2


An | The true Prophecies
Pc aE ks
French.


D’humain troupeau neuf feront mis a part, .
De Jugement & Confeil feparez,

Leur fort fera divifé en depart,

Kappa, Theta, Lambda, mors, bannis egarez.


Englifh.
Nine fball be fet afide from the human flock ,
Being divided in Fudgement and Counfel,
Their fortune [hall be to be divided ,
Kappa, Theta, Lambda, dead, banifbed, [catteredl.


' ANN OT. —
There is nothing difficult here, but what he meaneth by Kappa, Theta, Lambds,
which are three Letters of che Greek 4/phaber,
LXXX II.
French.


Quand les Colomnes de Bois grande tremblée,
. D’Aufter conduite,couverte de rubriche,

Tant videra dehors grande aflemblee,

Tremble Vienne, & le Pais d’Aufiriche.


| Englifh. |
When the wooden Columns fhall be much foaken, |
By Aufter, and covered with rubbifh, |
Then [ball go out a great affembly,
And Vienne,and the Land of Auftria fball tremble.


ANNOT.
After, in Latin isthe Southwind, Véennaisthe chief City of Asfris, belonging
to the Emperour of Germany. : *
LXXXIII
French.


Lb’ Agent eftrange divifera butins,

Saturne & Mars fon regard furiéux,
Horrible, eftrange, aux Thofcans & Latins,
Grees qui feront a frapper curiux.


Enolithi


ih


Of Michael Noftédinus. hues 49


Enelith, ao
The firanger Agent fall divide booties,
Saturn iz Mars fhall bave his afpett furious,
Horrid, and ftrange to the Vulcans and Latines
The Grecians fhall be curious to firike.


ANNOT.


By the Tu[cans are meant. the people under the Dominion of the Duke of F4
‘rence 5 and by the Latines,thofe under the Pope.


LXXXIV.

French.
Lune obfcurie aux profondes tenebres,
Son frere patie de couleur ferrugine, j


Le grand caché long temps foubs les tenebres,
Tiedera Fer dans la Pluie fanguine. —


Ençlifh.
The Moon fhall be darkned in the deepeft darknefs,
Her brother fhall pafs being of a ferrugineous colour,
The great one long hidden under darkuefs, |
Shall make bis ron lukewarm in the bhoody Rain.


ANNOT.


This fignifieth, that when the Moon fhall be totally Eclipfed in the night, and
that allthe next day her Brother the Sun fhall be feen ofa fertugineous, (tharis.


Iron like colour) then fhall a great one that was hidden arife, and do great feats «
Arms with the death of many men. | À


LXXXV,

French.
Par la refponce de Dame Roy troublé,
Ambafladeurs mefpriferont leur vie,
Le grand fes Freres contrefera doublé,
Par deux mourront, hain, ire, & envie.


Englith.


A King fhall be troubled by. the anfwer of a Lady,
Embaf[adors {ball defpife their lives,


The great one being double in mind fhall counterfeit his Brothers,
They foall die by smo,-anger, batred and envy.


H ANNOT,


T be true Prophecies


ANNOT.


There is nothing difficult here,but che laft Verfe, which yet will be plain enough,
if you make chefe three words anger, hatred, and envy not co-herent with chefore- |
moft, but {ubfifting by themfelves ; as if one fhould fay,there fhall be anger, hatred, |
and envy. |

|


LXXXVI.
French.


La grande Roine quand fe verra vaincue,
Fera exces.de Mafculin courage,

Sur Je Cheval, Fleuve pañlera nue,

Suite par Fer, a Foy fera outrage, ,


Englifh.
When the great Queen fball fee her felf vanquifbed,


She shall do a deed of a Mafculine courage,
Upon a Horfe, she shall pafs, over the River naked,
Followed by Iron, fbe shall do wrong to her Faith.


ANNOT.


It is (ome great Queen;who feeing her felf vanquifhed, fhall fwim naked on Horfe-
back over a River, being followed by thofe that would: have either killed or taken
her, and after that {hall forfeic her faith , but whether it be to her Husband, Friends,


or Relations, is not exprefled.
LXXXVITI.
French.


Ennofigee feu du Centre de Terre

Fera trembler autour de Cite Neuve,

Deux grands Rochers long temps feront la guerre,
Puis Arethufe rougira nouveau fleuve.


Englifh.
Ennofigee, fire of the Center of the Earth,


Shall make quake about the New City,
Two great Rocks fhall a great while War one againft the other,


After that,Arethula fball colour red a new River.


ANNOT.


nnoficee isa Greek word evectyues | in Latin Terre quaffator » from tvia movee,

and yate Terra,and is an Epithete of Neptune. Themeaning then of this Stanza is,
that the Sea fhall make the Earthquake, and fire come out of the Earth about Na-
ples, which in Greeks is called Neapolis, that is, a New City. |
| Arethufa


eo


i
1!
1
|
|
|
|
|
|


Se EEE


ns


of Michael Noftridamus. - HY


Arethufais a Fountain in Sicily, which a little way from its


Atath Spring, groweth into
a River, The ref is left to the interpretation of the Reader,


LXXXVITI,
French.


Le Divin mal furprendra üh grand Prince
’


‘ À "À )
Un peu devant aura femme élpoulce,


Son appuy ‘& credit a un COUP viendra mince,
Conleil mourra pour la vefte rafée.


Englifh.


[he Divine ficknefs ball furprife a great Prince,

A little while after he hath married 4 Wonlan,

His (upport and credit ball at once become {lender
J j


ee
Cou cil [ball die for the haven head. 3


ANNOT.


By the Divine ficknefs’, he meaneth the fal/


ling ficknefs, cailed by the Greeks
Epilepfia, and by the Latines Morbus Sacer. By the fhaven head, he meaneth fome


Eccletiaftical perfon of the Romifh Religion ; the confiruction of the whole is ealic, 7
Fat} Chie. [TT phon 21930 7109390 LH Sich re fi PTS
LXXXIX,


French,

« Tous ceux d’Illerde feront dans la 1 fofelle
Mettanta mort tous ceux de Loire & Seine 4
Lecourle Marin viendra pres d'Hantevelle,
Quand Efpagnols ouvrira toute veine.


Englifh.
All thofe of Wesde/ball be in the Molel,
Putting to death all thofe of Loire and Seine :
The Sea courfe fhall come near H autevelle,
When the Spaniard bal] oven all veins,


. ANNOT. ,
By Iderdehe meaneth the City of/'Iflein Flanders, the eMofel is a River thaer


in
sal rule


neth through Lorrain , the Loire and Seiné are two other Rivers of Frasce, the firft


of which paffeth at orleans and the fecond at Paris 3 the two laft Verfés are too hard
for me to interpret;


French,


SES


=.


ee


f
À
fai
Î
|
|!
F


T he true Prophecies


XC;
French.


Bourdeanx, Poitiers , au fon de la Campane,
A grande clafle ira jufqu’ a Langon,

Contre Gaulois fera leur Tramontane,
Quand Monftre hideux naiftra pres de Orgon.


Englifh.


Bourdeaux, Poitiers, at the found of the Bell,
With a great Navy fhall go as far as Langon,
Againft the French fball their Tramontane be,
When an bideous Monfter fball-be born near Orgon.


ANN OT.
Tramontana,in Italian, is the North-wind, Orgox, is the name ofa Town in Gal-
cony, the reft of the conftruétion isnot difficule:


X CT.
French.
Les dieux feront aux humains apparence,
Ce quils feront auteurs de grand conflit,
Avant ciel veu ferain, Efpée.&, Lance,
Que vers main gauche fera plus grande affliction,


: Englith.
The Gods shall make it appear to Man-kind, ‘


That they are the Authors of a great War;
For'the Heaven that was Serene, shall shew Sword and Lance,
Signifying, that on the left hand the affliction shall be greater.


ANNOT.


He foretelleth.here fome Prodigies that fhall be inthe Air, as Swords and Lances
after fais weather, which fhall be forerunners of great Wars, and chiefly in thofe
Countries that fhall be fituatéd on the left hand of thefe Prodigies, 4


Soubs un la paix, par tout fera clemence,
Mais non long temps, pille & rebellion,
Par refus Ville, Terre & Mer entamée,
Morts & Captifs le liers d’un Million.


bh,


_ —— 7


of Michael Noftradamus.


8 Englifh.
Under one ball be peace, and every where clemency,
But not a long while, then foadl be plundeting and Rebellion,
By a denyal fball Town, Landmand Sea be afjaulted, ’
There foall be Dead and taken Prifoners the third part of a Mills
_ ANNOT. |
Thewordsand fenfeare plain.
XCIII.
French.
Terre Italique des Mons tremblera,
Lion & Coq non trop confederez,


en lieu & peur l’un l’autrefaidera,
Seul Catulon & Celtes moderez.


Englifh. |
The Italian Land of the Mountains fhall tremble,
The Lion and the Cock fhall not agree very well together,
Shall for fear help one another,
The only Catulon and Celtes shall be moderate.
| PORTO AR ne nn |
By the Zion he @aderflandeth the Englifb, becaufe of their Aims, and by the


Cack the French, called in Latin Gaus, which fignifiech aCock; Catulop is the
Spaniards, as if he fhould fay Caftilian 5 the Celtes are the Dutch of the Low-Coun-


tries,


XGLY.«

French.
Au Port Selyn le Tyrant mis a Mort,
La liberté non pourtant recouvrce,
Le nouveau Mars par vindict & remort,
Dame par force de frayeur honoïrée.

Englih.
In the Port Selyn the Tyrant [ball be put to death,
And jet the liberty [ball not be recovered,


The new Mars by vengeance and reutor fe,
Lady by excefs of fear bonoured.


AN NOT


x


T hetrue Prophecies


ANNOT.
By the Port Selyn,is meant Conftantinople, becaufe of feveral Emperours of the


54


Turks that have been of chat name , therefore the intention of this Prophecy, is,thac
one of the Turkih Eniperours fhall be put to death ac Conftamtinople , which for ail


chat fhall not recover her liberty. The wars, be like he is fo called, that fhall
put him to death by vengeance mithowt remote. T he Lady Ly exces of fear honoured,


the Turks, who hath hitherto made her felf very confiderableby a great party which
thé hath raifed againft her Son, to prevent him from putting his Brothers to death, a
is ufually praétifed in chat Court.

X-CV.


LT


Î
Î VeHCH. *


Devant Mouftier trouvé enfant belion,
fang de Moi..e & veruftique,


Sonbruit per Secte,Langue,ëc putfflance Son,


VOL) iC lsu
Qu'on dira fort efleve le V optique.
Englifh.

Before the Minfter [ball one twin be found,
From Heroik blood, of à Monk and Ancient,
His fame by Set, Tongue, and Power fball be founded ,
So ‘that they [ball {ay the Vopisk is much raifed.

J J


ANNOT.

The meaning of the wholeis, that a Twin {hall be found before à Church, be-
gotby a Monk, of Illuftrious.and Ancient Family, and thal become very famous,
Se that they fhall [ay the. Vopisk is much raifed. Vopifcus in Latin, is, that one of the
Twins , which cometh to perfect Birth, ,

X CVI.
French
Celuy qu'aura la charge de deftruire,
Temples & Sectes changez par fantailie ,
Plus aux Rochers,qu’aux vivans viendra nuire,
Par langue ornée d'oreille rafale.
Englifh.
He that fhall bave charge to deStroy ,
Churches and Setts, changed by fancy ;
Shall do more harm to the Rocks than to the living,


By a finooth tongue filling up the Ears,


may be applied to the prefent great Sultanefs, Mother to this prefent Emperour of


8 ©
im


of Michael Noftradamus,
ANNOT.


x. | As the words of this Stanza are pl@n, fo is the fenfe moft obfcure,and fo to be lefe
| 4 to the Readers private Judgement, ù Wee act


| | XCWIL

French.
Ce que fer, flamme, na fceu parachever,
La douce langue au conféil viendra faire,
Pat relpos, fonge le Roy fera refuer,
| Plus l’Ennemy en feu fang militaire.


Engli(h.
What neither Iron nor Fire could coupafs,
Shall be done by a fimooth tongue in the Councel,
Tn fleep a dream shall make the King to think.
The more the Exemy in fire and Military blood.


ANNOT.
The fenfe of this is plain;though the words be fomthing untowardly expreffed.


| XCVIIL
French.
Le Chef qu’aura conduit peuple infiny ,
Loin de {on Ciel : de mœurs & langue eftrange,
| Cinq mille en Crete & Theffalie finy,
od p> Le Chef fuiant-fauvé en la: Marine Grange.


Englifh,
The Captain that shall lead an infinite deal of people


| Far from their Conntrey. to one of firange"manners and Language,
| Five thoufand in .Candia avd Theflalia finished,
| … The Head running away, shall be fafe in 2 Barn by the Sea.


| ANNOT, |

| Iris fome great Commander that fhall lead a multitude of people into.a ftrange
4 Cotntrey, far from their own ; fuppofe Candia and Theffalis, where the faid Com-
| mander fhall be compelled to runaway, and to fave himfelfin a Barn by the Sea fide,
Il _X CIX,

| Ne French.

| Le grand Monarque qui fera compagnie,

EL Avec deux Rois unis par amitié,

| O quel foufpir fera Ja grand mefynie,

| Enfans, Narbonne alentour; quel pitié !


À


Englih.


5


L


The true Propbecies


Englifh
The great Monarch fhall keep company,
With two Kings united in friend fhip ;
O what fights fhall be made by their followers! *
Children, O what pity fball be about Narbon.


ANN OT.


This Stanza requiteth no interpretation more, than what every one will be pieaied
to give himfelf.


C.
French.
Long temps au Ciel fera veu gris Oifeau,
Aupres de Dole & de Tufcane Ferre,
Tenant au Bec un verdoiant rameau,
Mourra toft Grand, & finira,la Guerre.


Englifh.
A great while fhall be feen in the Air a gray Bird, :
Near Dola and the Tufcan Land,


Holding in his Bill a green bough;
Then fhall a great one die, and the War have and end.


ANNOT.


Dolaisa Town in Bargundy The Tufcap Land,’ is that which belongeth to the
Duke of Florence.


€
c
0.


S


RES
Se Fe


Le
x


PILE
à WA VAR ath


) WAY PE a TE ie
le p= ZEUS
gw, ©. =


THE


PROPHECIES
Michael Noftradamus.


os


GENTOURY IL


I;
French.


2969 Ers Aquitaine par infults Britanniques ,
VAS De par eux mefmes grandes incurfions,
AS AS) Pluyes, Gelees, feront terrors intques,
NS O2 Port Selyn fortes fera invalions,


2
S


Towards Gafcony by Englifh affaults,

By the fame [ball be made great incur fions,

Rains, Frofts, fball marre the ground,

Port Selyn fball make férongdnvafrons.

wv, Nella nana RER oe ae Mo a

A Lx Prophecies are contained in this Stanza , the firft chat che Eg/fb (hall
make an incurfion in Gafcony; thefecong, that there fhall bea great dearth

by Rains and Frofts ; the chird, chat the Turks fall make great Incurfion.


French,


T be true Prophecies
Nb
French.


La tefte glue fera la tefte blanche,

Autant de mal que France a fait leur bien,
Mort a |’ Authene, grand pendu fus Ja branche,
Quand prins des fiens, le Roy dira combien.


Englih.
The Glue-héad foall do the white head
As much barm,as France hath done it good,


Dead atthe Sails yard, a great one hang "don a Tree,
When a King taken by his own, foall Jay, how much 2


ANNO,


Idid never find that word" of Glue-head before in ahy Author, and I believe if
Gotgrave were alive again, it would puzzle him to give the interpretation thereof,

The third and fourth fignifie, that one fhall be hanged dh the Sails-yard, and an-
otheron.a Tree,when a King fhall be taken by his own Men,and fhallfay how much?
that is,how much money fhall | give you to fet me free.


I I I.
French:


Par Ja chaleur Solaire fur Ja Mer,


De Negrepont, les Poiffons demy cuits,
Les Habitans les viendront entamer,


Quand Khode & Genes leur faudra le Bifcuit.


Englifh;
By the beat of the Sun upon the Sea
Of Negrepont, the Fifbes fball be balf broiled,
The Inhabitants shall come to cut them #p,
When Rhodes and Genoa shall want Bifcake.


ANNOT.


… Negrepont isan Ifland of the Archipelaconeat Morea,anciently called E¢bea, Rhodes
is another Hland, and Gemoaa City in italy, by che Sea fide, The reft is plain,


à IV
French.
Deptis Monac jufqu’aupres de Sicile,
Toute la plage demoura defolée,
Ul ny aura F auxbourgs,Cité, ne Ville,
Que par Barbares pillée foit & volée.
Englifh;


de


fh,


Of Michael Noftradamus,


Enghih:
From Monaco as far as Sicily,
All the Sea coast shall be left defolate ‘
There shall not be Suburbé, Cities, nor Towns,
Vhich shall not be pillaged and plundred by Barbarians.


ANNOT.


Monaco is a Town feated by the Sea-fide in Italy | between Provence and Genoa.
This Prophecy hath been once already fulfilled , when the famous Pyrate Barbarofla,
being fent by the grand Seignor, tohelp the French King againft the Emperour
Charles the V. in his return home, plundered all that Coaft , and carried away an in-
numerable multitude of people into flavery.


V.
French.
Quand dans Poiffon, Fer &:Lettre enfermée,
Hors lortira qui puis fera la, Guerre,


Aura par Mer {a clafle bien ramée,
Aparoiflant pres de Latine Terre.


Englith:
When in a Fifb, Iron and a Letter {ball be fbut up,
He fhall go out. that afterwards fall make War,
He fball bave bis Fleet by Sea well provided,
Appearing by the Roman Lad,


ANNOT.
‘The wordsand the fenfe are plain,


VE.
: French.
Aupres des Portes & dedans deux Citez,
Seront deux Fleaux & onc 8 aperceu un tel.
Faim,dedans Pefte, de Fer hors gens boutez.
Criéf fecours au vrand Died immortel!


Englifh. :
Near the Gates and within two Cities,
Shall be two Scourges, I never faw the like.
Famine, within Plague, people thruft out by the Sword,
Shall cry for help to the great God immortal.


I 3 ANNOT.


60 | The true Prophecies


ANNOT.
This needeth no Interpretation,


vit, |
French.

Entre plufieurs aux Ifles deportez,

L’un eftre nay a deux dens en la gorge,

Mourront de Faim, les Arbres esbroutez,

Pour eux neuf Roy, nouvel Edi& leur forge.


Englifb.
Among many that fball be tranfported into the Iflands,


fl One fball be born with two Teeth in his mouth,
qu They fhall die of hunger, the Trees fhall be eaten,
ial bey foall have a new King who fhall make new Laws for them.


AN NOT.
This is fo plain, that ic needeth no explication,


VIII.
French.


Temples Sacrez, prime facon Romaine,
Rejetteront les goftes Fondemens,

Prenant leurs Loix premieres & humaines,
Chaflants non tout, de Saints le cultement.


Englifh.


Churches Confecrated, and the ancient Roman way,
Shall rejeët the, tottering Foundations,

Sticking to their firft humane Laws,
Expelling but not altogether the wor fbipping of Saints.


ANNOT,


This Prophecy, is concerning the beginning of the Reformed Religion, whenthe
Rowsan Church rejected ic , yet neverthelefs , for fhame they left off many of their I
fopperies , for ever fince they never appeared fo great Worfhippers of Saints as |
before.


French,


of Michael Noftradamus.


| ; IX.
| French.


Puis il cherra en foif fi fanguinaire, |
Pour luy grand peuple fans Foy & Loy mourra,
Tue. par un beaucoup plus debonaire.


| | Neuf ans le Regne le maigre en paix tiendra,


Englifh.
| Nine years fball the lean one keep the Kingdom in Peace,
| Then be will fall into fuch a bloody thirf,
| © That a great people fball die without Faith or Law,
He fhall be killed by one milder than himfelf.


ANNOT. |
It isaleam man that fhall keep in Peace the Kingdom, for the fpace of nine years,
and then fhall become cruel ; fo that he fhall put to death many people without Law,
or regard of his promife, :


X?
French.
Avant long temps le tout fera rangé, | 114
Nous efperons un fiecle bien feneftre, LE:


L’Eftat des mafques & des feuls bien change,
Peu trouveront qui a fon rang vueille eftre.


Englifh.
Before it be long, all fhall be fet in order,
We look for a finifter Age, À
The ffate of the Vifarde and of the alone fball be changed,
They shall find few that will keep their ranks,
RIO Se re: i
All the difficulty of this confifteth in what he meaneth by the 7i/ardand alone, 1.
for my part, I believe he aimeth at the Popifh Clergy and Monks ; the firft by rea- a


i fon of their Hypocrify, the other by reafon of their folicarinefs, The reft is plain. i

ae | ypocrily, y

s | XI. a
| French. 1
| Le prochain, fils de l’Aifnier parviendra, i

he | Tant efleve jufqu’au au Regne des fors, À


Son afpre gloire un chafun la craindra, ||
Mais les enfans du Regne jettez hors. LE.
Englifhe


ee NE TEND APIS ECT PIR


_ etn wy + eet etes
RIOT STIR TIN AIE OR EOI Te


T he true Prophecies


Enphfh.
The eldeft Son of V Aulnier shall profper,


Being raifed-to thedegree of the great ones,
Every one shall fear. bis high glory,
But bis children shall be caft out.
ANNOT.

Thisisan Horofcope, for the Interpretation of which we are beholding to, Mr.
Mannefsier of Amiens , who faith chat the Father of the Lords 1 Az/nters writ to
Waftradamus his friend,to know his childrens fortune,who fent him thofe fout Vertes
for an an{wer, by which it is evident that the eldeft fhould be an eminent Man, as ic
fell out, being one of the chiefeft men in the Province of Azjos,and one of the chiefeft
inftruments to make Peace between Louis the XIII. and his Mother Mary of Medicus,
after the Battle of Pont de Ce.

The fourth Verle faith , chat (ome of his)-other Children fhould be expelled the
Kingdom, as ic happened by reafon of a falfe report raifed againft one of them,which
compelled him to retire into: Portugal till che truth was known , as it was afterwards
totis great repute and honour,


XL.
French.
Yeux clos ouverts d’antique faitailie,
L’habit des feuls fera, mis a neant,
Le grand Monarque chaftiera leur frenelie,


Vo
x
,


Ravir des Temples le Threfor par devant.


Englifh.


Eyes font, fhall be open by an antick fancy,
The cloths of the alone fball be brought to nothing.
rx}


Lhe great Monarck fhall punifb their frenzy ,
For baving ravifbed the Treafure of the Temple before.


ANNOT,


I can faften this upon no body, but upon fome Monks, which are called here The
aléne,becanfe of their folitary life; who fhall be punifhed by a King,for having robbed
the Church,


NE
Freach.


Le corps fans ame plus n’eftre en facrifice,
Jour de la mort mis en Nativite.


L’Efprit Divin fera l’ame fœlice,
Voiant le Verbe en fon Eternite.


nn


of Michael Noftradamus,


| Englifh.
The body without the foul foall be no more admitted in Sacrifice
The day of the death’ [ball be put for the Birth-day,


The Divine Spirit fball make the Soul happy
By feeing the Word in its Eternity.
ANNOT.
". The firft Verfe feemed to Prophecy the Reformation of Religion,and the change
of opinion concerning the Lords Supper, which fhould be no more à Sacrifice (as the
Roman Church callech the Mas) ot a body without a foul, But only a commemora-
tion of the Lords death, as the fecond Verfe confirmeth, faying, The day of the death


fall be put for the Birth-day, (eeing,that by the commemoration of chat death, we are


renewed intoa newnefs of life ; and asic were born agaim The laft two Verfe are
eafie,


?


XIV.
French.
A Tours, Gien, Gargean, feront yeux penetrans,
Defcouvriront le long de lagrande Sereine, +
Elle & fa Suite au Port feront entrans,
Combat pouflez Puiflance Souveraine.


Englifh. —
At Tours, Gien, Gergeat, hall be piercing eyes,
Who fhall difcover along the great Syren, _
She and her Attendans fball enter into the Port,
By a fight fhall bethruft ont the Soveraign Power.


AN NOT.


Towrs,Glen, and Gergeas Cities upon the River of Lire , which js called here
the great Syren, becaufe of thelengch of its courfe, the meaning then is, chat chofe
Cities fhall be watchful, and ftand upon their guard , and fhall fight againft a King,


which if ic hathalready cometo pafsin the Civil Wars, or fhall happen hereafter, I
cannot affirm.


XV.
French.
Un peu devant Monarque trucidé,
Caftor, Pollux, en nef aftre crinite ,
L Airain public, par Terre & Mer vaidé,
Pifa, Aft, Ferrare, Turin: Terre interdite:


Englifh;


Sno perenr ere Sree


e Prophecies


The tru


| Englifh,

A little before a Monarch be killed,

Caitor, and Pollux fhall appear and à Comet in the Ship;
The publick brafs, by Land and Sea fhall be emptyed,
Pila, Aft, Ferrare, Turin,Countreys forbidden.


ANNOT.


The meaning of this is, that a little before a Monarck be killed,Cafor and Pollux
wo Meteores fo called, as alfo a Comet in that conftellation of the Heavens, called
the Ship of Argos, and the Pablick Brafs ; that is,the Canons by Land and Sea fhall be
emptied, and thefe Towns of italy, viz. Pifa, Aft, Ferrare, Turin, hall be excom=
municated by the Pope.


XVI,

French.
Naples, Palerme, Sicile, Syracufe,
Nouveaux Tyrants,fulgures,feu Coeleftes,
Force de Londres, Gand, Bruxelles & Sufe,
Grand Hecatombe, Triomphe faire Feftes.


Englifh.
Naples, Palermo, Sicily, Syracufa,
New 1 yranes, Lightnings, Célefiial fires,
Army from London,Ghent,Bruxelles, and Sule,
A great Hecatomb, Trinmphs, and Feafts.


ANNOT,


There is nothing difficult but the word Hecatomb » whichis à Greek word figni-
fying a Sacrifice of an hundred Oxen,
bg

XVII


French.
Le Camp du Temple dela Vierge Veftale,
Non efloigné d’ Ethene & Monts Pyrenées,
Le grand conduit eft chaffe dans la Male,
North gettez Fleuves, & Vignes maftinces.


Englifh.


The Camp of the Temple: of the Veftal Virgin ,

Not far from Ethene and the Pyrenean Mountains,
The great Conduit is driven in the Clock-bag,
Rivers overflown in the North,and the Vines fpoiled.


ANNOT.


This is fo plain, that it needeth no Interpretation,


of Michael Noftradamus. | 6s


ANNOT.


There is fo many faults in the impreffion of this, and fo hard to be rectified, that I
had rather leave it.to the liberty of the judicious Reader ; then make my felf ridicu-
Jousin not giving him fatisfaétion,


X VI IL
French.
Nouvelle Pluie, fubite, impetueufe,
Empefchera fubit deux excercices,
Pierre, Ciel, Feux, faire Ja Mer pierreufe,
La mort de fept, Terre & Marin fubites.
Englifh.
A new Rain, fudden, impetuous,
Shall fuddenly hinder two Armies:


Stone, Heaven, fire, (ball make the Sea fiony,
The death of feven foall be fudden upon Land and Sea.


ANN OT.


The firft two Verfes fignifie, that afuddenand impetuous Rain fhall hinder two
Armies from fighting. Rt

The two laft Verfes foretell feveral Prodigies, the which happening , feven pet-
fons (hall {uddenly die upon the Sea and Land:


XX
French.


Nouveaux venus, lieu bafty fans defence,
Occuper piace pour lors inhabitable,
Prez, Mailons,Champs, Villes prendre a plai{


=
a Dic ANCES


Faim, Pefte, Guerre, arpent long Jabourable:
Enelifh.
New comers [hall Luild a place without fence; ©
And foall occupy a place that was not thon habitable,
They fhall at their pleafure take Fields Hou es and Towns.


There [hall be Famine, Plegue, War, and à long avable field,


ANNOT.


Ase EE “:
è


Re
à
> =


SR — — ——


The ir


ne Prophecies


XX.
French.
Freres & Sœurs en divers lieux captifs,
Se trouveront pafier pres du Monarque ,
Les contempler fes deux yeux ententifs,
Des plaifant vont, Menton,Front, Nez les marques.


Englifh.
Brothers and Sifters fball be made flaves in divers places, im
And fhall pafs before the Monarck ,


Who fball look upon them with attentive eyes,


They fhall goin beavine/s,witnefs their Chin,Forebead and Nofe.


This is obvious to the meaneft capacity.


XXI,
French.
L’Ambafladeur envoie par Biremes,
A my chemin incogneus repoulfez,
De Sel renfort viendront quatre triremes,
Cordes & Chaines en Negrepont trouflez.
Englith.
The Embafjadour that was fent in Biremes ,
In the midleway (ball be repulfed by unknown Men,


From the Salt to bis fuccours fhall come four triremes,


Ropes and Chains fall be carried toN egrepont.
ANNOT.


Biremse is a Galley that hath two ranges of Oares, Trireme, is one that hath three
ranges, The meaning then of thisis, that an Embaffadour fhall be fent ina Galley
with two ranges of Oares, and that he fhall be met in his way by unknown men, thac
is, Pyrates; there fhall come to his fuccours from the Salt, that is, from the French
four Triremes, that is four Galleys, every one having three ranges of Oares, but they
fall all be carried to Negrepont, an Ifland belonging to the Turk.


XXII.
French.
Le Camp Afcop d'Europe partira,


À


ed


Sadioignant proche de I’Ifle fubmergée,
2’ Arton claffe Phalange partira,
Nombril du Monde plus grand voix fubrogée.


i?


be)
Le
.


{


F
#3


Of Michael Noftradlamus.


Englifh.
The Camp Alfcop fball go from Europe,
And foall come near the drowned Ifland; ce
From Axton fball go an Army by Sea and Land,*
By the Navel of the Worlda greater vice fball be fubfitnted.


ANNOT.


The Author hath darkned this Stanza with fo many barbarous words, as Camp
A[cop, drowned Ifland, Darton, Navel of the World, that it is very like either he did
not underftand himfelf, or would not be underftood by others.


X XIII,
French.


Palaces Oifeaux, par Oifeau dechaifé,
Bien toft apres le Prince parvenu,
Combien qu’hors Fleuve ennemy repoulfé;


Dehors faily, trait d’Oifeau fouftenu;


‘ Englifh.
Palais Birds, driven amay by a Bird;

Soon after that, the Prince is come to bis own:
Although the enemy be\driven beyond the River, ;
He fball be feafed upon without by the trick of the Bird,


AN NOT,


The meaning of this is , chat many Courtiers (called here Palate Birds)’ {hall be
juftled out of favour by another principal Bird; that is a grec Courtier, 3§ foon as the
- Prince fhall come to hisown.
The two laft Verfes feem to foretell that the faid principal Courtiet fhall feize
upon the Prince, notwithftanding chat fome fuccour fhall come to his help, which
fhall be beaten back beyond the River.


ly XXIV,
he | | French.
md À ee 1 OM RE
ty | … Beftés farouches de faim Fleuvés tianét,:


Plus part du Champ encontre Ifter fera;
En Cage de Fer le grand fera traifner.
Quand rien enfant de Gerwiain n’obferverx.


Theirue Prophecies


Englifh.
Wild Beafts for hunger fhall {wim over Rivers,
Moft part of the feeld fball be near Mer,


Into an Iron Cage be fhall caufe the great one to be draw”


When the Child of German fhall obferve nothing.


AN NOT.


Ifterisa River, Germap is a proper name of fome confiderable perfon, whofe Son
fhall not obferve or'take notice when that eminent perfon mentioned here, shall be
drawn into an Iron Cage, |

X X V.
French.
e


Loire, Saone, Rbofne, Gar, a Mort outrages


Enolifh.


The Garrifon of ftrangets hall betray the Fort,

Under the hope and fbadow of a higher Match,

The Garrifon {ball be deceived, and the Fort taken in the crowd,
Loire, Saone, Rhofne, ‘Gar, ball do harm to Death.


ANN OT.


There is nodifficulty but in the laft Verfe, where you. muft obferve that. Laire,
Saoné, Rho{we, and Garden, which for the Verfes fake is contraéted into Gars are


Rivers of France , which are threatned here of overflowing, and caufing the,death of
many people,


XXVI.
French.
Pour la faveur que la Cité fera,
Au grand quitoft perdra Camp de Bataille,
Le fang d’ans Pawle Thefin verfera,
De fang feux, morsinoyez de coup de taille.


Englifh.


Becanfe of the favour the City shall shew,
To the great one,who foon after [ball loofe the Battle,
The Thefin shall pour blood.into the Pau,
Of blood, fire, dead, drowned, by Edgeling,


of Michaël Noftradamus, Go
ANNOT,


This is plain, if you obferve that the Thfrisa River of Italy, and the Paw another,
into the which the Thefr runneth,


XX VII
French.
Le Divin Verbe fera du ciel frappé
Qui ne pourra proceder plus avant,


Du reflerrant le fecret eftoupe
Quon marchera par deflus & devant.


Englith. :
The Divire Word fhall be Sruck by Heaven,
So that he fball proceed no further,


The fecret of the clofe Keeper, fball be fo clofed up,
That people fhall tread upon, and before it.


ANN OT,


By the Divine Word, you muft not underftand the fécond perfon of the Trinity,
or elfe all this Stanza would be abfurds but yon muft underftand a Divine or Theo-
logian, called in Greek 8207, which fignifieth a Divine Word, The meaning
therefore of it, is, chat a 7 heologian fhall be truck by Heaven; that is, {hall die, fo thac
he fhall proceed no furtherin his work ; which I fuppofe by the two laft Verfes, was
the Philofophers ftone ;.for in the two laft Verfes he faith, that the fecres of the
clofe Keeper, that is, of him that wrought fecretly, fhall (by his death ) be fo
Clofed up, that people fhall tread on, ana before it,


XV TE

Eréuch.
Le penultiefme de Surnom de Prophete,
Prendra Diane pour fonjour & repos
Loing vagnefa ‘par Frenetique'telte,
Et delivrant un grand peuple d'Impos.


LE | Englhih po:
The laft, but one of the Sivname of the Prophet;
Shall take Diana for his day and bis reff,
He fhall wander far by reafon of his Frenetick bead,
Delivering a great people from impofitions.
ANNO,


|


This is concerning à falfe Prophet, which is called here the lait but Oe of chat
Surname, who hall make Diane (that is Monday which is dedicated to Diana ) his
Sunday gr Sabbath. day, and fo wandring'torand froin aFremetics mannes, fhall per-


Swademany people to pay no Taxes,


Thé true Prophecies
X XIX.
French.


L’ Oriental fortira de fon Siege,

Pafler les Monts Apennins, voir la Gaule
Tranfpaffera le Ciel, les Eaux & Neige,
Et un chacun frappera de fa Gaule.


Englifh.
The Oriental fhall come out of his Seat,
Shall pafs over the Apennine Mountairs, and fee France,


Shall go over the Air, the Waters and Snow,


And fall ftrike every one with bis Rod.


ANN OT.


It is an Eaftern Prince, who leaving his Countrey, fhall come over the Apennine
Mountains, which divide stay, and come as far as France, deftroying all before


him.
XXX.
French,
Un qui les Dieux d’Annibal infernaux,
Fera renaiftre, effrayeur des Humains,


Onc plus d'horreur ne plus dire Journaux,
Qu’avint viendra par Babel aux Romains.


Englith.
One that fhall caufe the infernal Gods of Hannibal
To live again, the terror of Mankind,
There was never more borror, not to fay ill dayes,


Did happen, cr fball,to the Romans by Babel.


ANNOT.


This Prophecy was concerning Charles V. Emperour, who facked Royse, took
the Pope Prifoner, and filled it with more horror and flaughter than Hannibal did,


though a Heathen,
X XXI1
French.


En Campanie le Caffilin fera tant,
Quon ne verra que d'Aux les Champs couvers,
Devant apres la pluye de long temps, |


Hormis les arbres rien lon-verra de verts.
French!


of Michael. Noftradamus.


| Englifh. | ;
In Campania the Caffilin fhall fo behave bimfelf,
That nothing fhall be feen but Fields covered with Garlick,
Before, and after it, foall not Rain for a good while,
Except the Trees, no Green hall be feen.


ANN OT.


This hath a dependance upon the foregoing Stanza ; for Campania is the Province
wherein Rome is feated, and Cafsilin, called Campania di Roma, is the fame as Ca-
ffillan, becaufe Charles V. was not only Emperour, but alfo King of Spain, the
chief Province of which is Caftiléa: therefore the Author defcribeth here the mifery
and devaftation of Campania di Roma, by the Cajtilian , who lefe nothing in the
ground, but Garlick, whichis their moft delicate food, and nothing Green but the


‘Trees,
XXXIL
French.


Lait Sang, Grenovilles, efcouldre en Dalmatie ans
Conflit donné, pefte pres de Balene, LEE :
Cry fera grand par toute Efclavonie, oe
Lors naiftra Monftre pres & dedans Raveune.


Englith.
Milk. Blood, Frogs fall reign in Dalmatia,
A Battle fought, the Plague near Balene,
A great cry fball be through all Sclavonia,
Then fhall be born a Monfter, near and within Ravenna.


ANN OT. |
Dalwatia and Sclavonia, are Countreysjoyning to the AdriatickSea, belonging
tothe Venetians,  Ravennaisa City in italy, thereft needeth no interpretation,
XXXIIL
French.
Dans le torrent qui defcend de Verone,
Par lors qu’au Pau guidera fon entrée,
Vn grand Naufrage, & non Moins en Garonne,
Quand ceux de Genes Marcheront leur contrée.


vena ea


Tbe true Prophecies


Englifh. |
In the torrent which cometh down from Verona, |


About the place where it alleth into the Pau,
A great Shipwrack, and no lefs in Garonna,


I ben thofe of Genoa fall 20 into their Countrey.


ANNOT.


Verona isa City in Italy, belonging to the Venetians , through the middle of which
runneth a River called 4dde, which falleth into the River Paw, about which place
there fhall be a great Shipwrak ; as alfo another in the River of Garona, which paf-
feth at Bordeawx , the time chat the Author marketh , is when thofe of Genoa fhall
go into their Countrey, thacisto fay, when fome Ships of Genoa {hall come to


Bordeaux.


1 =


XXXIV. pre
French.


L fre infenfée du Combat furieux,
Fera a Table par Freres le Fer luire,
Les departir, bleffe, curieux,

Le fier duel viendra en France nuire.


Englih,
T he mad anger of the furious fight , a
Shall caufe by Brothers the Iron to glifter at the Table,
To part them one wounded, curious,


The frerce Duel fhall do barm after in France.


AN NOT,


It is the fhort Hiftory of two Brothers, who foughtat the Table, whereby one
that was curious to part them was wounded, they afterwards fought a Duel,in whofe
imitation many fince have been fought, to the great harm of the French Gentry,


XX XV.
French.
Dans deux Logis de nuit le feu prendra,
Plufieurs dedans eftoufez & roftis,
Pres de deux Fleuves pour feuril adviendra,
Sol, Arc, & Caper, tous feront amortis.


ne
€


of Michael: Noftradamus.


Englifh.


The fire fhall take by night ir two Houfes,
Many fball be ftifled and burnt in it ;

Near two Rivers it fball for certain happen,
Sun, Arc, Caper, they fhall all be mortified.


ANNOT.

By Sun, Arc, Caper, he meaneth the Sun being in the Signs of Sagéfarius and C'a-
pricorsus.

This Prophecy was fulfilled about 90. years ago tn the City of Lion, feated upon
two Rivers, viz, the Rhefneand the Saone , for about that time feveral. Merchants
coming tothe Fair, fome went to lodge atthe Silver Head,in the ftreet de la Grenete,
where being in an upper room , as they were talking of their bufineffes, and pafling
the time merrily, the fire took, in the Kitchen where was abundance of Oil,
which did burn fo fuddenly and fo violently , that. the lower’ part of the Houfe was
prefently confumed. Thofe Merchants that were in the upper room towards the
ftreet, begun to look for their Clock- bags,that were locke up th 2 Trunk’; but while
they were bufie about opening the Trunk , the Stair-cafe fell, and che fire got into
cheir Room , then begun they tocry for helpthrough the Windows. They would
willingly have thrown chemfelves down the Windows, butthey were barred with
Iron, fo that they could not fave themfelves , the Houfe béing a fire on all fides ;
Moreover, the neighbours taking more care of their own Houfes,then of thofe Stran-
gets, did run every one to his own concerns , fo that they all miferably perifhed,
Parradin in his 3. Book of the Hiftory of Lyon, Chap. 22.


ak NT,
French.


Du grand Prophete les Lettres feront prinfes,
Entre les Mains du Tyran deviendront,
Frauder fon Roy feront fes entreprinfes,
Mais fes rapines bien coft le troubleront.


| A Englith. Asay
The Letters of the great Prophet fhall be intercepted,
They foall fall into the hands of the Tyrant,


His undertakings fhall be to deceive his King,
But bis extortions foall trouble him [oon.


ANNOT. 3
It is fome eminent Churchman, whofe Letters fhall be intercepted, by which he
intended to betray his King, therefore hisaétions {hall be called in queftion,and being
found guilty of extortion, he fhall fuffer for it, |


gg lp © _


a ‘ ” Bi
ER A, ge mr


The tre Prophecies


XXXVIL
French.


De ce grand nombre que l’on envoiera ;
Pour fecourir dans le fort affiegez,
Pefte & Famine tous les devorera,
Horfmis feptante qui feront profligez.


j Englifh.


Of that great number wbich foall be fent, 7
To fuccour the befieged in the Fort,
Plague and Famine foall devour them all,


Except feventy that {ball be beaten,
ANNOT.


This is fo plain, that it needeth no explication,


XXXVIIL
French.


Des Condamnez fera fait un grand nombre,
Quand les Monarques feront conciliez,

Mais l’un deux viendra fi mal encombre,
Que guere enfemble ne feront raliez.


Eoglilh.


There hall be a great number of condemned men,
When the Monarchs fhall be reconciled, |
But one of them fball come to fuch misfortune,
That their reconciliation fball.not laft long.


ANNOT.


The words and fenfe of this are eafie to be underftood,


XXXIX.<
French.


Un an devant le conflict Italzque,
Germains, Gaulois, Efpagnols pour le Fort,
Cherra l’Elcole maifon de republique,

Ou horfmis peu, feront fufloquez morts;


Of Michael Noftradamus.


Englith:
One year before the Italian fight, |
Germans, French, Spaniards for the Fort,
The School-houfe of the Common-wealth fall fall, .
Where, except few, they hall be fuffocated,and dead.


ANNOT.


Itfeemeth there fhould bea Battle between the Ztaliaus, Germans, French, Spa-
niards for a Fort, which I fufpeét to have been that of ser?zoles, wherein all thofe
Nations were engaged, and that one year before that Battle, the publick houfe of
a Common-wealth fhould fall,and kill abundance of people; But of this I could find no-
thing in Hiftory. 7

XL.
French.
Un peu apres non point long intervalle,
Par Mer & Terre fera fait grand tumulte.
Beaucoup plus grande fera pugne Navalle,
Feu, Animaux, qui plus feront d’Infulte:


Englifh.
A little while after; without any great diffancé of time:
By Sea and Land fhall a great tumult be made ,


The Sea fight fball be much greater,
Fire and Beafts which fhall make greater infult.


ANNO T,
_ This hath a Relation toa foregoing Stanza, and likewile is got hard to be under-
ftood, 4
LL
French:


La grand Eftoile par fept jours bruflera;
Nuce fera deux Soleils apparoir,

Le gros maftin toute nuit hurlera,
Quand grand Pontife changera de terroir.


Englifh.


The great Star. fall burn for the {pace of feven days.
A Clond fhail make two Suns appear, |
The big Maftif fball-boul all night,

When the great Pope fball change his Countrey.


BR


=


Len Times te tar Eee se
et Re ER a
eee ee
Sa :


The true Prophecies


ANNOT.
The meaning of this is, that thofe three Prodigies, contained in the firft three
Verfes, fhall appear when aPope changeth his Countrey.


XLII:
French.


Coq, Chiens, & Chats de fang feront repeus,
Et delaplayeda Tyran tronve Mort,

Au hé d’un autre, Jambes & Bras rompus,
Qui n'avoit peu mourir de crucl Mort,


Englih,


A Cock, Dogs, andCats fhall be fed with Blood,
And with the wound of the Tyrant found dead

In the bed of another, with Legs and Arms broken,
Who could not die before by a cruel Death,


ANNOT.


Thefe words fignifie, that a great man or Tyrant hall be found dead in another
mans Bed, having his Legs and Arms broken, the body of which fhall be devoured
by thefe three kinds of Creatures, a Cock, a Deg, and a Cate. The laft Verfe Ggnifieth
that this Tyrant had efcaped a crwel Death.


XLIIE
French.


Durant l’eftoile cheuelue apparente,

Les trois grand Princes feront faits ennemis,
Frappez du Ciel, Paix, Terre tremulente,
Arne, Tibre, undans Serpent fur le bord mis.


Englifh.
During the hairy apparent Star,
The three great Princes {ball be made Enemies
Struck from Heaven, Peace, quaking Earth,
Arne, Tyber, full of Surges, Serpent caft upon the Shore.


?


ANNOT.


In the year 1556, upon the firft day of march appeared a blazing Star which
lafted three Months, and in that year che three great Princes were made Enemies,
viz, Pasl1V, Pope, Henry 11. King of France, and Philip IL King of Spain, about
the breaking of the Truce by Henry 11,

The Affairs not facceeding according to the Pope’s, and the King of France’s de-
fire, they made Peace with the Spaniardthe 14th of offeber 3557, and becaufeic
was


cos SBS


of Michael Noftradamus, 79


was an effect of GodsProvidence, which moved the Pope’s, andthe Kings hearts 5
the Author faith, they were firuck from Heaven, |

After this Peace the Author mentionsan Earth-qzake, which is very likely con-
fidering the overflowing ofthe Zyber, which followed immediately,

The night after, that Peace was proclaimed at Reme, ona Twefday che T yber did
fo overflow his Banks, that the inundation was thought the greateft that ever was,
yea greater than that which happened in the year 1530. under Clement V II. :

There wereten or twelve Mills carried away, all the Vine-yardsalong the Ty4er,
from Pontemole to St, Peters Church, were buried under:the Sands, thatthe water
cartied. |

Abundance of Houfes fell totheground, In Reme many Gardens and houles of
pleafure were deftroyed, the lofsof the Wines, Hay, Wood, aud Corn could not
be valued.

In Florence the River of Arne did more mifchief than the Tyber at Rome, the
Hiftory of the Genealogy of the houfe of cHedics, madeby Peter de Boiffat, men-
tioneth, that in fome places of the City of Florence,the water overflowed to the heigth
of eight Fathoms, andcovered all the valley of Arne,

The damage was yet greater at Empoly, a Town in T#[casy, where, of three thou-
fand people, there efeaped but eighteen. RE SES

But to return to Tyber, its waters being retired into their Channel, left fo much
mud, where it had overflowed, that no body could walk uponit, and upon that mud
near the Ty£er, was a Serpent feen of a prodigious bignefs, which was killed by the
Countrey people, _ | Has He

Thisis the Auchors meaning in the laft Verfe, Arse, Tyber, full of Surges, Serpent
café. #pon the Shore. : oe

In the third Verfe he faith, thofe three Princes were ftruck oi moved from Hea-
ven to make Pesce, that is, from God; every one confidering that this War was
only for their mutual deftruction, 2. ? :

The Vulgar impreffion puttech inthe fourth Verfe, Pas, Tyber, in ftead of Arne,
Tyber, which is a vifible fault; for the Hiftory mentioneth only the inundation of
thofe two Rivers in Italy, itmay be that the Jikenefs of thofe words, Pas and Arae,,
isthe caufe of the miftake ; as alfo becaufe the name of Paw, which is the biggeft Ri-
ver in Italy, is more famous in Hiftory than chat of Arse, which is the River that


paffech through Florence,

XLI V.

French.
L’Aigles pouffée entour de Pavillons,
Par autre oifeaux d’Entour fera chaflée,
Quand bruit de Timbres, Tubes, & Sonaillons,’
Rendront le fens de la Dame infentee.

Englith,

The Eagle flying among the Tents,
By other Birds fball be dréwen away,
When noife of Cymbals, Trumpets, and Bells, |
Shall vender thefenfe to the Lady thatwes withont st,


ANNOT,


T he


truz Prophecies


Itis an Eagle driven from the Tents by other Birds, whena mad Lady thall reco- |
ver her fenfes by the noifeof Cymbals, Trumpets,and Bells,


XLV.
French. a
Trop le Ciel pleure ! Androg yn procree,
Pres de Ciel fang humain refpandu,
Par mort trop tard grand peuple recree,
Tard & toft vient le fecours attendu.


[D Englifh.

D The Heaven bemoaneth too much the Androgyn borr,

| Near Heaven humane blood fall be fpilt,

By death too late a great people foatt be refrefbed,
Late and foon cometh the {uccours expected. P


Androgyn, is one that is Male and Female, from the Greek word enr, which
fignifieth a Male, and ys, which fignifieth a Female; the meaning then of the firft
Verleis, that {ome great perfons, fuppofe a King and Queen, which hecalleth Hea-

en, by reafon of their exaltation above the common fort of people, fhall bemoan too
fong one of their Children, that was,or fhall be born Male and Female,
_ The fecond Verfe is eafieto be underftoodj, if you take Heaven in the fame fenfe
| that we have faid.  Thelaft two Verfes are plain. ; a


fF || |

| iif ANNOT.,.
|

|


XEVT.
French. p |


Apres grand troche humain , plus grand faprefte,
Le grand Moteur les fiecles renouvelle,

Pluye, Sang, Lait, Famine, Fer & Pefte,

Au Ciel veu feu courant longue eftincelle.


Englifh.


After à great humane change, another greater is nigh at hand,
The great Motor reneweth the Ages,

Rain, Blood, Milk, Famine, Sword, Plague,

In the Heaven fball be {een a running fire with long fparks.


ANNOT.


Troche in Greek is a Pulley, the meaning therefore of the Author, that after a |
great mutation, God fhallrenew the Ages’, and according to his promife fhall create |
a new Heaven, and anew Earth: |
By | f A


| of Michael Noftradamus. Lire


By thofe prodigies related in the two laft Verfes, it feemeth the Author intendeth
to fpeak of thelaft day, and of the fore-runners of it,


©
XLVII


French.
L’Ennemy grand viel, deult, meurt de poifon,
Les Souverains par infinis {ubjugues, -
Pierres pleuvoir cache foubs la Toifon,
Par mort Articles en vain font alleguez.


Englifh.
The great and old Enemy grieveth, dieth by Poifon,
An infinite number of Soveraign’s conquered,
It fhall rain ftones, they fhall hide under Rocks,
In vain fball death alledge Articles.


ANNOT.


This hath a relation to the foregoing Stanza, and is as is were the fecond partof
it. For as the foremoft fpeaketh of the laft day, fo doth this of Dooms-day.

Firft,he faith that the great and old Enemy erieveth and dieth by Poifon, that’s the
Devil who fhall be caft into a Lake of Fire andBrimftone. The fecondVerfe fignfieth,
that all the Kings of the Earth fhall be fubdued by him that is Lord of Lords and King
of Kings. Thechird Verfeexpreffeth, the anguifh of tte reprobate, when they {ha
cry to the Rocks, hide us, and co.che Mountains, fall upon us,
Verfe faith, chat Death fhall alledge in vain ; the Articles fhe made with the Devil
and his Angels.


Andthe fourth


2


XLVILL

French. ea
La grand Copie qui pañléra les Monts,
Saturne, Aries, tournant au Poiflon Mars,
Venins cachez fous teftes de Moutons,


Leur chef pendu a fil de Polewars.

| Englifh.
The great Army that ball pafs Over the Mountains,
Saturn, Aries, Mars, turning to the Fifbes,


Poifons hidden in Sheeps heads,
Their Captain bang d with a thred of Polemars.


ANNOT.


Paradin relateth in his Hiftory , that after the Duke of 4/44 had relieved Fulpien,
. with Viétuals, which was done from the 22. of ¥uly to the firft of Augu/t, a Captain
ofthe Emperors Army named la Trinité | went out of /alfrenieres the fame firft day


of Augaff, to plunder the Countrey of Piermont,


fe
e
k fe


£ CRE”
SS


ne


in


ne in


be true Prophecies


He had 400 Horles, and 500 Foot: The news-being brought to the Marfhal of
Briffac, he fent out a great number of Horfes, who did utterly deftroy their Foor,
fo that but thirty efcaped, co carry the news to alfrenicres,

The Spanifh Horfe, feeing #he Freachin{uch a fary, ran away, and got feme to
Aft, fometo Alexandria, :

After chat, the Spanzards feeking.to revenge themfelves, took a Caftle three
miles from Cazal, called Fregene, or Fracinet du Fam, where they hanged up the
Captain, put tothe fword all the Italians, and fent all the French to the Galleys,

‘This proceeding being not according tothe Lawsof Arms, we may believe, that
the victorious difcovered à malitious craft of the vanquifhed, who hadleft fome
Sheeps-heads poifoned, to revenge themfelves of the vitonous, which obliged the
Spaniards to ferve fo the Captain, the Ztalians and the French; and becanfe the
French were not fo illufed, as che Z#4lians, we may judge chat the /taltans were the
chief contrivers of this bufinefs,

Thereforethe Author forefeeing this, faich, that the great Army of the French,
which fhall go over the Mountains, (hall come to this mifchief, becaufe of the
poifon that was hidden in the Sheeps heads,

The Vulgar impreffion erreth much in putting Salons, for Muttons ; for every
body knoweth that the Sa/mons donot come intothe Mountains df Montferrat, and
that in the Month of A4xgulff it is not a meat fit for Souldiers, therefore in ftead of
Salmons; we have put Msttons, or Sheep.

The Captain was hanged with a thread of Polemars, thatis, with a Match, of which,
Tam perfwaded, that one certain Palemars was the Inventor, |

The Author faith in the fecond Verfe,that the time when this accident happened,
was, when Satwrn wasin Aries, the Vulgar impreffion putteth 47e in ftead of Aries.
bur that’s falfe, therefore {et down Aries. . Satarn was in that Sign in the year 1555,
from the 2oth of Febrwary,to the 14th of Faly,where from the 12th degree and four
Miautes, he began toretrograde in the fame Sign.of Aries, tillthe 18th of Novers-
ber, fo that Satur was almolt all that year in Aries,

He faith alfo that Mars was going back to Pifces ; becaufe in that fame year, Afars
that was gone out of the Sign of Pé/ses from the 19 of March 1554, was retrogradiag
to come back again into it upon the 20th of Pasuary 1556.

Thus the Author meaneth, that this accident fhould happenin the year that 54.
turn {hould be in Aries, and cars fhould be near che Sign of Pifces.

And to fay truth, in the Month of 4wew/f, Mars was in the Sign Of Scerpie ; upon
the 23 of September, he entred into that of Sagitariws 5 the third of November, into
that of Capricornuss the 12th of December into chat of Aquarius, andthe year fol-
lowing, viz. 1556, into that of Pifcés ; fo that Mars was returning into Pifces which
is the end of its particular motion.

By this Aftrological and Hiftorical difcourfe we corre& the Vulgar impreffion
which putteth turning from Pi/ces, Mars, in ftead of which, we put, turning to Pifees,
Mars, which we do by changing only from, intoto, and fheweth us how careful we
ought to bein the explication of thefeStanza’s, when the time is prefixed tous by
Aftronomical calculations.

The Authors Phrafe doth confirm us in this correction, when he ufeth this word
turning, which fignifieth the motion that tendeth cowards its end, and not the mo-
tion that cometh from its end, le :


4


French.


All the difficulty of this lieth in the fignification
fignifieth a City. The word Mosspo/y is Vulgar, and fi
would engrofs all che Trade ofa Town... Thereft
leave it tothe liberty of the Reader, than break my Brains about it,


ly chat 1am going to bed, the precedent Stanza having exhaufted
{o fareweil till to morrow;


Hainault is a Province of the Low- Countries, and Gand the chief
ders, and Braxelles the chief Town of the Dukedomeof Brabant,


Langres is a City in France, in the Province of Champagne, whichis called the
Maiden Town; becaufe it was never befieged,. The reft i


Of Michael Noftradimus.
XLIX,

French.

Les confeillers du premier Monopole,

Les Conquerans feduits par la Melite,

Rhodes, Bifance pour leur expofant pole,

Terre faudra les pour-fuivans de fuite.’


Englifh.
The advifers of the firft Monopoly.
The Conquerors feduced by the Melite,
Rhodes, Bizance, for expofing their Pole, _
The ground fhall fail the followers of runaways.


ANN OT.


#L:

French, Lo dae.
Quand ceux d’Hainault, de Gand, & de Bruxelles,
Verront a Langres le Siege devant mis,

Derrier leur flancs feront guerres cruelles,
La playe antique fera pis qi’ Ennemis.

| _Englith. : ;
When thefe of Hainault,of Gand, and of Bruxelles:
Shall fee the Siege laid before Langres,
Behind their fides [ball be cruel Wars,
The old wound [ball be worfe then Enemies.


ANNOT.


is eafie,


LL
French,
Le fang dujufte a Londres fera faire iy:
Bruflez par feu, de vingt & trois, les Six
La Dame antique cherra de place haute,


De mefme {ee plufieurs feront-occis:


M Englifé,


of the word Pole,which in Greek
ind fignifieth when-one or few
is fo obfcure, that Thad rather
cenfidering chief:
all my Spirits, and


Town in Flan-


~ as


sae ae =


SR ae
o «3


HE 2


+ The true Prophecies


Englifh.
The blood of the juft fhall be wanting in London,
Burnt by fire of three and twenty, the Six,
The antient Dame fhall fall from her high place,
Of the fame SeS many fall be killed.


ANNOT.


Leaving unto the impartial Reader his liberty to judge of this Prophecy, we for
our part underftand by it the impious and execrable murder, committed upon the
perfon of our laft moft gracious Sovereign King Chales 1. of blefled memory, to
whofe expiationit feemeth our Author attributeth the conflagration of London. By
that proportion of three and twenty, the Six, is tobe underftood che number of Hou-
fes and Buildings that were burnt, which isabout the proportion of three in four,
and cometh near to the computation, as alfo-by that three twenties and Six, may be
underftood the year'66. By the antient Dame that fhall fall fromthe high place, is un-
derftood the Cathedral Church of St. Pasi, ‘which inthe time of Paganifm was de-
dicated to Diana, meant here by the title of an antient Dame, the fall from ber
high place hath relation both to the fumptuoufnefs and height of her building,as alfo
to her fituation, which is in themoft eminent place of the City.

By this Verfe, Of the fame Sect many hall be killed, is fignified the great number
of other Churches even thenumber of 87 ( which he intimateth here by che name
of the fame Seét, that fhould be involved in the fame woful conflagration.


LII.
French.


Dans plufieurs nuits la Terre tremblera,

Sur le printemps deux efforts feront fuitte,
Corinthe, Ephefeaux deux Mers nagera,
Guerre {efmeut par deux vaillants de Luitte.


Englifh.
During many nights the Earth foall quake,
About theSpring two great Earthquakes fball follow one another,


Corinth, Ephefus hall fwim in the two Seas,
War foall be moved by two great Wrefilers.


AiN NOT.
Corinth isaCity of Grecis, and Ephefws one of Afias che reft is plain,
LIN.
French.

Le grande Pefte de cite maritime,

Ne ceffera que Mort ne foit vengee,
Du jufte fang par prix damné fans crime,
Dela grande Dame par feinte noutragée,


of Michael Noftradamus,


Enelith.
The great Plague of the Maritine City, .
Shall not ceafe till the dzath be revenged
Of the juft blood by price condemned without crime,
Of the great Dame not fainedly abufed.


i. | ANNOT. |

be Thisis a confirmation of the LI, Stanza and foretelleth the great Plague we have

to had here inthe year 1665, which he faich fhall not ceafe till the death of the Juft

by blood , meaning King Charles the I, ‘be avenged who was as is hereexpreffed , con-

" demned without crime, and fold for a Price,

nr, By the great Dame unfainedly abufed , he meaneth the fumptuous Cathedralof

he St, Pasi, which was polluted and made a Stable by thofe prophane wretches,

à LLY: i

(es fi

17 Freych. ty

os Par gent eftrange, & Nation Jomtaine, ll

# Leur grand Cite, apres eau fort troublée, i

me Fille fans trop different de domaine,
Prins chef, ferreure, navoir efté rib'ée. ;

Englifh.


By a frange people and vemtote Nation, 3
The'great ‘City near the water fhall be wuch troubled,
The Girl without great difference for a portion;

Shall take the Captain, the Lock having not been pick.


SP =
Sa 3
«


LE:
|) 4
ANNOT. BE :
Inthe explication of this myftical Stanza » [believe every body.may beas wife i
asf, jé |
thet, JU | i
French. Me


Dans le conflit le grand qui peu valoit,
A fon dernier fera cas merveilléux.
Pendant qu’ Adrie verra ce. qu'il failloit,


Dans le Banquet poignarde l’orgueilleux.


ph Englith,

In the fight the great one who was but little worth, ni
At bis laft endeavour {hall doa wonderful thing. we ai
| + dW bile Adriafhallfes hatinas wanting, iflq 218 2 A PAL
| - Inthe Banquet he fhall ftabb the proud one. Pate tea | i À
il | oa M 2 ANNOT, is |


The true Prophecies


ANNOT.


This is concerning fome eminent perfon, who having fhewed no great valour ia a
Battle, fhall neverthelefs ia a Banquet be fo bold as to ftab a perfon of quality, chac
was proud,

' ‘This accident muft happen fomewhere about Vewice, becaufe he faith that Adria,
which is taken for Vewice fhall look on,


LVI,
French.


Que Pefte & Glaive n’a {ceu definer,

Mort dans les pluies,fommet du Ciel frappé,
L’ Abbe mourra quand verra ruiner,

Ceux du Naufrage, l'Efcueil voulant graper.


Englifh,


He whom neither Plague, nor Sword could deftroy, |
Shall die in the Rain being firicken with Thunder,

The Abbot fhall die when he fhall fee ruined,

Thofe in the Shipwrack, ftriving to catch hold of the Rock ,


ANN OT.


There is two accidents contained in this Stanza, the firft is in the two firft Verfes,
where he faith that fome confiderable perfon, who had efcaped the Sword , and the
Plague fhall be ftrucken by the Thunder, and die in a great fhowr of Rain,

The fecond is, in the two laft Verfes, where he faith, an Abbot fhall perifh by
Shipwrack, thinking to fave himfelf by holding the Rock,


LY Ii,

French.
Avant conflit le grand tombera,
Le grand a mort trop fubite & plainte,
Nay miparfait, la plus part nagera,
Aupres du Fleuve, de fang la Terre teinte.


Englifh.
Before the Battle the great one fhall fall, {
The great one to death too fudden and bewailed ;


One fhall be born half perfect the moft part fball fwiw,
Near the River the Earth fhall be dyed with blood.


ANNOT,


i Pas are plain enough; but of che fenfe every one may think what he
pleafeth, :


French.


of Michael Noftradamus.


LVIIi

French,
Sans pied ne main, dent aigue, & forte,
Par Globe au fort de Port & laifne nay ,
Pres du portail, defloial le tranfporte,
Seline Juit, petit grand emmené.


pet
Withont foot or band, (barp and ftrong tooth, :
By a Globe, in the middle of the Port and the firft born


Near the Gate fball be tranfported by a Traitor ,
Seline fhineth, the little great one carried away.


ANNOT. *


d


The fenfe of the whole is this, thatan Infant begot by fome perfon of quality
fhall be expofedin thenight time , the Moon fhining, whichhecalleth Seine, from
the Greek word sans, which fignifieth the Moon,


LIX.
French.
Clafle Gauloife par appuy de grand Garde,
Du grand Neprune & {es tridens Soldats,
Ronger Provence pour fouftenir grand bande,
Plus Mars, Narbon, par Javelots & Dards.


Englith. | |
The French Fleet by the belp of the great Guard,
Of great Neptune and his Tridentary Soldiers,


Shall graw Provence by keeping great company,
Befides, Mars fball plague Narbon by Favelins and Darts,


A NNOT.


Here be two things defigned in this Stanza one is concerning Provence, which
{hall be eaten up by Soldiers , and the other concerning the City of Narkes, which
hall be Befieged, or the Citizens fall out among themfelves,


Ex

French.
La foy Punique en Orientrompue, »
Grand Fred. & Rhofne, Loire & Tag changeront,
Quand du Mulet la faim fera repeue,
Claife efpargié, Sang & Corps nageront.


Engtith,


ne te SS SS
a Pats ~~ » pol à À


_ rfi:
Thetrne Propéecies
Englith.

The punick faith brokex in the Eaft,
Great Jud and Rhofne, Loire and Tag. {ball be chanced,
IV ben the Mules bunger fhall be fatisfied,

The Fleet fcattered, Blood and B dies feall fwim.


ANNOT.


The Punick Faith in Latine Punica fides,a falfe Faith, was fo called from the Car-
thaginians, called in Latine Peni, which was an unfaithful Nation.

Ido not know what he meaneth by great Fad, as for Rhofne, Loireand Tag, they
arethree Rivers, the two fi ft in France, the laft is the River of Lisbone, called in La-


tine Tages, The reft is eafie,
LX


French.
. n i À

Agen, Tonneins, Gironde & la Rochelle,
O fang Troien mort au Port de'la fleche,
Derrier le Fleuve au Fort mife le(chelle, .
Pointes, feu, grand meurtre fur la brelche.

Englith.
a en, Tonneins, Gironde and Rochelle,
Poin blocd death is at the barbour of the Arrow,
Bvond the River the Ladder fball be raifed againft the Fort,


D egy Be ry PR MERE Des A ABA 7
gornts Tre, QTear MK: Her upon the oreder.


ANNOT.


Agen and Tonncins are two Towns in Gafcony , Gironde is a River that paffeth in
char Countrey , the fenfe therefore ofthe whole is, that there fhall be great Wars,


and fightings in thofe Towns , as alfo upon that River , which happened in the time
of the civil Wars in France, as every body may read in the eAnnals , and alfointhe


Commentaries of the Lord of Monluck,


L XII,
French
Mabus puis toft alors mourra, viendra,
Des gens & beftesun horrible destaice;
Puis cout a coup la vengeance on verra,
Sang, Main, Soif, Faim,quand courra la Comete,


Enelith. :


Mabus fball come, and foon after fball die,

Of people and beafts [ball be an horrible defiruéfion,
Then on a fudden the vengeance fball be feen,

Blood, Hand, Thirft, Famine, when the Comet foall run.
ANN OT.


of Michael Noftradamus.


ANNOT.
Here is nothing hard but who fhould be this c# abus
tion of Letters that he meaneth Ambys,which was th


be headed the Du


peareth our Author,
cidents, even the names of the perfonsthat were to


LXIIXI
French.


, À Gaulois, Aufone bien peu fubiuguera ,
| Pan, Marne & Seine fera Perme l'Urie,
| Qui legrand Mur contre eux dreflerä,


~
67
at
é


at laft I found by tranfpofi-
enameof the Heades-man that
ke of Montmorency at Thowloafe, how mitaculous therefore ap-


who did not only forecell general things, but alfo particular ac-
be born a hundred years after,


Du moindreau Mur le grand perdra Ja vie.


be : Englifh.
f The French foall a little (ubdue Aulonne,
f Pau, Marne, and Seine shall make Perme


Which shall raife a great Wall againft them,


i From the lefs to the Wall the great one shall

à | ANNOT.

: “Aufonne isalways taken by the Autho
dus a famous Latine Poet was born there,


rupted, that I had rather leave it to the lib
lous, by not acknowledging my ignorance,


LXIV.
| … French.
si Seicher de faim, de foif, gent Genevoife,
Efpoir prochain viendra au defaillir,
Sur point tremblant fera Loy Gebenoife,


| Englifh,


i The Gebenna Law
| The Navy foall not be capable to come into
) | - ANNOT-.
Here you maft obferve that Gebenna in Latine fignifier
| whole Stanza is concerning the City of Geneve.


VUrie,
loofe bis life.


r for the City of Bordeanx , becaufe Aue
the reft is fo obfcure, and the text fo core


erty of che Reader, then to become ridicu-


Claffe au grand Poftne fe peut accueillir,


Thofe of Geneva fballbe dried np with hunger and thirf,
A near bope fhall come when they fball be fainting,
foall be upon a quaking point,


the Port.


Geneva and therefore chis


French,


TRES Fe orne SS —
Le =
ae , CLEO “ —

+ CAE Lee A ine Lt PEN Li


nS


Si: maine 2
tn TE Le ie es
. eg qe es


Eee


LXV!
French,


Le park enclin grande calamite,
Par l’Hefperie & Infubre fera,

Le Feu en Nef, Pefte, & Captivite,
Mercure en I’ Ar, Saturn fenera. ‘


Englifh.
The Park enclineth to great calamity,
Which fball be through Helperia and Infubria,
The Fire in the Ship, Plague, and Captivity,
Mercury zz Aries, Saturn fball wither.


ANNOT.


Though thewords be plain, neverthelefs the fenfe is very obfcure, and chiefly as
I fuppofe by the faults of theimpreffion, all what I can tell you here, is; that Hef.
periain Latine, is Spain, and Jn{ubria,is Savoy.


LXVI
French.


Par grand dangers le Captif efchapé,
Peu de temps grand a fortune changée,
Dans le Palais le peuple eft attrapé,
Par bonne augure la Cite afliegée.


Englifh.


The Prifoner efcapedthrough great danger,

A little while after fhall become great, his fortune being changed.
In the Palace the people fall be caught, 4
Aud by a good Sign the City [hall be befieged.


ANNOT.
All this is plain, both in the words and the Senfe.


LX VIL
French.
Le blond au nez forche viendra commettre,
Par le Duel & chaffera dehors,
Les exiles dedans fera remettre,
Aux lieux marinscommettans les plus forts.


of Michael Noftradamius.


Englifh.
The fair one fhall fight with the forked Nofe,
In Duel, and expel him ont,


Hefball re-eftablifb the banifbed,
Putting the flronger of thea in Maritine places.


ANN OT,


Both the Senfe and the words are plain.


LXVIII
French.


De l’Aquilon les efforts feront grands,

Sur l’Occean fera la Porte ouverte,

Le Regne en !’Ifle fera re-integrand.
Tremblera Londres par voiles defcouvertes.


Englifh.
The endevours of the North fhall be great,
Upon the Ocean the gate fhall be open,
The Kingdom in the Ifland (hall be re-eftablifbed,
London fhall quake, for fear of Sails difcovered,


ANNOT,


This is a Very remarkable one, which hath been fulfilled fince the happy reftau-
ration of his facred Majefty King Charles 11. now Reigning : For the endevours of


the North, (wz. the Dutch) have been very great.


The ocean; like agate, hath


been open to all kind of Armies, to play their pranks upon, His Majelty, and
Kingdom, have been happily reftored, ;


LXIX.
French.
Le Roy Gaulois par la Celtique dextre,
Voiant difcorde de la grand Monarchie,
_ Sur Jes trois parts fera fleurir fon Sceptré,
Contre ta Cappe de la grand Hierachie.


Englifh,
The French King, by the Low-Countreys right hand,
Seeing the difcord of the great Monarchy,


Upon three parts of it will make his Scepter to flourifb,
Againft the Cap of the great Hierarchy. |


N ANNOT.


eg


The true Prophecies


ANNOT.


This fignifieth, that the French King, through the difcord that is inthe Spanifh
Monarchy, fhall caufe his Scepter te flourifh upon three parts of the Netherlands 3 not-
withftanding the affiftance of the King of Spain, whois called here the Cap of the
great Hicrarchy, that is, the great defender of the Popedom ann Popery.


LX X.
French,
E f
Le Dard du Ciel fera fon efténdue,
Morts en parlant, grande execution,
La pierréen l'arbre la fiere gent rendue.
Brait Humain, Monftre purge expiation.


Englih,


The Dart of Heaven fhall make his circuit,
Some die (peaking, a great sexecution,

The Stone in the tree, the fierce people humbled,
Humane noife, a Monft er purged by expiation.


ANNOT.


All this Stanza fignifieth nothing but a fearful Thunder and Lightning, called
here, the Dart ef Heaven, that fhall do a great deal of mifchief; for ashe faith, fome
fhall die {peaking, there {hall be 4 great execution, the Thunderbolt thall ftick inthe
Tree, the people that was fierce, fhall be humbled. and a Monfter purged by expiation,
that fome notorious wicked perfon fhall be confumed by that Cœleftial fire.


LXXL
French.


. Les exiles en Sicile viendront,
Pour delivrer de faim la gent-eftrange,
Au point du jour les Celtes luy faudront,
La vie demeure a raifon Roy fe range.


Enghfh.
The banifbed perfons {ball come into Sicily,
To free the forram Nation from hunger,
In the dawning of the day the Celtes fball fail thew,
Their Life hall be preferved, the King [ball fwbmit to veafon.


ANNOT.,


_ Ic is hard to judge what he meaneth by that Forreign Nation, which fhall be re-
fieved in Sicily, by the banifhed, nor what Xéxg isthac which fhall fubmit toreafons
let it be left to every body's private judgement, |


French.


lled
fom
athe


1}


of Michael Noftradamus.
LXXII,
French.
Armée Celtique en Italie vexee,
De toutes partes conflit & grande perte,
Romains fuis O Gaule repoulfée,
Pres du Zhefin, Rubicon pugne incerte.
Englifh.
The French Army fball be vexed in Ktalÿ,
On all fides fighting, and great lofs,
The Romans run away, and thou France repulfed,


Near the Thefin, by Rubicon the fight fhall be doubtful,
ANNOT.


A French Army fhall be diftreffed, ifnot deftroyed in Italy, The Romaws, that
is, thofe under the Pope, that fhall take their part, fhall be put to flight, and this
battle (hall be fought by the River Tbefis. Another fhall be fought by che River
Rubicon, whofe event fhall be doubtful, that is tofay, itthall hardly be known who
got the victory: | if |
LXXIIE
French:

Au Lac Fucin de Benacle Rivage,

Pres du Leman au port de Lorguion,

Nay de trois Bras prædit Bellique Image,

Par trois courones au grand Endymion,
Englifh.

At the Fucin Lake of the Benacle Shore,

Near the Leman, at the Port of Lorguion,

Born with three Arms, à Warlike Image,

By three Crowns to the great Endimion.

ANNOT, ht etes

There is a Laké in staly called Zacas Facinius; the Lake of Geneva is called La
eus Lemanus ; the meaning then of this obfcure Stanza, is, (if Tunderftand any
thing ) thac a Montter thall be born with three Arms, near oneof thofe Lakes, which
fhall be afign of great Wars: what he meaneth by the three Crowns tothe great En:


dymion, is unknown to me, |
LXXIV.


French.
De Sens, d’ Autun viendront jufques au Rhofne,
Pour paffer outre vers les Monts Pyrenée, ©
La gent fortir de la Marque d’ Ancone,
Par Terre & Mer Suivra a grand trainées.
Englifh.
They shall cone from Sens and Autun, as far as the Rhofne,
To go further to the Pyrenéan Mountains,
The Nation come from the Mark of Ancona,


By Land and Sea shall follow fpecdily after: |
gibt Be] ANNOT:


Tbe trne Prophecies


PAR AN: NOT. é
Sens and Antwn are two Cities in France;the Pyrencan Mountains, are thofe which


divide France from Spain,
UX KV:
French.
La voix oùie de l’Infolit oifeau,
Sur le Canon du refpiral eftage,
Si haut viendra dw froment le borffeau,
Que l’homme d'homme fera Antropophage.
Enghfh.
The noife of the unwonted Bird having been heard,
Upon the Canon of the higheft ftory,
The Bufbel of Wheat (ball rife fe bigh,
That, wan of man foall be Antropophage.
ANNOT.
This is a prediction of a mighty Famine, wherein men fhall eat up one another,


when an wawonted Bird fhall be feen and heard to cry, being perched upon one of the
biggeft pieces of Ordinance,
Antropophage is a Greek word, fignifying a Man-eater, from "evdemé home, and
ayes, comédens, of which fort of men there be too many “already,
EXXVI
French.


Foudre en Bourgongne avec cas portenteux,
Que par engin oncques ne_pourroit faire,
De leur Senat Sacrifle fart boiteux,

Fera Scavoir aux ennemis Paffaire.


Englith.

Lightning in Burgundy, with marvellous accidents,

Which vpalit never have been done by art,

Of their Séxaté Sacrilte being lamed,

Shall. make known the bufinefs to the enemies.
AN NOT.
The Senate or Parliament of Burguwdy, fits at Dijon, among them there is always

a Church-man, that is one of the Judges, to fee that nothing | be done to the preju-


dice of the Church. I fufpeét thaticis he, chat is called here Sacrifte, and who fhall
reveal the bufinefs to the Ex¢mies. The two firft Verfes need no explication.


LXXVII.
French.
Par Arcs, Fœux, Poix, & par feux repouffez,
Cris hurlemens fur la minuit ouys,
Dedans font mis par les tempars caflez,
Par Canicules les Fraditeurs fuis.


ib


of Michael Noftradamus,


Englith.
Being repulfed with Bows,Fires, and Pitch,
Cries and bowlings fhall be beard about midnight,
They fhall get in through the broken Walls,
The betrayers foall run away through the Conduits.


ANN OT.

Ic isa Town Befieged, where after a repulfe given to the Befiegers, they fhall get
in by the Treafon of fome within, who fhall run away through the Conduits or
Channels of the Town,

LXX VIII?


French.
Le grand Neptune du profond de la Mer,
De fang punique & fang Gaulois meflé,
Les Ifles a fang pour le tardiframer,
Plus luy nuira que occult mal cele.
Englifh.
The great Neptune in the middle of the Sea,
Having joyned African and‘French blood,
The Iflands fhall be put to the Sword,and the flow rowing
. Shall do thene more prejudice than the concealed exil,


To underftand this, you muft know that Henry che Il, King of France; having re:
newed his Alliance with the Grand Seignior Salran Sélyenan, he asked him fuccours
for to take Nice, which he pretended to belong to the Earldom of Provence. To that
purpofe the Marfhal of Briffac went from Court with the Kings Army in the year
1557, to fet upon Wice, Savona, and Genos,and fo to hinder the Spaniard from coming
by Sea in Péemout, andthe cMilanefe. The Tark fent him a good Fleet, confifting
of 105. Galleys, and 14. Galliots,

The French Fleet confifted ot 26 Galleys, of which the great Prior was Admiral,
who went with them from the Caftleof 7f, the 9, of Fume 1558,

Being at Sea, and not knowing where the Turki/h Fleec was , he went to and fro
tofeek it out, at laft he found it pillaging and plundering the Ifland of e%inorica,
The Turks had already takenthe chief Town, where 800, Tarks were killed, which
fo incenfed the reft, that they fet the Town on fires, then going, upand down che
Countrey, they took 5000, Prifoners, and if the Lords of Carces and Vence had not
ftayed them, they would have ruinated the whole Ifland,

Then forfaking the Ifland , they joyned with the French, but the perfidious Baffa
being bribed by the Genoefes, and thofe of Nice, went flowly to work, andat laft re-
treated without doing any thing for the French. Thisis the relation of Cefar Noftra-
damus , in bis Hiftory of Provence under Henry the II, and according,to this the Au-
thor faith, that the great Neptune in the middle of the Sea fball joys French and African
blood, Neptune fignifieth the Mediterranean Sea.

The Iflands {hall be pus to the Sword, by the taking of Minorica).after which che
Tarks being bribed ; went flowly towork., and in conclufion did nothing of coafe-
quence.

The third and fourth Verfe adds, that this Baffa’s flow rowing, (hall de them| more pre-
jadice then the concealed evils thacis, hall do.more damage to the French by his ae
en


94 The true Prophecies


den defign of the Baffa of not ferving the French, becaufethis flownefs of the Baffa |
fpoiled the French aGtivity, leffened their provifions, and at laft difcouraged thems
whereas if the Turks had not come, the French Galleys alone were able to take
Nice,
LXXIX.
French.
La Barbe crefpe & noire par engin,
Subjuguera la gent cruelle & fiere,
Le grand Cheyrez oftera du longin,
Tous les Captifs par Seline Baniere.


Englifh.
The frixled and black Beard by fighting,
Shall overcome the ferce and cruel Nation,
The great Cheyren fball free from Bands,
Allthe Captives made by Selyne Standard.


ANNOT, bi

This Prophecy was fulfilled in the year 1571, upon the feventh day of offober,
when that famous Battle of Lepanto was fought becween the Chriftians and the Turks,
the General of the Chriftians being Dom Fan of Auftria, whom he calleth here the
frialed and black Beard.

Inthis Battle the Chriftians loft 7566, men, and the Turks about 32000, befides
220, Ships ofall forts , and allthe Chriftian flaves releafed chat wereinthem. By
the Se/yne Banner isunderftood that of the great Turk , whofe name at that time was
Selyne, By the great Cheyrew isunderftood Henry the IT, King of France, who te-
deemed many flaves, for Cheyren by tran{pofition of Letters is Henry,

LX XX,
French.


Apres conflit du lzfe Eloquence,

Par peu de temps fe trame Saint repos,
Point l’on admet les grand a delivrance.
Des ennemis font remis a propos.


Englifh.
After the Battle,the eloquency of the wounded man,
Within:a little while [hall procure a boly reff,
The great ones [ball not be delivered,
But fhall be left to their Enemies will,


ANNOT.

After the Battleof St, Laurence, the Prifoners taken by the Spaniard were the
Conftable of France, the Dukes of Montpenfier, of Longweville, the Marfhal S, Andre,
Ludovic Prince of Mantua, the Rhingrave Colonel of the Germans , thé Earl of Ze
Rochefoucaud, and feveral other perfons of quality,

They were Prifoners from the 10th of Augsft 1554, to the third of April i559.
that is,one yeat and eight Months ; during which time the Pope’s Naucios,Chriftierne
Dutchefs Dowager of Lorraine, the Conftable, and Marfhal St. André endeavoured
to make the peace,


*


Among


of Michael Noftradamus. 95


Among them the Conftable was chief, and Philip the IL. King of Spain gavehim
Jeave to go to and fro upon his Paroll; and of himit is our Author {peaketh in the
firft Verle : After the Battle the eloguency of the wounded man, thacis after the Baccle
of Saint Laurence, where the Conftable ot Afonmorency was wounded inthe hip, His
eloquency procured the peace, which was concluded ina fhort time, for had it noc
been for the death of Queen ary of England, that happened upon the 15 of No-
vember 1558, it fhould have been concluded three Months after the conterence that
was begun in the Abbey of Cercamp near Cambray.

The third Verfefaith, chat rhe great ones fhall not be delivered | becaufe during the
Treaty of Peace, Philip the 11, would not hearken to take any Ranfom, but they were
kept Prifoners till the Peace. It isthe meaning of thefourth Verte, when it faith,
but [hall be Left to the Enensies will, viz, the Spaniards who gave them liberty after the
Peace,

| French. *

| ~ EXX XI.
Par feu du Ciel Ja Cite prefqu’adufte,
L’Urne menace encor Deucalion,
Véxée Sardaigne par la punique fufte,
Apres le Libra lairra fon Phaeton.

Englifh.

By fire from Heaven the City fball he almo$t burat,
The Waters threatens another Deucalion,
Sardaigne /hall be vexed by an African Fleet,
After that Libra fball have left ber Phaeton.

| ANNOT. ao,

All isplain but the lat Verfe, thefenfeof whichis, that the things before ‘poxen,
fhall happen when the Sunis newly come out of the fign of Libra.


LXXXIL
French
Par faim la proye fera Loup prifonier,
L’ Affaillane lors en extrefme detrefie,
Lefnay ayant au‘devant le dernier,
Le grand nelchape au niilieu de la preffe.
BDO Duiss: 4. Grecvtigiss
By bunger, the prey foul make the Wolf prifoner,
Affaulting bin then in a great diffrefs.
The eldeft having got before the laft ,
The great one doth not efcapein the middle of the crowd.
ANNOYT,


The two firft Verfes fignifie, chat an hungry Wolf feeking fora Prey, fhall be


caught in fome trap,where being almoft famithed, the Prey fhall affaulc him. 1 hela&
tivo Verfesbeing obfcuréand not material coany thing I have neglected them.


Frened,


Pan | ©


1 he true Propbecies
L'ANPE,

| French. oan

Le gros Traffic d’un grand Lion change,

La plufpart tourne en priftine ruine,


Proye aux Soldats par playe vendange,

Par Fura Mont, & Sueve bruine. : I
Englifh, 7

The great Trade of a great Lion alter à,

The moft part turneth into its former ruine,

Shall become a Prey to Soldiers and reaped by wound,

ih In Mignt-Jura, and Suaube great Foggs.

Wil #” ANN OT.


Hil | /
11 NUE d é “ . ° . ,

ae This Prophecy is concerning the City of Lion in France , which is a Town of an
exceeding great Trade, and is threatned to fufferan alteration,and a decay by War.


The lait Verfe is concerning a great Mift or Fogg, which thall be upon Ment-Fers
and in Swabeland.


NO TS RSET SABIAN Ang + MOI


LXXXIV.

French.
Entre Campagne, Sienne, Pife & Ufhe,
Six mois neuf jours ne pleuvra une goute,
L’Eftrange Langue en Terre Dalmatie,
Courira fus vaftant la Terre toute.

Englith. 1

Between Campania, Sienna, Pila and Ofttia, and!
For fix Months and nine days there fhall be no rain,
The ffrange Language in Dalmatia’s Land,
Shall overrun, {poiling: all the Countrey.
ANNOT.


All thofe places mentioned, in the firft Verfe are feared in Italy; the.Author
faith that in that Countrey it fhall not rain for the fpace of fix Months and nine days,


which if it be paft,or tocome, I know not.
The two laft Verfes fignifie; thata ftrange Nation fhall come into Dalmatis, and


overrun and fpoil all chat Countrey.


ee


LXXXV,
Freach.
Le vieux plein barbe foubs le ftatut fevere,
A Lion fait deflus l'Aigle Celtique, Thi
Le petit grand trop outre perfevere, | im


Bruit d’Arme au Ciel Mer rouge Liguffique. : (re


ui
4


a ee ~


of Michael Noftradamus.


Englith.
The old plain beard uxder the severe Statute,
Made at Lion upon the Celtique Aigle,
The little great perfevercth too far,
Noife of Arms in the Shie, the Liguftrian Sea made red.
AN NOT.

I could fcrape no fenfe out of the firft three Verfes ; thelaft fi
noife of Arms fhall be heard in the Skies , and thar the Ligu/trian Sea
of Gena, {hall be made red with blood, when the former prodigy. hat

LXXX VI.

French.
Naufrage a claffe pres d’Onde Adriatique,
La Terre tremble emeue fur I’ Air en Ter
Ægypt tremble augment Mahometique,
L'Heraut foy rendre a crier eft commis


Englith,
A Flect fhall fuffer Shipwrack near the Adriatick Sed,
The Earth quaketh, a motion of the Air cometh upon the Land,
- Egypt trembleth for fear of the Mabometan increafe. |
The Herald furrendring fhall be appointed to cry.
ANNOT.


In the two fir Verfes is foretold a great ftorm by the dristick Sea, in which a
Fleet thall be difperfed, and many fuffer Shipwrack.


The two laft Verfes relate the great fear o£ egypt was in, whenthegreat Turk
Sultan Selyn went to conquer it.


The laft Verfe is concerning a Herald which was furrendred to the contrary party,
and by them was appointed to perform that office in their behalf,
LXXX Vil.
| French.
Apres viendra dés extremes Conti ées à
Prince Germain deflus Throfne d’Oré,
La fervitude & les Eaux rencontrées,
La Datne ferve fon temps plus n’adoré:
Englith. ù
After that fhall come out of the remote Countr


gnifieth, that a
» which is that
h appeared,


re mis


Cysy
»4 German Prince upon a gilded Throne. —
The flavery and waters foall meet, .
The Lady fhall ferve her time no more wor fbip ped.


ANNOT. |

This Prophecy is concerning Guffauss Adolphus King of swedeland

German Prince, becaufe his Anceftors came ov

Conntrey, that is Swedeland, he came upon a

he fhall make flavery and waters meet » becau

toconquer, and to fubdue that Lady (viz, Ge
fince as the was before,


» Whois called
tof Germany, he came out ofa remote
gilded Throne, that is à Ship gilded,
fe as foon as he was Landed he began
rmanta) that wasno more worthipped


ay Frénch.


The true Prophecies


LXXXVIIL
French.
Le Circuit du grand fait ruineux,
e nom feptielme du cinquielme fera,
D'an tiers plus grand l’eftrange belliqueux,
Aries, Lutece, Aix ne garentira.


VE


The Circumference of that ruinous building, was the Fresch league againft Hesry
LL and Henry 1 V. which numbers being joyned together, make feven, mention-
ed in thefecond Verfe

By the (frange warlike man, inthe third Verle, is understood Henryl V. becanfe
he was not borninFraace, butin Navarre; and therefore called a ftranger, who fub-
dued both Parés and Aux, feated under the conftellation of Aries,  Ifyou had not
rather, by thename of the Ram, Of Aries, underftand the Duke of cHayemne, who
who was head of the league,


LXXXIX.
French.
Un jour feront amis les deux grands Maifires,
Leur grand, pouvoir fé verra augmenté,
La Terre neufue fera en, fes hauts eftres,
Au fanguinaire le nombre raconté.


Englifh.

One day the two great Mafters fball be friends,

Their creat power fhall be increafed,

The new Land (ball be in a flourifhing condition,

The number [ball be told to the bloody perfon.

ANNOT,
We muft fuppofe here three Kings of Europe, two of which fhall become friends,

and by their agreement, the new Eand, thatis, either the Plantations, ot the Trade


either in the Eafor Weft Indies, {hallflourifh, their profperities fhall be related and
rold to the third.King, who fhall be a bloody and cruel man,


x Cy
F reach.
Par vie & mort change Regne d’ Hungrie,
La loy fera plus afpre que fervice,
Leur grand Cité d’Urlemens plaine & érie,
Caftor & Pollux ennemis dans la Lice.


of Michael Noftradamus, 99


Enolifh,
By Life and Death the Kingdom of H ungary fball be changed.


| The Law foall be more fevere than the fervice


Le


fl Their great City fball be fullof bowling and crying;
| Caftor and Pollux hall be enemies in the Lift,


ANN OT.
There fhall happen a great change in the Kingdom of Hungary, caufed by the
birth of one, and the death ofanother,
The meaning of the fecond Verfe is, thac it will be more tolerable to goto War,
than to Law.
The laft verfe fignifieth, that this diffention thall happen between two Brothers;
becaufe Caffer and Pollux were fuch,


MY . XCE

| French.

à Soleil levant ungrand feu lon verra,

| | Bruit & clarté vers Aquilon téndans,

|: Dedans le rond mort & cris lon orra,

a | Par Glaive, Feu, Faim, mort les attendans.
| Englifh. .


| At the rifing of the Sur a great frre fhall be feen,

| Noife and light tending towards the North,
Within the round death and cries foall be heard,
Death by Sword,Fire, Hunger watching for them.


A NNOT.
Thefe are Prodigies that fhall be feen, alittle before that a great Calamity fhall
happen,
XCII.
French.


Feu couleur d’or, du Ciel en terre veu,
Frappé du haut nay, fait cas merveilleux,
Grand meurtre humain ,prinfe du grand Neveu,


1 À Morts de fpectacles, efchapé lorgueilleux.
ne | Englifh.
ln |


| © À fire from Heaven of a Golden colour fball be feen,

| Stricken by the high born, a wonderful cafe, |
Great murder of Mankind,the taking of the great Neveu,
Some dead looking, the proud one fball efcape.

Te ANN OT. |


L This is a continuation of the former, relating more Prodigies that are to
| nappen, 18)


The true Prophecies


XCIII.
French.
Aupres du Tybre bien pres la Lybitine,
Un peu devant grand Inondation,
Le chef du nef prins, misa la fentine,
Chafteau, Palais en conflagration.
Englifh.
Near the Tyber, going towards Lybia,
A little before a great Innundation,
The Mafter of the Ship being taken fhall be put into the Sink,
And a Caftle and Palace fball be burnt.
ANNOT.


This is plain.
XCIV,
French.
Grand Pau, grand mal par Gawlois recevra,
Vaine terreur au Maritin Lion,
Peuple infiny par la Mer paflera,
Sans efchaper un quart d’un Million.
Englith:
Great Pau fball receive great barm by the French,
A vain terrour [ball feixe upon the Maritine Lion,
. Tgfinite people fhall go beyond Sea;
Of which fball not efcape a quarter of a Million.
ANNOT.
The firft Verfe fignifieth that the Countrey about the Pas, (which is the greateft


River in /taly) {hall receive great damage by the French.
The fecond, that the Maritine Lion, viz.the Holanders {hall fear in vain, The


third and fourth are plain,
XCV.
French.
Les lieux peuplez feront inhabitables,
Pour Champs avoir grande divifion,
Regnes livrez a prudents incapables,
Lors les grands Freres mort & diffenfion.


Englith,
The populous places fball be deferted,
A great divificn to obtain F zelds,
Kingdoms given to prudents incapable,


When the great Brothers fhall die by diffention.


fl
elt


Of Michael Noftradamus,
ANNOT.


This needeth no interpretation,


XCVI.

French.
Flambeau ardant au Ciel foir fera veu,
Pres de la fin & principe du Rhofne,
Famine, Glaive, tard le fecours pourveu,
La Perfe tourne envahir Macedoine.

Englifh.
A burning fhall be feen by night in Heaven,
Near the end and beginning of the Rhofne,
F amine Sword, too late fuccours [hall beprovided,
Perfia fball come againft Macedonia.


ANNOT.


This is eafie,


XCVII,
French:


Romain Pontife garde de taprocher,
De la Cité que deux fleuves arroufe,
Ton fang viendras aupres de la cracher,
Toy & les tiens quand fleurira la Rofe.
Englifh.
Roman Pontife take beed to come near


To the City watered with two Rivers,
Thon fhall fpit there thy blood,
Thou and thine, when the Rofe fball bloffom.


ANNOT,


Although there may be many Cities watered with two Rivers, yet I know none
more famous than ios in France,where two famous Rivers, the Rbofneand the Saone
meet together , and I believe this is the place that our Author forewarneth the Pope
to come to, for fear of his death, and that of his attendants,


XCVIII
French.
Celuy du fang refperfé le vifage,
De la Viétime proche du Sacrifice,
Venant en Leo, augure par prefage,
Mis eftre a mort alors pour la fiance:


: Englifh.
He that fall have bis face bloody,


With the blood of the Vittim near to be facrificed,
The Sun coming into Leo fhall be an Augury by prefagé,
That then he fall be put to death for bis confidence.


T he trie Prophecies


ANNOT, soi: où dysboun id
I fuppofe this tobe fpoken of a Jewifh Prieft , who going about to practice the
Ceremonial Law, ina Countrey where itis forbidden, thall be put to death for his
bold confidence,
XCIX.


French.
Terroir Romain qu interpretoit Angure,
Par gent Gauloife par trop {era vexée,
Mais Nation Celtique craindra l'heure,
Boreas, claffe trop loïing l’avoit poufice.


Englifh.


The Roman Countrey in which the Augür did intetpret,
Shall be too much vexed by the French Nation, :
But the Celtique Nation fhall fear the hour,
The Northwind had driven the Navy in too far.


ANN OT. '


Since the Reign of Henry the Il. King of Frawce, the Hiftorians do not mention
that the Countrey about Rome hath been troubled by the French Armies, © It was
only in the time of Panl the 1V, who was affifted by the Fresh Troops ; under
the condué of the Lord Stro%y, and Captain cMonlac, therefore this Stanza belon-
geth to the time of that Kings Reign,

And indeed what he foretelfeth here, came to pafs in the year 1556, for the
Counttey about Rome was vexed by the French Nation, who:went about then to
take the places , which the Duke of Alba had taken from the Pope, and chere-
by caufed thofe diforders, which commonly are incident to War,

The fecond Verfe faith , the Countrey [hall Le too much vexed , and notalittle, be-
caufe cMonluc , whomthe Author calleth the quick Gafcon,did continually torment
the Enemies , which could not be done without a great prejudice'to the Countrey ;
Moreover, his ‘Troops being for the moft part Gafcons, and'confequently active
méns ‘the Soldiers'did more harm chan ordinary.

In the firft Verfe he faith’, chatthis Countrey about Rome was marked by an 44°
gury, to be the place upon which the fad effect of the 4agury fhould fall, which
proved true ; forthe firft of A¢arch 1556. appeareda Blazing Star , which did pre-
fage to that Countrey of Rome , its difafter.

Roman Gountrey in which the eAugur did interpret, that is to fay, which the 4xgar
did fignifie, and prefage fhould be vexed by the French Nation,

Afterwards the Author faith, that the fame French Nation, or Celtique, thall
fear the hour when Boreas fhould drive to far the Fleet, that is to fay;fhall fear much,
when the Baron dela Garde was fo troubled with the ftorm (as we have faid) and in
truth it was Boreas, or the Northwind, that drove him into St. Flerents road,


1e
F reach,


ae Dedans les Ifles fi horrible tumulte,
Rien on n’orra qu’une bellique brigue,
Tant grand {era des predareurs ]’Infult,
Qu'on fe viendra ranger-a Ja grand ligue.
Englifh.
In the Iflands hall be fo horrid tumults,
That nothing foall be heard but a Warlike furprife ,
So great {ball be the infult of the Robbers, |
That every one fball fhelter himfelf under the great League.
ANN OT.
This is plain, ifby the the great League, you uaderftand the foundeft.and moft
powerful party.


PROPHECIES
Michael Noftradamus.


CENTURY IIL


I,
French.
Pres Combat & Bataille Navale,
Le grand Neptune a fon plus haut befiroy ,


Rouge adverfaire de peur de viendra pafle,
Mettant le grand Occean en eftroy.


Englifh.
After the fight and Sea Battle,


The great Neptune in bis bigheft Steeple,
The red adverfary {ball wax pale for fear,
Putting the great Occean ina fright.
ANNOT.
I find no myftical fence in this, unlefs by the red adverfary he fhould underftand
che Pope, becaufe clothed in Scarlet, Therefore I leave the explication to the judge-
ment of every particular Reader.


Of Michael Noftradamus.


IX:
French.


Le Divin Verbe donfa a la fubftance,

Compris Ciel, Terre, or occultau lait myftique,
Corps, Ame, Elprit, ayant toute puiflance;
Tant fous {es pieds comme au Siege Celique.


Englith,
The Divine Word fhall give to the fubfEance,
Heaven and Earth, and Gold hid in the myftical milk,
Body, Soul, Spirit, having all power,
As well under his feet, as in the Heavenly Seat.


ANN OT. . | :

I defire the judicious Reader, and chiefly if he be given to the Hermetick Philo-
fophy , to takea fpecial notice of this Stanza, for in itis contained the fecret of the
Elixir or Philofophers Stone, more clearly and plainly then in the Tabala Smaragdina
of Hermes, which to make appearent, we fhall expound it Verfe by Verfe,

The Divine Word {hall give tothe [ubftance by the Divine word you muft not un-
derftand the fecond perfon of the Trinity, but a Doctor in Divinity or a Theologian,
called in Greek 65ac70s or Divine word , who fhall bean Adeptas , a Difciple of
Hermes, and one that (hall attain to the fecret of the Philofophers ftone, _.

That man fhall give to thefubftance , thatis, to Gold; Heaven and Earth, and
gold hidin the myftical Milk. Heaven and Earth, thatis all the Celeftial and Ter-
reftrial qualities, lurking in the Gold, whichis hid inthe myftical milk , that is in
the Azoth, or Mercury of the Philofophers,

Body, Sout, Spirit, having all Power, that is, the three principles, of which the Phi-
lofophers fay their ftone is compounded, viz. Body, Soul, and Spirit,

Having 4H Power, that is, having the power to tranfmute all Metrals intoits kind;
as alfo having all the powers from above and below, as Hermes faith, Pater ejus eff
Sol, Mater véro Luna, © Terra nutrix ejus, isha d

Which is confirmed by the laft Verfe ; 45 well under his feet, asin the Heavenly
Seat,


TDR
French.
Mars & Mercure, & Largent joint enfemble,
Vers le Midy extreme ficcité,
_Awtond d'Afe on dira Terre tremble,
Corinthe; Ephefe lors en perplexite.
| 06e 1 OS NE: <i
Mars and Metéury, and Silver joyned together,
Towards the South a great drought,
Inthe bettome of. Alia fhall be an Earthquake, :
Corinth avd Ephelus foal then bein perdlexity,


P ANNOT.


The true Prophecies


ANNOT.,

After the Author hath in the foregoing Stanza expreffed the miftery of the Phi-
Jofophers ftone, he feemeth to give here a receit, though Sophiftical, for-the re-
lief of the Inquifitors, and as it were a Viaticums, for them to fubfift till they can
attain to the perfection, as Bafilins, Valentinus bath done fince to his difciples.

He faith then, that with Mars, that is, Iron, Mercury and'Silverjoyned toge-
ther, fome thing may be done, ifyou beware of a drought. in the South > that is,
in the middle of the operation; and this is concerning the two firft Verfes. Thofe
chat fhall defire to be better and further informed, may cometo me, and they fhall
have all che fatisfaction I can afford them.

The two laft Verfes have norelation to the firft two, and foretel onely a great
Earth-quake in Afia, by which, thofe two Towns, Corinth and Ephefus, fhall be in


great perplexity,
IV.
French;

Quand feront proches Je defaut.des Lunaires,
De Puna lautre ne diftant grandement,
Froid, ficcité, dangers vers les frontieres,
Mefme ou l’Oracle a: pris commencement.

Engldh,
When the want of the Luminaries fball be near,
Not being far diftant one front another,
Cold, drought, danger towards the Frontiers,
Ewen where the Oracle bad bis beginning.


ANNOT,

The word near, fheweth that the two Eclipfes, one of rhe Sun and the other of the
Moon, (hall be near. one another.

The Ephemerides of bn Stadius, teach ns, that in the year 15 56in the Month
of November, thefe two Eclipfes did meet. That of the Sun upon the firft of
November, at 17 hours (asthe Aftrologers reckon) and 53 Minutes, That of the
Moon at 12 hours and 43 Scruples ; and thus the two laft Verfes are plain.

Concerning the other two: Belleforeft teacheth us twothings; the firft, chat the
fame year was extraordinary dry, in fo much that from April to odeber it did not
rain, but only upon the Eve of St. oh» the Baptift, and that che Vintage was made
in Auguff, the Wine proving excellent, Thefecondis, thatin the Month of De-
cember began a horrid Froft, whichlafted agreat while. Thus there was Cold and
drought,

Concerning the dangers towards the Frontiers, Bel/eforeft faith, that towards
Pickardy the Spaniard began to break the truce, making inrodes about Adéeville
St. Spirit of Rue, laChapele, Rozoy, Thieraffe, and Aubenton, :

When complaints were made of it, they alledged their neceffity and want of
Vi@uals; which did oblige the Lord Admiral to permit the Souldiers retaliation;
and inthis mannet, there was danger towards the Frontiers, :

As for the Town where the oracle ( that is, our Author ) had his beginning or
birth, whether it be that of St. Remy or Salon de Craux. The dangers Phat were
ee ais from the Civil Wars between the Proteftants and the Romas Ca-
thOICES, :


French:


There fhall happen two great Ecclipfes between March and A
and the other of the Moon ; then
relieved by the two powerful Princes ofa good Nature.


of Michael Noftradamus.


ne
French,
Pres le de defaut des deux grands luminaires,


Qui furviendra entre [Avril & Mars,


O quel. cherté! mais deux grands debonnairés.


Par Terre & Mer {ecourront toutes parts.


Englith.
Near the Ecclipfes of the two great Luminaries.
Which fhall happen between April and March,
O what a dearth ! but two great ones bountiful: .


By Land and Sea foall fuccour them on all fides
ANNOT.


a


VI.
French.


Dans Temple clos le foudre yentrera.
Des Citadins dedans leur fort grevez,
Chevaux, Boeufs, Hommes, l’Onde mur touchera,
Par faim, foif, foubs les plus foibles armes.
' Englith.
Into a clofe Church the lightning feall fall
The Citizens [hall be diftreffed in their Fort,
Horfes, Oxen, Men, the Water [hall touch the Wall.


By hunger, thirft, down fhall come the worft previded,


ANNOT.


This is plain.


VIT.
French.

Les fugitifs, feu du Ciel fur les Piques,
Conflit prochain des Corbeaux fesbatans;
De Terre on crie, atde, fecours Celiques,
Quand pres des murs feront Jes combatans.

Englifh.
The ruzaways, fire of Heaven upon the Pikes ,


A fight near band, the Ravens fporting,


They ery from the Land, fuccours O Heavenly powers !


When near the walls {ball be the fighting wen.


D = ANNOT.


prit, one of the Sun,
(hall bea greac dearth, but the affli@ted fhall be


108 ‘The true Prophecies


ANNOT.. |. |
The firft Verfe fignifieth, that chere fhall be fome Fagétives, upon whole Pikes
the Lightning fhall fall.
The fecond, that when a multitude of Ravens flall be [porting, a great fight thall
be near hand. | |
The third, thac there fhall be a great exclamation and prayers, when the Soul-
diers fhall come near the wall to give an affault. ‘


VIIL
French.


Les Cimbres joints avecques leurs voifins,
Depopuler viendront prefque l’Efpagae,
Gens ramafñlez, Guzenne & Limofins ,
Seront en ligue & Jeur feront Compagne.


Englifh,
The Cunbres joyzed with their neighbours ; + ON Ge
AI J * & 2 , ! nl
à bull come to depopulate aloft all Spain, jé
People gathered from Guienna and Limofin,
Shall he in league with them, and keep them Company.

ANNOT. | 4

The Cimbres and Tewtens were a Northern people, viz: the Swedes and Danes,


who came once out of their Countrey to fack Rome, and were overcome by Marius


near the Town of Orenge, in a place where his Triumphal Arch is feen to this day:
The reft is eafie. :


.<
French.
Bourdeanx, Ronan & la Rochelle joints,
Tiendront autour la grand Mer Occeane
A rae 7 y bc
Anglois Bretons, & les Flamans conjoints,
Les chafleront jufque aupres de Rouane,


| Englifh. } oS
Bourdeaux, Rouan, and Rochel joyned together,
Will range about upon the great Ocean,
Englifh Brittans, avd Flemings Joyned together,
Shall drive them away as far as Roane.
agi ANNOT,
By mentioning Bordeaux, Rowan, and Rechel, the Author underftandeth the
whole Naval forces of France, which (he faith ) fhall be defeated, by the Eng/ifh,


Bristains, and Hollanders, and purfued as far as Rowane, which isa Town at the head


of the River Loire, from whence icrunneth down for the {pace of seo Miles to Nap-
#es, and a while after difchargeth it felf into the Ocean:


French,


Hath


of Michael Noftradamus.
, X.

French,
De fang & faim plus grand calamité,
Sept fois faprefte a la Marine plage,
Monech de faim, lieu pris, captivité,
Le grand mené, Croc, enferré en cage:

Englith.

Of blood and famine, what a great calamity !
Seven times is ready to come upon the Sea Coal
Monech by hunger, ihe piace taken, captivity,
The great one carried away, Croc,/but up ina Cage,
ANNOT.


Monech or Monaco is a Town and Principality belonging to the, Family of the
Grimaldi of Genua, and isfeated by the Seafide, between Provence and Genoa ; that
place is threatned here with many afflictions, as is plain in this Stanza,


xX I,
French.
Les Armées battre au Ciel longue faifon,
L’ Arbre au milieu de la Cite tombe,
Vermine, Rogne, Glaive en face tilon,
Lors le Monarque d’ Adrie fuccombe,
Englifh.


Armies foail fight i in the Air a great while,


The Tree fhall fall in the middle of the City,
Vermin, Scabs, Sword, fire-brand in the face,


When the Monarch. of Adria fall fall.
ANNOT.


The three firft Verfes contain feveral prodigies ; that fhall happen before the
death of the Duke of Venice , or rather (becaufe he ismo Monarck) before the fall
of that Monarchy or Common-wealth.


xX LE
French.


Par Ja tumeur du Heb. Po. Tag. Tibre de Rome,
Et par leftang Leman & Aretin, |
Les deux grands chefs, & Citez de Garonne,
Prins, Morts, Noiez. Partir humain butin.


Englifh..
By the fwélling of Heb. Po. Tag. Tiber of Bone,
And by the Lake Leman aad Aretin, _
The two great Heads, and Cities of Giionne:


Taken, Dead, Drowned. The buman booty fhall be divided.
ANN OT.


Cet Re


aes


a


en ee NEIRER


miser"


DL I Ste


The true Prophecies


ANNOT.


Heb. is the River Hebrts in Thracia, Po,is the great River of Italy, Tag. is Te agies
the River of Lisbonne ; the reft is plain. |


XIII.
French.
Par Foudre en Arche Or & Argent fondu,
De deux Captifs lun l’autre mangera,
De la Cite le plus grand eftendu,
Quand fubmergée la Claffe nagera.


Englith.


By Lightning [ball gold and filve be melted in the Arch,


Of two Prifoners one foall eat up the other,

The dheateft of the City [bull be laid down,

When the Navy that was drowned fhall fwim.
ANNOT.


The words and the fenfe are’ plain,


XIV.
French.


Par le Rameau du vaillant perfonage,

De France infirme, par le Pere infelice,

Honeurs, Richefles, travail en fon viel Age,

Pour avoir creu’ le confeil d'homme nice.
Englith.

By the Bow of the valliant men,

Of weak France, by the unfortunate Fatber,

Honours Riches, labour in his old age,

For having believed the cou ncelof a nice man.


ANNOT.


Every body may underftand this as well as I do.


X V.

French.
Cœur, vigueur, gloire, le Regne changera,
De tous points contre, ayant fon adverlaire,
Lors France enfance par mort fubjuguera,
Un grand Regent fera lors plus contraire.

Englifh.
Heart, vigour, and glory fball change the Kingdom
In all points, having an adverfary againft it,
Then fball France overcome Childhood by death,
A great Regent fhall then be more adverfary to it.


ANNOT,


eh


of Michael Noftradamus.


| ANNOT.
The two firft Verfes feem to have foretold of the late Tyrant Cromwel.


The two laft-Verfes may be applied to France, when the Infant of Spain Don Bal-
thazar died, dc,


X VI.
French.
Un Prince Awglois Mars à {on cœur du Ciel,
Voudra pourluivre fa fortune profpere,
Des deux duelles l'un percera le fiel,
Hay de luy, bien aymé de fa Mere.
Englifh.
An Englifh Prince Mars hath bis heart from Heaven,
Will fellow bis profperous fortune, |
Of two Duels one fhall pierce the gall, | ie
Being hated of him, and beloved of bis Mother. ne
ANNOT. HUE dl
By this Stanza is promifed to England a Martial Prince, who fhall have his heart


from Heaven, and with all endeavours follow his profperous fortune, whichis a re- ti |
markable and commendable part in a man, ja
By the laft cwo Verfes, it feemeth that this Prince fhall have a Son,who fhall fight


two duels, forone of which his Father fhall be angry and hate him , but his Mother
fhall love him for it.


X VII.
French.


Mont Aventine brufler nuit fera veu,

Le Ciel obfcur tout a un coup en Flandres,
Quand le Monarque chaffera fon Neveu,

Lors gens d’Eglife commettront les efclandres.


Englith.
Mount Aventine fhall be [een to burn in the night. —
The Heaven fball be darkned upon a fudden in Flanders,
When the Monarch fhall expel bis Neveu,


Then Churchmen fhall commit fcardals.


| ANNOT. . |
Mounte Aventine is one of the feven Mountainsin Rome. Thereftis plain,
X VIIL
French


Apres la pluye de lait aflez longuette, My 4
En plufieurs lieux de Rheims.Je Ciel couché, jun
O quel conflit de fang pres deux faprefte, Me
Pere & Fils Rois, noferont approché,


Englith,


The true Prophecies


TREES Dey he + CR DOUANES
After a pretty long rain of Milk,
In many places of Rhemes the lightning fball fall,
O what a bloody fight is making ready near them,
Father and Son,both Kings, fball not dare to come uear.
ANNOT,.
Rhemes is a City in France, The reft is eafie,
XIX.
French.
En Lucques {ang & lait viendra pleuvoir,
Un peu devant changement de Preteur,
Grand Pefte & Guerre, Faim & foif fera voir,
Loin ou mourra leur Prince Recteur.
Englifh.
In Luca it fhall rain Blood and Milk,
A litile.before the change of the Magiftrate,
A great Plague,War Hunger and Lbirft [ball be feen,
A great way off where their Prince Ruler fhall die.
ANNOT.

Luca at prefent is a ftrong Town, and a little Common-wealth by itit felfin
Italy, governed by their own Magiftrate : That Town is threatned here tofee thofe
prodigies mentioned, a little before the change of their Government, befides a
great Plague and dearth; as alfothedeathof their chief Magiftrate, who fhall die
far off chat Countrey.

As for the raising Milk and Blood, they are Prodigies that have appeared often be-
fore, and therefore notincredible, as thofe that are Verfed in Hiftory may juftifie:
and although the reafons may be drawn from natural caufes, yet wonld they be too
tedious if I fhould infert them here.

XX.

French.
Par les Contrées du grand flevue Betique,
Loin d’Idere, au Royaume de Grenade,
Croix repoufices par gens Mahometiques,
Un de Cordube trahira a la fin Contrade.
| Englifh.
Throngh the Countreys of the great River Betis,
Far from Iberia, in the Kingdom of Granada,
Croffes beaten back by Mabometan people,
One of Corduba fhall at laft betray the Conatrey,

ANNO T,

The great River, called in Latine Bets, and in Spawifh Guadalquivir , is the River

of Sevilia, the moft famous Town in Spain for Trade. This River runneth through


moft of the Spark Dominions, apd difchargeth it felfinto the Ocean about the
| a | mouth


of Michael Noftradarnus, 113


mouth of the Straights, over againft Barbary, upon which Coaft of Spain \yeth the
Kingdom of Granada, the chief City of which is Corduba, in Spanifh Cordwa, This
Kingdom was of time almoft immemorial, occupied and inbabited by the Moores,
till they were expelled and driven back into Barbary, by Ferdinand and Ifabells, King
and Queen of Csffil/a, The reftis eafie,
XXI:
| French.
Au CruStamin pres Mer Adriatique.
Apparoiftra un horrible poiflon,
De face humaine & de corps aquatique,
Qui fe prendra dehors de l’Hamecon.
| Englifh,
Ia the Cruftamin near the Adriatick Sed,


An horrid Fifb fhall appear,
Having a mans face, and a fifbes body,
Which fhall be taken without a book,
ANNOT.

I fuppofe this Cr#ffamin to be fome place fo called, near the Adviatick Sea,

As for Fifhes with an humane face, we have feveral examples of them, Ambrofiz
Paraus relateth divers, and in his works hath inferted the Pidures of them.

1, When Mewa was Governour of -£gypt, and walked by the Nilwsfide, he
faw a Sea-man rifing out of the River, having an humane fhape as far as the Navel,
and with a grave look and fair hairs, intermixed with white ones, bony Breaft, and di-
ft Arms,the reft of the body was like a Fith, Three days after inthe Morning ap-
peared another Sea-monfter like a woman: thofe two Monfters appeared fo long,
that every body had time to confider them.


2. Rondeletius faith, that in our age was taken a Fith in the Sea of
every body prefently called a Monk, becaufe of the refemblance.

3-,Jn the year 1531. was feen a Sea-monfter, covered with Scales, which for
the refemblance was called a Bifhop, Rondeletive and Gef{uerws have the PiQure of ir.


4: In the year 1523, was feen in Rome a Fifhabout the bignefs of a Child of five
years old, that had humane fhape ro the Navel, except the ears: So thar all thofe
things related of Tritons, Nereides and Sirens feem not altogether fabulous, and we
may conclude with Pliny: Vera eff valgi opinio, quicqnia nafcatur in parte nature ua,
© in Mari effe, praterque multa que nujquam alibi, lib, 9. Cap. 2.

XXII.

French.
Six jours laffaut devant Cité donné,
Livrée fera forte & afpre Bataille,
Trois la rendront, &a eux pardonné,
Le refte a feu & fang trauche taille.


i Englifh.

Six days flall the affault be given to the City, :

A great and fierce ‘Battle fbalt be fought,

Three fhall furrender it, and be pardoned,

The reft shall be put to fire and Sword,cut-and flasht.

; ANNOT,
Some famous City muft'be here underftood,which the Author hath not named,
The fame fhall be affaulted for fix days continually, and in conclufion thall be furren-

| Q


dred


Norway, which


ei se MN


ee |


‘ia 7 be true Prophecies
dred or betrayed by three men,who fhall be pardoned, and all the reft put to Fire and
Sword, Moft men that have knowledge in Hiftory, interpret this of the City of Mag-
debourg in Germany that was deftroyed with Fire and Sword by the Earl of Ty, Ge-
neral {or the Emperour againft Gaffavus Adolphus, King of Swedeland. For the like
devaftationand cruelty was never heard of in Ewrope,
XXILI.
French.
Si France pafle outre Mer Liquiftique,
Tu te verras en Ifles & Mers enclos,
Mahomet contraire plus Mer I’ Adriatique,
Chevaux & Afnes tu rongeras les os,
Englifh.
If France goeth beyond the Liguftick Sea, |
Thou fhalt fee thy felf inclofed with Iflands and Seas.
Mahomet, againft thee befides the Adriatick Sea,
Of Horfes and Affes thou fbalt gnaw ihe bones:
ANNOT.

This is concerning the miferies which the French were to fuffer int
Corfica, till the peace was concluded in the year1559, The Author directeth his
fpeech to the French Fleet that wentto Cerfica in the year 1555,

He faith inthe firft Verfe , If France gocth beyond the Liguffik Sea; that is, ifthou
goeft to Corfica, which is beyond the Ligu/tik Sea towards Africa Thon fhalt fee thy
felf enclofed with Iflands and Seas,that is,thou fhalt be conftrained to keep within thofe
tivo Towns which chou haft there, without going out either by Land or Sea 5 not by
Sea for want of Ships, nor by Land the Garrifons being weak, becaufe the King had
then fo much bufinefs that he could not fuffice all.

Moreover the Author addeth that Mahomet fhall Le contrary; not that he was an
Enemy co France , but becaufé he was then Mafter of the 4driatick Sea; fo that the
Venetians, which were then friends to the French,could not fuccour them.

And thus thé news of the peace beiag brought,the Frezch dideat their Horfes and
Affes, and there was never a peace fo well come as to the French that were in Cor/iea,
XXTLY,

French.
De l’Entreprile grande confufion,
Perte de gens Threfor innumerable,
Tu ny doibs faire encore tenfion,


Francé a mon dire fais que fois recordable.
Englifh.

From the undertaking great confufion,

Lofs of people and innumerable Treafury,

Thou oughteft not yet to tend that way,

France endeavour to remember my faying.


,
,
L


ANN OT. «
‘This is annexed and hath relation to the precedent , therefore needeth no otheï
interpretation, XX V.
French.


Qui au Royaume Navarrois parviendra,
Quand la Sicile & Naples feront joints,

. Ce) 1 é e
Bigorre & Landes pat Foix lors ontiendra,


D'Un quid Efpague fera par trop conjoint. Englith)


Sees À rite &, L æ " a


of Michael Noftradamus.
Engliffi.
c — He that fhall obtain the Kingdom of Navarre,
: | When Sicily and Naples fhall be joyned,
Bigorre and Landes then by Foix fhall beheld
| Of one who fhall too much be joyned to Spain.
| _ ANNOT. Re
Bigerre is a Town in Gafcony,the Landes is a defert Countrey about Bordeaux where-
|| innothing groweth but Pine-Trees , Foix: is a Country of Gafcony,called the County,
|| of Foix. The reft is eañic, XX VI. |
| ) French.
| Des Rois & Princes drefleront fimulachres,
| Augures, creux eflevez arufpices :
| Corne victime dorée, & d'Azur & deNacre,
Intrepretez feront les éxtifpiices:
.. Englifh.
Some Kings and Princes flall fet up Idols,
À Divinations, and hollow raifed Divinators,
| Vittim with gilded Horus, and fet with Axur and Mother of Pearl
The looking into the Entrals fhall be interpreted.

| ANNOT.

1 can find nothing in this but a defcription of the Heathens facrifices in ancient
times, where they brought the Vidtim ;-thatis, the beaft that was to be facrificed,
trimmed in a gallant manner,having the Horns gilded, and {et with Azureand Mother
of Pearland after the Entrals were taken out,by the infpection of themthey practifed
| their Soothfaying. Thisinfpeëtion of Entrals wascalled by the Latines Exté(picium,
k | fromthe word éxta which fignifieth Entrals, and /pecfo which fignifiech to look,
ao XX VIL


="
= =
” =,
ptet a on


| French.
À Prince Libique puifiant en Occident,
| Francois d’ Arabe viendra tant enflammer;
| Scavant aux Lettres fera condefcendent,
La Langué Arabe en Francois tranflater.
Enelith.
A Labian Prince being powerful in the Weft,
The French fball love fo much the Arabian Language,
That be being a Learned man fhall condefcend,
To have the Arabian tongue tranflated into French,
' ANNOT.
This Prophecy is de Faturo,and is concerning a Litian Prince (now Libia isa King-
dom of Africa) who hall be a powerful man in the V Veft,:and being alover oflearn-
ing, fhall.condefcend to have the. Arabian Language tranflated into French, becaufe
_. D the French at that time fhall be mach,in Jove with it.
iy XXVIII.
a | French.
De Terre foible & pauvre parentale,
Par boute & paix parviendra a l’Empire,
Long temps regner une jeune femelle,
Qu oneques en Regne nenfurvint un fi pire:
2


The irue Prophecies


Englifh:
One weak in Lands and of poor Kindred,
By thrufting, and peace [hall attain to the Empire,
Long time [ball Reign a young woman,
Such.as in a Reign was never a worfe.
3 | ‘ANNOT. *
The words are fo plain, that every body may interpret them.
X XTX.
French.
Les deux Neveux en divers lieux nourr&,
Navale pugne, Terre peres tombez,
Viendront fi haut eflevez aguerris,
Venger l’Injure ennemis fuccombez.
Englith,
The two Nephews brought up in divers places,
A Sea fight, fathers fallen to the Earth, |
They fhall come highly educated, and expert in Arms,
To avenge the injury, their enemies foall fall down under them.


ANNOT. |
This is concerning two Nephews, who hall be educated in divers places, and grow


expert in Arms, their Fathers fhal! be killed, butchofe Mephess thall come, and


having ‘fought at Sea, fhall revenge the injury done tothem, overcoming their
enemies.


XXX!

French.
Celuy qu’en luitte & fer au fait Bellique,
Aura porte plus grand que luy le prix,
De nuit au lit fix luy feront la pique,
Nud fans harnois fubit fera furprins.

Englifh.
He who in Wreftling and Martial affairs,
Had carried the prize before his better,
By night Six fhall abufe him in his bed,
Being naked, and without harnefs,he [ball fuddenly be furprifed.


où ANNOT.

Many attribure this tothe Earl of eMentgemery in France; who having run a tile
againft Henry If, unfortunately killed him; for which, and for being of the Proteftane
party jhe was afterwards beheaded, though quarter had been givenhim.


French,


of Michael Noftiradamus,


XXXI
French.


| Aux champs de Mede, d’ Arabe, & d’ Arienie,
| Deux grands Copies trois fois faflembicront,
Pres du Rivage d’ draxes la mefgnie,

Du grand Soliman en Terre tomberont,

| iio à , Englith. |
| In the fields of Media, Arabia, and Arinenia,
! Two great, Armies hall meet thrice,

| Near the Shore of Araxes,the peuple

| Of great Solyman fhall fall down,


| | ANNOT. |
This fignifieth no more, but the lofs of three famous Battles on the Turks fide, ray
Againft che Perfians. | | ae
The firft that I find after the coming out of thefe Prophefies, \is che Battle of | |
Sancazan, {even miles from Ta#rés; and hard by the River Araxes, where 20000 QUE


|

|
: ° 3 : ; i
Turks were (lain, without any confiderablélofs of the Perfians ;, this wasin the time an
he fécond,T he other aT

ij


| of Amarath thelIL.Emperour of the Tarks,and fon to Selymas € |
Lo | two Battles I could not make good, becaufe I want the fupplement of the T urkifh Cid
: … . Hiftory, asalfo becaufe they have not yet happened, | aw
be XXXII. ee
French. |
‘Le grand fepulchre du peuple Aguitanique,, | as


hat
HE e255 )
S’aprochera aupres de la i ofcane, :


Quand-Mars fera pres du coin Germanique, Ut
Et au terroit de la gent Mantuane. | 4
We}
Enolifh. at
The great grave of the Aquitanick people;
Shallcome near Tulcany, i
When Mars (ball be in the German corner, | a
‘And in tbe Territory of the Mantuan people. a j


ANNOT.


The Lord of Thos faith in his Hiftory,,, that the Cardinal Carafagotby the King
| of Frances permiffion, out of Gerfica, feveral Troops of Ga/cons, and broughrfome
ut Rome, Many


Fa with them: to the number of about 2000 which were quartered abo
ih E of them were among the Troops of the Duke of Guife, being allured thither by
| thereputation of their Countreÿman Captain Mouluc. |
The Author forerellech,-thac:chey. fhall find their Graves neat Tufcany, becaule

refit the Territory of Rome joyneth to that Province,
| Then in the 3 and 4 Verfe he fpecifieth the time |
foall be near the German corners the other, when he foall bein the Territory of the Man- Hi
twan people, and the War was then in that Territory; for the Duke of Ferrara to Hh

fhew he would not ftand fill, fent his fon A/phonfo d Efte to make incurfions there,..


fyjaud-co take fome places. wb ;
Moreover the War was then near the German corner, which is Lorrain, when
Henr1


by two marks s0ne is, when Mars


fry


118 The twrne Prophecies

efieged Thienville in the year 1558. Paradis fheweth, that Afarswas in
s before, fith about the end of the year 1555: the
Duke of ‘Nevers by an extraordinaty endeavour in the middle of the Winter, did re-
lieve Mariembonrg : and the following years the French Garrifons kept the fields to a-
void furprifes. And ih the year 1557: when the Duke of Gusfe fought in Italy,


che Duke of Savey brought his Army againft Mariembourg ; foit proved true that
Mars, vis. the War was in the German corner 5 for that Town is in the borders of


Germany, and was in that corner till the taking of Thionville.
KXXIIE
French.


En la Cite ou le loup entrera;
Bien pres de la les ennemis feront;
Copie eftrange grand pais gaftera,
Aux Monts des Alpes les amis pañleront.
Englifh.
In the City wherein the Wolf {hall go,
near that place the enemies foall be,
An Army of firangers [ball [poil a great Countrey,
The friends fhall go over the Mountains of the Alpes.
ANNOT.


The two laft Verfes make me think that this Prophefie was fulfilled in the time
of Heary 11. King of France, becdufe the French being then friends to the Pope,
went over the Alpes to ferve him,

This Stanza might alfo beapplyed to Zews 13,who caufed his Army to go beyond
the Alpes, but chat word Friends is more convenient to the time of Hewry I I. be-
caute the French went then over the Apes in quality of friends to ferve the Pope. =<

According to thisconje@ure, the wolf which fignifieth the Spaniard, came anne
1556. into many Towns, which the Duke of Alsatook, as we have faid in another
place, and becaufe among thofe Towns Neptune Was one of the moft confiderable,
being feated by the Seafide near Rome: I believe that by this word City he mean-


eth that Town whichbelonged to the Colonefe.
And to fay truth, the French were then very neat ir, to endeavour the relief of


Henry 11s b
the German corner two yeat


it, |

Afterwards came the Duke of Gaife’s Army, whis is named by the Anthor; 4
Army of ftrangers, becaule the French and Germans are ftrangerstoltaly, This
Army {hall [poil great Countrey 5 for in chat year it went through all /t«/y, and where


an Army paffeth, nothing but ruine can be expected,
XXXI V,
French.
Quand le defaut du Soleil lors fera,
Sur le plein jour le Monftre fera veu,
Tout autrement on l'Interpretera,
Cherté na garde, nul ny aura pourveu.


of Michael Noftradamus.


i | Enghth.

a | When the Ecclipfe of the Sun fhall be

d | At noon day, the Monfter foal be feen,

| It fhall be interperted otherways, © Ms

; | Then for a dearth sbecaufe no body hath provided againft it.
| ANN OT. |
[| - Thefenfeofthisis, that when tffe Sun fhall be Eclipfed at noon , a Monfter thali
[|  beborn, which fhall prefage a dearth, though no body will believe it, becaufe they
|| - were unprovided againtt it,
| XXX V.
| French.
| Du plus profond de l'Occident d'Europe,
| De pauvre gens un jeune enfant naiftra,
| Qui par fa langue feduira grande troupe,
| Son bruit au Regne d'Orient plus croiftra.
| Englith.
I Out of the deepeft part of the Weft of Europe,
| Frou poor people a young child ball be borir,

| | Who with bis tongue fball feduce many people,

x | His fame fball increafe in the Eaftern Kingdon.

"| oe - ANNOT.

af This needeth nd explication, he

be § XXXVI à

; French.

“ | Enfevely non mort Apoplectique,

je | Sera trouve avoir les mains mangees,

a | Quand Ja Cité damnera l'Heretique,

aa Qu’avoiz leur Loix ce leur fembloit changees,

id ; 3 Englifh.

| One buried, not dead, but Apoplettical,

ke | Shall be found to have eaten up bis hands,

ke |


IV ben the City fhall blame the heretical man,
Who as they thought had changed their-Laws.
ANNOT, .

Many perfons (according to Hiftories being only ina fit of Apoplexy) have been
buried for dead,and being afterwards taken out of the ground, have been found to have
exten up their hands, as I my felf have feen one digged out of Saint Bartholomews
Church-yard;abont the time chat the City of London began to be weary of Crommels
| devices and Tyranny , yet I would not here definitively affert,he was the man here
pointed at by the Title and Epichere of Heretical mart, unle(s it were in the point of
| goverment. —


brencB.


PE dépit 2e 57 Re
fo boys Le he aes SS ee eee


SS


pese


T be true Prophecies


XXXVIL

French.
Avant l’aflault l’Oraïfon pronouncée,
Milan prins l’Aïgle, par embufche deceus,


Murailleantique par Canons enfonfée,
Par feu & fang a mercy peu receus.
Englifh. *
Before the afjault the Prayer fhall be faid,
. AnEagle fall take a Kite,they fhall be deccived by an Embufcado,

The ancient wall fball be beaten down with Canons,
By fire and blood, few fhall have quarter.

ANNOT.


XXXVIIL.
French.
La gent Gauloife & Nation eftrange,
Outre les Monts, morts pris & profligez,
Au mois contraire & proche de vendange,
Par les Seigneurs en accord redigez.


Englifh.
The French Nation, and another Nation,
Being over the Mountains, fball die, and-be taken,
Ina monthif@ontrary to them, and near the vintage,
By the Lords agreed together.


ANNOT.

Two kind of Nations were led into Italy by the Duke of Cwi/e to fuccour the
Pope, viz, Frenchand Germans, meaning by the Germans all chofe that ufe the Ger-
man Tongue, as Switzers, &c.

The Author faith, thefe two Nations were led beyond the Mountains, becaufe
they went beyond the eApennine Alpes, to come downinto the Champion Coun-
trey of /taly, where fome of them died by the Sword, others by famine and ficknefss
others loft their liberty, being made prifoners of War, others were expofed to the
inconveniences that attend a ruined Army: He addeth, chat thefe accidents fhall
befall them in a Month near the Vintage, that Month is September : He calleth ie
Contrary, becaufe the Grapes being ripe, the ftarved Souldiers did eat abundance of
them, and fo fellintoabloody flux. The Pope’s Tenants made ufe of this Strata-
gem to ruine that Army,

The Spaniard had his revenge the year following ;. for the Duke of Gaife having
miffed his defign, and being ftept before Civitella, and incenfed that the Pepe did
not keep his word with him, he refolved to go back again into France, and {o the
Pope did by the means.of the Common-wealth of Venice,and of the Duke of Florence,
it was concluded and figned with the 23 of September.

This isthe Authors meaning in the 4 Verfe, thacall the misfortune which befell
the French, was by reafon of that peace; for the Pope disbanded his Troops, con-
lifting moft of French and Switzers, the greateft part of whom fell into the ands of

their


The fenfe of this is eafie.


Of Michael Noftradamus. tai


their enemies, and of the Countrey people, others died of ficknefs. Jristrue
that the Duke of Gwife brought his own Army back without much lofs, but the
Author fpeaketh here of the Gafcons and Switzers, that werein the Pope's fervice,
under the command of Marthal Sivozzy, Mowluc, Cardinal €araffs, and others,

The time of this peace agreeth with the Prophefie 5° for it was:concluded on the
23 of September, which is a Month near the Fintage,


XXXIX,
French.
Les fept en trois Mois en concorde, :
a, -Pour fubjuger les Alpes Apeninnes,
Mais la tempefte & Ligure couarde,
Les profligent en fubites ruines.
Englifh.
The feven fball agree together within three Months,
To conquer the Apennine Alpes,
But the teupeft, and coward Genocfe,
Shall fuk them into fudden ruines. |
| ANNOT, . :. | À
… There fhall be feven perfons, who fhall be three Months in making an agrec- JL
ment to go beyond the Apemies, but they fhallbe hindred by atempeft, and by I
the cowardlinefs of the Gensefes, |


PRE
| French.
Le grand Theatre fe viendra redreffer,
Les dez jettez & les rets ia tendus, .
Trop le premier en glaz viendra laffer,
| Par arc proftrais de long temps ia fendus.


: | The great Theatre fhall be raifed up again,

uk (| The Dice being caft, andthe neft fpread, HUE
4 | The firft ball too much ia Glafs. any at
* { Beaten down by Bows who long before me fp ko | 4 j
ial | | PNA  ANROT: a
thit | This muftbe put among Jnfolabilia de Alilaco, ek
to i Se Ree |

a {| rage es wesw: French:

ae Boilu fera eflenpar le Confeil, |

Hi Plus hideux Monftre en Terre napperceu,

the | Le coup volant luy crevera un ceil,


Le traiftre au Roy pour fidele receu. 7 i il


The true Propbecies


Englith.
Crook-back foall be chofen by the Councel,
A more hideous me I never faw upon Earth.
The flying blow fhall put out one of his eyes,
The Traitor to the King,fball be admited as faithful.
ANN OT:
This needs noexplication,
XLIT.
French.
L’Enfant naiftra a deux dents en Ja gorge,
Purres en Tufcie par pluie tomberont,
peu d’ans apres ne fera Bled ny Orge,
pour faouler ceux qui de faim failleront.
Englifh. |
A Child foall be born with two Teeth in bis mouth,
It fball rain ftones in Tulcany,
A few years after there fball be neither Wheat nor Barley
To feed thofe that [ball faint for hunger,
ANNOT.


Thofe two Prodigies mentioned in the twofirft Verfes, . do prefage a great Fa-
mine that fhall enfue a few years after,


XLIIL
French.
Gens d’alentour du Tar, Lot, & Garonne,
Gardez les Monts Apennins de pañler,
Voftre tombeou pres de Rome & d’ Ancone,
Le noir poil crelpe fera Trophée dreffer.
Englifh.
People that live about the Tar, Lot, and Garonne,
Take heed to go over the Apennine Mountains,
Tour Grave is near Rome and Ancona,
The black frifled hair fall drefs a Trophy of you.
| ANNOT.
The Tar, the Lot, and the Garone, are three Rivers of Ga{cony, the Inhabitants
of which are forewarned not to go over the Apennine Mountains, orelfe they fhall


meet with their Graves near Resse and Ancona. This hath relation to the 38 Stanza,
and to the interpretation thereof, therefore vide,


French,


Of Michael'Noftradamus.


XUETN.

French...

fl Quand J’Animal a l'Homnie domeftique!

| Aprés grands peines & faüts viendra parler,
| Le foudre a vierge fera fi malefique,

| De Terre prinfe & fufpenduë en!’ Air.


Englith.
When the Beaft familiar to Mankind,
After great labour, and leaping fball come to peak,
The Lightning fball be fo burtful to'a Virgin,
That fhe fhall be taken from the Earth, and fufpended in the Air.
ANNOT.


It is a Dog that fhall come howling and leaping to his Miftreffes friends ; be-
caufe fhe was killed and fufpended inthe Air by the Lightning,


XLV.
French.
Les cing eftranges entrez-dedans le Temple,
| Leur fang viendra la Terre prophaner,
| Aux Thouloufain {era bien.dur exemple,
fe | D'un qui viendra fes loix exterminer.
Englifh.
| The five ftrangers having come into the Charch,
| The blood fhall prophane the ground,
It fall be a hard example to thofe of Thouloufe,
Concerning one that came to break their Laws.
| ANNOT,
| I fuppofe thefe five ftrangers to be five Commifsiouers,, for the altering fomething


in the Government of Thesloxfe, who fhall be all killed in a Church, and the ground
prophaned by their blood, according to the Romijh opinion,


XLVI.
French.

Le Ciel ( de Plancus a Cité ) nous prelage,
Par clercsinfignes & par eftoiles fixés,
Que de fon changé fubitfaproche lage,
ants À Ne pour fon bien, ne pour fes malefices.
| Lith:
ui, || : Engli

| A The Heaven foretelleth concerning the City of Plancus,
| By famous Clerks, and fixed Stars,
| That the time of her fudden change is neat band,
wi, | Neither becanfe of her goodnefs or - wickedne(s.


i


R'2


The true Prophecies


ANNOT.


The City of Plancus is Lion, becaufe he wasthe Founder of it, That City is
threatned here ofa fudden change , caufed neither by her goodnefs or wickednefs,
but by a certain pofition and afpeét of the fixed Stars, which makes it.facal,


XLVII.

French.
Le vieux Monarque dechaffe de fon Regne,
Aux Orients fon fecours ira querre,
Pour peur des Croix ploiera fon Enfeigne,


En Maylene ira par Mer & par Terre.


Englifh.
The old Monarch being expelled ont of bis Kingdom,
Shall go into the Eaft.to get fuccours,
For fear of the Croffes be shalt-fold up bis Colours,
He shall go into Mitylene by Sea and Land.
ANNOT.
eMityleneis an Ifland of the eArchipelago, belonging to the Turk,
XLVI IL
French.


Sept cens Captifs attachez rudement,
Pour la moitie meurtrir, donné le fort,
Le proche efpoir viendra fi promptement,
Mais non fi toft qu’une quinziefme mort.


Englifh.
Seven hundred prifoners fball be tied together
To murder half of them, the lot being caft,
The next hope fball come quickly,
And not fo quickly, but fifteen fball be dead before.
ANNOT.
By the next hope, he meaneth ehereprieve, The reft isclear.
XLIX
French.
Regne Gaulois tu feras bien changé,
En lieu eftrange eft tranflaté l’Empire,
En autre mœurs & Lois feras rangé,
Ronan & Chartres te feront bien du pire.


3,


of Michael Noftradamus.
 Englifh. |

French Kingdow thon fbalr be much changed,

The Empire is iranflated in another place,

Thou fhalt be put into other manners and Laws,

Rouan azd Chartres fhall do the worfe they can to thee:

ANNOT.


Rowan is the chief City of the Province of Normandie, and Chartres the chief City
of that of Bean(fe,


L.

French
La République de la grande Cité,
A grand rigueur ne voudra confentir,
Roy fortir hors par Trompette Cité,
L’Efchelle au Mur la Cité repentir.

Englifh.
The Common-wealth of the great City,
With great barfbnefs (ball not confent,
That the King fhould go out being fummoned by a Trampet,
The Ladder ball be put to the Wall, and the City repent.

ANNOT.


It is hard to know what he meaneth by the great City wherein there is a Come
mon-wealth, whether it be Venice, Genoa, Geneva, Luca, or fome of the Cities of
Switzerland; but it feemeth thata King fhall take thelter init, who fhall be fummo-


hed by a Trumpet to come ont, but che City will not fuffer it, for which the faid
City thall be fcaled, and repent.


LE
Freñch.
Paris conjuté un grand meurtre commettre,
Blois le fera fortir en plein effet,
Ceux d’Orleans voudront leur Chef rémettre,
Angers, Troyes, Langres, leur féront un mes fait.


Englifh.


Paris confpireth.to commit'a great murder,


Blois will caufe it to come to pafs, >

Thofe of Orleans will fet up their head again,

Angers, Troyes, Langres wall do them a mifchief.
ANNOT.


The Prophecy contained in the two firft Verfes came to pals in the time of Henry
the III, King of France, when the Parifiansidid rebel againfthim , and made Barri-
cadoes in the ftreets, thinking to have taken him, who was compelled to run 4way for
his life, and fly to Chartres, This rebellion’ was raifed and fomented by Hezry of
Lorraine Duke of Gwife, whom the King afterwards caufed to bé murdered, with


his


The true Prophecies


his brother the Cardinal of Lorraine, atthe Convention of che three Eftates kept at


Blois.


Orleans, Angers, Troyes, Langres, are remarkable Cities in France,


œ


L EX
French.
En la Campagne {era fi longue pluye,
Et en |’ Apoville fi grande ficcité,
Coq verral Aiglel’aifle mal accomplie,
Par Lion mile fera en extremite.
Engltfh.
In Campania foall be folong a rain,
And in Apulia fo great a drought,
The Cock fall fee the Eagle with his wing difordered,
And by the Lion brought to extremity.
ANN OT.


Campania, and Apulia are two Provinces of the Kingdom of Naples.'

The laft two Verfes of the Prophecy came to pafs about the years 1630 and 1631;
when Guftavas Adolphus King of Swedeland, called here the Lion, brought the Em-
pire (fignified by the Eagle ) to extremity; the King of France fignified by the
Cock, looking upon, and underhand affifting him. 3 |


LIILI
Freucb.


Quand le plus grand emportera le prix,

De Nuremberg, d’ Aushourg,& ceux de Balle

Par Agripine Chef de Frank fort repris,

Traverferont par Flandres jufqu'en Gale.

Englifh.

When the great one fball carry the prize,

Of Nuremberg, Ausbourg, avd Bafil,

By Agrippina the Chief of Frankfort fball be taken,

They hall go through Flanders as far as France.
ANNOT.


Nuremberg, Ausbourg, and Bafil are Cities of Germany.
_By Agrippine is underftood the City of Cologne, called in Latine Colonia Agrip-
pina, from the Founderefs of it Agrippina, Mother of the Emperour Nero, or from
CM, Agrippa favourite of Angufias Cefar.


LEV.
French.
L’un des plus grands fuira aux Efpagnes,
Qu’en longue playe apres viendra feigner,
Paflant Copies par les hautes Montagnes,
Devaftant tout, & puis apres regner. 1°


of Michael Noftradamus.
Englifh.

One of the greateft fball run awdy into Spain,

That fhall caufe a wound to bleed long,

Leading Armies over the high Mountains,

Deftroying all, and afterwards fhall Raign.


ANNOT.
This is fo plain, that it needeth no interpretation.
LV.
French.
En l'an qu'un œil en France Regnera,
La Cour fera en un bien fafcheux trouble,
Le grand de Blois {on amy tuera,
Le Regne mis en mal & doubte double.
Englifh,
| In the year that one eye fball Reign in France,
En | The Court foall be in a very hard trouble, |
the À The great one of Blois fhall kill bis friend, 3 LH
à: The Kingdom [hall be in an ili cafe,and double doubt.
OT


ANNOT,
The meaning of the firft Verfe is, when a King having but one eye fhall Reign in
| France,


Blois is a City in France upon the River Zoire,
LVI.
| French.
| Montauban, Nifmes, Avignon & Befier,
| Pefte, Tonnerre & Grefle a fin de Mars,
De Paris Pont, de Lion Mur, Monpelier, a :
Depuis fix cens & fept vingt, trois parts, | | "|
| Englifh.
| Montauban, Nifmes, Avignon and Befier, ae
| Plague, Lightning and Hail at the end of March, ee
pr | The Bridge of Paris,the Wall of Lion,and Monpelier, fhall fall, ae
4 From fix bundred and feven feore, three parts.
ANNOT,


Montauban is a Towa in Galea) Nifmes and Befers are Townsin Langwedec 5 - 3
Avignenis a Town in France belonging to the Pope,which thall fuffer thefe damages di 4
by Lightning at che end of Hercr, qu


French.


The true Propbecies
LVIL.
French.


Sept fois changer verrez gens Britanique,
Teints en fang en deux cens nonante an,
France non point par appuy Germanique,


Aries double fon Pope Biffarnan.'
Enghifh.


+ Seven times you fball fee the Englilh to change,
Died in blood, in two hundred ninety year,
Not France, by the German fupport,

Aries doubleth bis Baftarnan Pole.


ANNOT,


The two firft Verfes concern England; thethird France; the fourth marketh
the time by the motion of the Sign of Aries, which fhall be favonrable to France.

We fhall leave the two firft Verfes to be interpreted by the Æ#glfh Nation,
which is moft concerned init, and come to th@laft two, which concern France.

Thethird Verfe faith that France fhall not changeas Englaed , by reafon of the
help it fhall have from Germany , which hath been made good already for thefe hun-
dred years, dotwithftanding the Wars between Henry IL. and the Spaniards the
Confpiracy of the Proteftant party againft Francis the I]. at Amboife; the civil Wars
under Charles the IX. the League under HewrylIT, and Hénry LV. the Forrain Wars
under Lewis XIII. and Lewis XIV. now Reigning,

The Authors meaning by thefe words, bat France mot, is, you fhall not fee France
change feven timesin two hundred ninety years ; as the Brittifh nation , and then he
giveth the reafon of it, by German help,that is to fay, that France fhall have help from
Germany,

The fourth Verfe faith, that during chofe two hundred ninety years, Aries doubleth
his Baftarnan Pole, to underftand this, we muft fuppofe firft that the Sign of Aries
rulech over France, Paleftine, Baftarnia, Scc,

Secondly , we muft learn from Ptolomy and other Geographers , that Baftarnia
containeth the people that are towards Sarmeatia or Poland, which were called by the
Ancients, the people of Admone, Sidane, Roxolane, and by others Pescins, fromthe
Ifland Peace, which isin Jfria,

Thirdly, we muft fuppofe, that the Sign of Aries hath two Poles, the firftis chat
of the Aquinoctial Line, and the fecond, that of the Eccliptick , becaufe the Sign of
Aries beginneth juft in the Line of the Equator, and afterwards ftretcheth towards
the North, Nowitis fo that che place where its extenfion endeth in the Eecliptical
Line of the Sun, is called by the Author the Baffarnan Pole.

Ic is a Pole fich in the conftellations of Heaven, we call Poles, the two ends or ex-
tremicies of them , and in the conftellations of the Zodiack , we call the firft Pole
that whichis next tothe Equator,and the fecond Pole that which ftretchethtowards
the North, ôr towards the South in the Eccliptical Line, “OT £3

In this fenfé, the firft Pole of the Sign of Aries, is that which hath jts-firt degree
in the Equator ; the fecondis, chat which ftretcheth towards the North in the Ec-
cliptick, and this laft Poleis called Baftarman, becaufeit is Vertical to Baftarnia, as
the Aftrologers fet down their Climates, Kingdoms, Provinces and Towns under
thé twelve Sigas.


Fourthly,


Of Michael Noftradimus. 129


Fourthly, We muft fuppofe that this: word to doulle, may ficnifie three things.
1,In Sea-mens tearmssit fignifieth to go beyond fome place,as to double the Cape of
bona Speranza, which ts called in 44/45, Tramontare ; that is » to go beyond.
2. It fignifiech to co twice the fame thing, as Facob did double his fervice for Re-
chel, &c, 3. In matter of traveling; it fignifieth to go twice’as far asis requi-
fite: |

To double, in this place cannot beunde:ftood in the firft fenfe; becaufethe con-
ftellations never ftretcht out of their compaffes, though che Stars of which they
are compounded, have their peculiar.motions,

To underftand this, we muft know that the Stars of the Firmament have their
peculiar motions from Weft to Eaft, upon the Pole of the Eccliptick, and thac
they gothat way a matter of one Degree, in the {pace of about 100 years, and con-
fequently the Stars do retrograde every year in the Eccliptick from Weft to Ealt 52
Seconds.  Ptolomeus holdeth this opinion, but other renowned Aftrologers vive
them more: For my part I am of Tychebrahe’s opinion, who allowed them one De-
gree of retrogradation in 70 yéarsand 7 Months, and confequently 5 1-Seconds évery

ear,

; According to this Doctrine the Star chat is inthe Horn of Aries, was obferved by
Tymocharis in 2d Degree; 150 years after, Hipparchus obferved it in the firlt ; 265
years after, Péolomeus faw it in the 6 Degrees 740 years after, 4/bathognins obferved
it in the 18 Degrees 304 years after, Alphonfws King of Spain, foundit in the 6
Degree; 265 years after, Copernicus did oblerve it robe in the 37 Degreeand two
Minutes ; 61 years after, Tychobrahe faw itin the 27 Degree, and above 37 Minutes:
fo that in the {pace of 6 t years it had gone 35 Minutes.

By this Doctrine we fee that the whole conftellations donot go beyond their
Poles, though the Stars that Compound them change their Poles every year of 5r
Seconds. as © .

10 doublé, then here cannot bé taken in the firft fenfe, nor in the third fenfe, for
the firft reafon, it muft thenbe ithe fecond fenfe ; and thus Aries Zonbleth his Ba-
flarnan Pole; that is, Aries maketh twice. his Pole; which an(wereth:to Baftar-
nid. SA

If you ask how it cometh to pafs that ‘4ries-doubleth this Pole, andin what place
of Heaven we fet this Bajtarnas Pole: Lantwertovhe fit, ‘that Aries doubleth his
Pole, when one of thole 13 Stars cometh to that point, which is a Northern or
Weftern Pole to that fign in the Eccliptick., As co che fecond : lanfwer, that che
place ought to beits laft Degree, viz. the end of the 30 Degi¢e,

Why? (will you {zy ) did che Auchoï mark chat difference of the Sign-of Aries,
rather chan chat of Tawrws, or of anothers

I antiver, that it was in favour of Franëe; becaufé Aries doth govern in France.
and ific hath been favoutable to itswhen it came firft to the Ba/araan Pole, ic will be
fo too when it doubleth the fame Pole, feeing chac ic will have the (ame pofition
and Afpect. Now we fee, that in the {pace of thefe 100 years, France. was not
overcome, much lefs fhall it be hereafter; feeing that che Stars do promite its ex-
alration fora long continuance. bli |

If I were a great Aftrologer, I fhould obferve exactly by this, hat within the (pace
of 290 years, Aries [hall double bis Cape Baftarnan, and confequently Aries fhould
come to that Pole juft in the year 1845. which is according to that we have faid.


fl
wi


AE


F rench,


Tbe true Prophecies


LVIII.
French.


Aupres du Rhin des Montagnes Noriques,
Naiftra un grand de gens trop tard venu,
Qui defendra Sarmates & Pannoniques,
Qu'on ne {caura quil fera devenu.


Englith.
Near the Rhine, out of the Norick Mountains,
Shall be born a great one, though too late come,
Who fball defend the One and Hungarians,
So that it fball not be known what is beconte of i


ANN OT.


This is plain.
LI
French.
Barbare Empire par le tiers ufurpé;:
La plus grand part de fon fang mettre amort,
Par mort fenicle par luy quart frappé,
Pour peur que fang par le fang ne {oit mort.


Englifh,
A Barbarian Empire fball be u urped by athird perfon,
Who fhall put to death the greateft part of bis Kindred,
By death of old age, the fourth fhall be ftricken by bin,
For fear that blood fhould not die by blood.
ANN OT.
The two firft Verfes are plain, I acknowledge my Ignorance in the laft two:


LX,
French.


Par toute Afia grande profcription,
Mefine en Myfic, Lydie,& Pamphilie,
Sang verfera par diffolution,
D'un:jeune noir remply de felonie.


Englith.
Through all Afia fhall be a great profcription,
Yea in Myfia, Lydia, avd Pamphilia,
Blood fhall be [pilled by the debauchne/s
OF a young black man, full of felony.


A NNOT.
Myfia, Lydia, and Pamephilia, are Gountreys of Afia,


of Michael Noftradamus,


ERA
aaa | French.
La grande bande & fette Crucigere,
Se dreflera en Mefopotanie,
Du proche Fleuve compagnie legere,
Qui telle Loy tiendra pour ennemie, 7
j 17 PEINE
The great troop and fet wearing à Crôfr,
Shall rife up in Melopotamia,
Near the next River fhall be a light company,


Which fball hold that law for enemy.
CU AN NOT,


It is an Army-of Chriftians (be like Armenians) that thall tite in Mefopotancié
againft whom fhall an Army of Turkifh Horfeman come ; who did live by the next


LX:

i, French. |
Proche del Duero par Mer Cyrene clofe,
Viendra percerles grands Monts Pyrenees;
La main plus courte & fa percee glofes
A Carcafonné conduira {es menées.

Englifh.
Near the Duero clofed by the Cyrenian Sea,
Shall come to pierce the great Pyrenean Mountains,
The fborter band aud his pierced glofe,
Shall in Careaflone lead his plot.
ANNOT.


… The Cyrenian Sea,is that Sea which is by the Province of Cyrene. The Pyresears
Mountains part Spain from France,  Carcaffonne is à Town in France hear unto
Spain, Thereft pafleth my underftanding, :


oLXULE
| French.


Romain pouvoir ferx dir toutia bas,


Songrand Voifinimiter les vettiges,


Occaltes haines civiles, & debars,
Rétarderont aux boufons leur folies,

2 : Enghith.
The Roman power [hall bequite put down,
His great Neighbour: {hall follow his fleps;
Secret and civil batreds and quarrels;: ©»
Shall flop the Buffons folly, 0 Hie

etl Got ANNOT,


Tbe trae Propbectes
ANNOT.
The firft Verfe fignifieth, that the Pope's Authority (hall be putdown,
The fecond, that his great neighbour , that is the Empire fhall follow his fteps 5
that is,be put down too, The two laft Verfes are plain,
LXIV.
| French:
Le Chefde Perfe remplira grand Olchade,
Clafle trireme contre gent Mabometique,
De Parthe & Mede & piller les Cyclades,
Repos long temps au grand Port Jouzque.
Englifh.
The Head of Perfia fhall fl a great Olchade,
A Fleët of Galleys againft the Mahometah Natzor, |
From Parthia and Media they fhall come to plunder the Cyclades,
A long reft fball be on the Jonique Port.
ANNOT.
Ï could not find what he meaneth by olchade, The fecond Verfe is plain,
Parthia and CMedia are two Kingdoms depending from that of Perfia. The Iflands
of Cyclades arein the Ageam Sea, andare fo called becaufe they are like a Garment
about the City of Delos, for xvxaes in Greek fignificth a Mound garment of a woman,
The Fonique Sea is that Seain Grecia,whichisabout Athens and Corinth, &cs
LXV:
French.
Quand le Sepulchré du grand Romain ttouve,
Le jour apres fera efleu Pontife,
Du Senat gueres 1l ne fera prouvé,
E mpoiionne, fon fang au Sacre Scyphe.


eon Englith. de à
W'benthe Sepulcher of thegreat Roman {ball be. found,
The next day after a Pope {ball béieleëted::
Who fhall not be much approved by the Senate,
Poifoned, his blood in the Sacred Scyphe.
ANNOT, |
This feemeth to foretel the finding out-of the Sepulcher of fome famous Roman,
and chat che next day after a Pope fhalk be Elected', who being not well approved of
by the Conclave , fhall be poifonedin the Chalice, which isthe Communion Cup
that the Roman Catholicks ufe at Ma/s, fighifiéd here by the Latine word Seyphws.
. LXV.
\ Brenchy :
Le grand Baillif d’Orleanf mis a hrort:\
Sera par un de fangvindicätif, ie lus
De mort merite ne mourra, me parort} :
Dis pieds & mains mal,te faifoit captifs


Englifh}


a


of Michael N oftradamus,
| Englith. |
The great Bailif of Orleans fall be put to death,
By one of a revengeful blood, sat
He fhall not die of. a deferved death,nor by chance,
But the difeafe of being tied band and foot, hath made him prifoner,
: AN N O i,
The Bailif of Orleans isa great Officer, for he.is there Lord Chief Juftice, and of
all the precinéts. Itfeemeth chat this man fhall be put co death, by one of area
vengeful blood, not chat he had deferved it, or come to it by Chance, but becaufe he
fhallbe tied hand and foot, and die in prifon, © ; eat |
LX VII I
: French.

di f Une nouvelle Sete de Philofophes, lt
\ '  : Mefprifant mort, or, honneurs & richeffes, mae
Des Monts Germains feront fort limitrophes,
A les enfuivre auront appuy & prefles, LI
ns | — Englith. ae |
i ë A new Se& of Philofophers fball rife, bi \
Defpifing Death, Gold, Honours and Riches, i |

They foall benear'the Mountains of Germany, | aie
They foall have abundance of others to fupport and follow them, |e
ANNOT. | Ur

This is properly faid of the Anabaptifts in Germany, in the time of Feb dd —

Leyden, and now ofthe Quakers in England, and elfewhere. rane
LXVIIL
French.
Peuple fans Chef d'Efpagne & d'Italie,
Morts, profligez dedans le Cheranefe,
Leur di& trahy par legere folie,
Le fang nager per tout a la traverfe. ee
| , Englifh. veg
aa 1 © A people of Spain and Italy withont a Head, id
vet | Shall die, being evercome in the Cheronefe,
à Their faying fhall be betrayed by a light folly,
fh ‘The blood hall fwim all over.atrandom.
ot ent ANNOT. =.
Eheronefeisa Land or ground'unmanuted ; the reftis plain.


French)


T be true Prophecies
LXIX.
| French.
Grand exercite conduit par jouvenceau,
Se viendra rendre aux mains des ennemis;
Mais le vieillard nay au demy pourceau,
Fera Chalon & Mafcon eftre amis.
| 3 Englifh.
A great Army led by à young man,
Shall yield it felfin the hands of the enemies,
But the old man born at the fign of the balfe-Hog,
Shall canfe Chalon and Mat{con to be friends.


| AN NOT.

The two firft Verfes are plain, ; as forthethird Verfe, I could not find who that
Old man fhould be, that fhall be born at the fign of the ha/f-Hog.

Se 4 and Mafcenare two Cities in France, the firlt in Champagne, the laf in Bar:
S#na),


Le
French.


La grand Bretagne comprile d'Angleterre,
Viendra par eaux fi haut à inondre,

La Ligue nevue d’Aufone fera gerre,
Que contre eux ils fe viendront bander:


Englifh. |
Great Britany comprebended in England,
Shall fuffer fo great an Inundation by W. aters,
The new League of Aufone.fball make Wars,
So that they (ball fland againft them.


ANNOT.

This Prophecie is divided intwo parts, The firfttwo Verfes foretel 4 great Ins
nundation, that was to happen in England. | |

The laft two {peak of a league and infurreétion, chat fhallbeat Bordeaux, which
is here called e4sfone, from a famous Latine Poet, named Asfoniws, who was born
inthatCity,

As to the firft part, after much feeking anidenquiry: Efoundthe truth of it ina
Latine book, called Rerum in Gallia, Beleias Hifpania, Anglia, &c. geftaram anno
1607, Tomi feptimi Liber [ecundus confcriptus a Nicolao Gotardo Artas Dantifcane,
where the Hiftory is related thus.

About the end of Faswary'1604,theSea broke out fa violently in Zag/and,that after
the breaking of Fences and Dikes;, it.caufed very great damages to the Inhabitants,
The greateft mifchief,was done, in Somer{et/bire, where the water.did overflow, ten
Leagues in length, and two inbreadth, twelve foot highin the moft eminent places.
This fudden Innundation brought a fearful alarm to the Countrey peoples fome of
them going to theit Plough, were fained to run back to their houfes, where they
found their enemies at their doors, viz, Death and Water, who without diftinétion


{wept them away, Inalittletime, the Towns appeared like Iflands, encompafied
on


of Michael Noftradamus. 138


on all fides, and prefently after were fwallowed up, fo that the tops of the Trees
were fcarce feen. This new Flood covered fo the Towns of Hansfield, inthe fame
County, thofé of Grantham, Kenbus, Kiagfton, and Briandon, with feveral Farms
builcin che Champion Countrey, that none of the Buildings could befeen, Ifyou
add to this the devaftation of the places, the quantity of Corn, Fruit,and Grafs chat
was loft, the mifery fhall be fo great, as not tobe exprefled, During this fearful
quarrel between the Water and the Land, an exceeding great number of people died
ofall Ages, and Sexes, it would avail them nothing to get into the upper Stories and
Roofs of houfes, nor upon the higheft Trees; for che imperious Waters did fo {well
andrage, that the Foundations of the houfes, and roots of the Trees were loofened,
fo that both fell to the Ground, or rather intothe Water, The people feeing no
way to efcape, refolved to die patiently. No body could without great grief {ee
the Oxen and Sheep drowning ; for there wasfuch a numerous quantity of them,
that afar off one would have chought them to be Rocks in the Sea, but feeing chem
fwiming, and hearing them bleating and bellowing one would have thought them to
be a ftorm and hiffing of winds, À rich Farmer, and father of feven Children, being
involved in che Flood, and much aftonifhed at this accident, neverthelefs thinking
the danger lefs then it was, went about to fave fome of his beft Goods ; but feeing
the Waters to increafe, he forfook all, and went to fave one ot his Children, whom
heloved beft ; but the Waters followed him fo clofe, that all he could do, was to get
upon the Roof of his houfe, Among the Children there was a little one fleeping
in a Cradle, which being made of clofe boards, did {wim upon the V Vaters about
three Miles, and was takenup alive, and found. ‘The Hay-cocks did {wim like Ships
upon the VVaves, the Pigeons and Pigs were upon the Sheaves that the V Vater
carried away. . The Coneys being driven out of their holes, had Jeapt uponthe backs
of the fiwiming Sheep. A certain Shepheard being about to gather his Sheep into
their’ Fold, was followed by the Flood, ran for his life, and climbed upon a high
Tree, where feeing his Sheep bleating in the water, he beganco tear his hair, to
{mite his breaft, co lift up his hands and his eyes to Heaven,and when his Sheep had
all perifhed, and him felf endured an extream cold and hunger, he was at laft taken
up in a Boat that was fent to favethe diftreffed.

But here we muft talk of Briel, whichis one Oe tie chieleft Cities in England,
by reafon of the Haven, which bringeth thither abam@ance of Merchants, from feve-
ral Nations. The fame day of that Inundation, the Sea breaking into a greac
Channel, did prefently overflow the Countrey ‘with fuch quicknets and violence,
that it covered the Valleys, and the fmalier Hills, in fo much chat nothing but an
utter ruine was expected ; many whole houfes were turned upfide down, and carried
away withthe Flood. The Barns full of Corn, Hay, and Scraw, were overthrown,
and the Cattle carried away, befides abundance ot people of all forts. The Mer-
chants of London and Briffol, and thereft of the Inhabitants, befides the lo{s of P:o-
vifions, fuffered an ineftimable one in their Commodities, whith they had provided
for the Fair, chat was then neamhand, the moft part of chem being carryed away by
the Flood, and the reft fo {peiied, char che owners could not tell what co do with
them: A Gentldman dwelling between Baraffable and Briftol, and two Leagues off
ftom the Sea, being gone abroad in the Morning to overfee his grounds, did look to-
wards the Sea} ran back again to his houfe, to bring this fad news to his Wife and
Servants, while they were endeavouring to pack up the moft precious of their Goods,
the Water came about the houfe fo faft, that theyalcered their refolution, and be-
thought themfelves only to fave their lives ; the fervants bufied themfelves about
tying the Goods together, chinking the Water could not have carryed them away :
As for the Gentleman, he went with his V Vife ane Children to the top ofthe houte,


and got upon the rafters of the Roof, Although nothing appeared to them bus
| the


mm — —


T be true Tropbecies

the Image of death; neverthelefs fome hope and defire of efcaping, made the Gen-
tleman come down to favealittle Trunk, wherein his papers of greaceft concern-
ment were, Being come down from the Rafter, he faid hold ofthe Trunk, and
faltened it to a Manger ; while he was bufie about it, the Waves of the Seadid fo
beat againit chat houle, that it felldownto the Ground. The Wife, Children, and
Servants. were {wallowed up inthe ruine, The Gentleman laid hold on a Rafter,
and was carryed away with it above halfa League further, toa Mountain, where he
fet his foot upon dry Ground, being half dead.with fear and grief, and bewailing che
lofs of his V Vite, Children, and Servants, he fpyed the little Trunk and the Manger,
which he drewto Land, and that was all he faved, befides his Life.

Another Gentleman living thereabouts, and newly married,was refolved that day
to go tothe next Town, and make merry with (ome friends, whereupon he bid his
man makehis Horfe ready, and himfelt went co put on his Boots ; after he had put
on one, and whilft he held the other in his hand, the V Vaters came fo fiercely into
that houfe, that they compelled the half Booted Gentleman to run away for his life,
in an upper Chamber, but he was followed fo clofe by chat mercilefs Element, chat
he was fained to get upon the top of the Roof, to fave his life, and to rideupon the
upper Raiter, but the houfe and Roof melting by the violence of the V Vaves, this:
new Knight was cartyed by the violence of them towards the Town where he in-
tended to make merry, and there was faved with much adoe,

It happened at the {ame time near Markand, in the Dutchy of Norfolk, that two
Thieves, going about to fteal ome Cattle, while they. were driving of them, per-
ceived in the Morning the Juftice of God following them; it was the V Vater;
which having overtopped the Dikes, threatned thetakers of being taken, and com-
pelled them to fave themfelves with all fpeed, From their wickednefs did arifea
great good ; for to the next Town they went, and bid the Sextonto Ring the Beil,


and to cry VVater, VVater: The Inhabitants being for the moft part afleep, did
not know whatto doin fuchan Alarm: Some climbedinto the Church's Steeple;
others thinking there were Thieves went about to fence and defend their houfes ;
others hearing of a Flood, laughed at it, and faid, chat chofe who brought this
News, deferved tobe punifh@@ bur prefently they altered their Languages, and


their laughing was turned into@ fearful mourning, every one flying to fave himfelf,
his VVite, and Children, ad whatfoever they could pack up of their moft precious
Goods, Some thinking to have more wit than others, went about to divert the
Current of the VVater from their houfess but feeing there was no remedy, they
went with their VVives and Children to the tops of their houfes, ina lamentable
fright,

But when the VVater came to feizeupon the houfes, wherein there were {ome
Playing, fome Diinking, others already Drunken, a great part of them were drown-
ed, others ran to a Hill near the Town, where they {pent thereft of chat night, and
the day following with great lamentations,

The next day they faw their houfes half underV Vater, and many people, who
from the windows andSteeples cryed for help;ochets endeavoured to fave themfelves
upon Boards and Rafters; the Horfes tyed co theManger werélall fuffocated, The
Cattle in the fields, were by this time driven to che Mount called Trubill, and for all
that,were not out of danger; for the Mountain was encompafled withV Vater to fuch
a heighth and depeh, chat without Boats there was no acces toit ; chiefly becaufe
of the Thickets and Buthes, Thus fo much Cattle was about to perifh, had noe
fome Shepherds brought Boats loaded with provifions for Men and Beafts, till the
V Vaters retired again, and the Dikes were made good,

e


French,


of Michael N oftradamus.


LXXI
French.
Ceux dans les Ifles de long temps aflieger,
Prendront vigueur force cantre ennemis,
Ceux par dehors morts de faim profligez,
En plus grand-faim que jamais feront mis.
Enelifh.
Thofe in the Iflands that have been long befieged,
Shall take vigour and force againft their enemies,
Thofe without foall die for hunger ; being overcome,
They fball be put in greater famine then they were before.
ANNOT. ;
This Prophecy came to pafs, when the Spaniards Befieged Leydesin Holand, for
the Dutch brokethe Dikes, whereby the wacer came uponthem fo faft, that they


were more befieged and ftarved then thofe of the Town, and their Army wholly de-
ftroyed. Read Cardinal Bestivoglios his Hiftory of the Low-Cowntreysas allo Strada:


LXXIT.
French. at
Le bon VieilJard tout vif Enfevely, Ei
Prez du grand Fleuve par faux foupcon, |
Le nouveaux vieux de richefle ennobly, | |
Prins en chemin tout l’or de la Rancon. 11
Englifh. |
The good old man fhall be buried alive,
Near the great River by a falfe fufpicion,
The new old one niade noble by bis riches,
The gold of bis ranfom fhall be taken inthe way.
ANNOT.
This Prophecy is divided into two parts: the two firft Verfes are concerning an


ee
is EE pA


old man that fhalf be buried alive near a great River, upon a falfe fufpition. |
The latter two are concerning a young man, who fhall affume unto himfelf the quil
hameof a noble Family , and fo make himfelfnoble by his riches , but being after- PA


ward taken prifoner , the money that was fenc for his’ Ranfom, fhall be taken in the
way, RUES


pee erg


LXXIDL

French.
Quand dans le Regne parviendra le boiteux,
Competiteur aura proche Baftard,
Luy & le Regne viendront fi fort rogneux,
Quwains quil guerifle fon fait {era bien tard.


T 3 Eogil{h;


Tbe true Prophecies
Englith.

When the lame man [hall attain to the Kingdom,

He fhall have a Baftard for his near competitor,

He, and his Kingdom fhall be fo feabby,

That before he be cured it will be late.


ANNOT.
The words and the fenfe are plain.


LXXIV. |
French. att
Naples, Florence, Fayence & Inle,

ae Seront en termes de telle fafcherie,

Wie Que pour ur complairea au malheureux de No ale,
EDS (l Bias d'avoir fait a fon Chef moquerie,
eh Englifh.

| Hl Naples, Florence, Fa uyenza, and (mola,

pit | | Shall be put into fo much diftrefs,

LS For being dits tothe unbappy one of Nola


Who was complaine cd of for having mocked his Superiour.


ANNOT,
Naples, Florence, Fayenza, Imola, and Nola are all Cities in Jtaly; the reft is plain.
| | LXX V.
| French.
| Pau, Verone, Vicence, Saragouffe, i


=f) Glaive atteints, Teoh de fang humides,
Pefte fi grande viendra a la grand gout fle, wri
ete {ecours & bien long ies remedes, nee


Englifh.
Pau, Verona Vicenza, Saragoffa,
Shall be hit by the Sword, the Countres foall be moift with-blocd,
So great a plague, and fo uebement foall come,
That though the fuccours be near, the remedy ‘fall be far off.
ANNOT.
By Pas here are underftood the Towns that are feated upon that River.
Verona, Vicenza, are two Cities in /taly, belonging to the Venetians,  Saragoffais a
City in Sicily.
LXX VI.
French
En Germanie naïftront diverfes Sectes ,
Saprochant fort de l’heureux Paganifine, | :
Le Cœur captit & petites receptes, ‘i
Feront retour a payer le vray dilme. Wt
Englith. fa


of Michael Noftradamus:
mae Englifh:

In Germany foal divers Ses arife,

Coming very near the happy Pagani{m,

The beart captivated and {mall receivings.,

Shall open the gate to pay the trne Tithes.


aa J a a ANNOT.
The firft and fecond Verfes have been verified fufficiently.


_, By the two laft Verfes, he meaneth that theheart of eve
that they fhall come to an agreement,in which thet


: BET: tue Tithes thall be paid,and every
one come to his own again,


LXXVII
; French.
Le tiers climat foubs Aries comprins,
L’An mil fept cens vingt fept.en Ofobre,
Le Roy de Perfe par ceux d' Ae ypte prins,
Conflid mort, perte 4 la Croix grand opprobre.
wilt. : Englith.
Thetbird Climat comprehended under Aries,
| In the year 1700. the twenty seven of O€tober,
n | “The King of Perfia hall be taken by thofe of Ægypt,
| Battle, death, lofs, a great foame to the Chriftians.
dt Ae À AIN T 22 © 0 A
Here be three notable things to be obferved: one isthe plain and punctual fpecifi-
Cation of the time, in which the Prophecy thal! come to pals, viz. the 27. of Odfa-


berin the year 1700, The fecondis, that the King of Per(ia (hall be taken by thofe
of -£gypt. . The third is, the fhame and confufion that the Chriftians fhall fuffet for


the fame, et
LXXVIII.
Pre French.
id Le Chef d'Efcoffe avec fix d’ Allemagne,


Par gents de mer Orientaux captif,
Traverferont le Calpre & Efpague, |
Prefent en Perfé ait nouveau Roy cramtif,
| | ! » Englith.
it || ‘The Chief of Scotland mith fix of Germany;
| Shall be taken prifoners by Seamen of the Eaff,
| They {ball go through the Calpre aml Spain; |
| And fhall be made a prefent i Perfix to ibe aéw fearful King.
‘ “Ak OTHE) OAD TUCRSUAON Ba CNE io à
By the Capre isunderftood the Capzon promontory, whichisatthe mouth of che


Streights , by and beyond which thefe Prifoners will be carried into Per fiz for a pre-
fentto che King, who chen fhall be fome tearful perfon,


T à


French,


ry one fhaïl bein fear, fo -


ee


- The ine Prophecies
BEX XIX,

| French.

Le grand criard fans honte audacieux,

Sera efleu Governeur le d’Armee,


La hardieffe de fon contentieux,
Le pont rompu, Cité de peur palmee


Englfh.
The great bawler proud without fhame,
Shall be eleéted Gowernour of the Army,
The floutncfs of bis Competitor, —
The Bridge being broken, theCity [ball faint for fear.
AN NOT. Sate

Paradin faith, that in che year 1558, the Lord of Bonnivet being dead,. the King
of France did chufe Francis of Vendo[me, Vidame of Amiens, to fucceed the faid Bon-
#ivet, in the Office of Colonel of the Freach Foot, This idame is noted by all Hi-
ftorians, for a rath proud man, that had a good opinion of himfelf, and found faule
with all the commands of the Marfhal of Bréffac, then General of the Army,

The King in confideration ofhis Birth, and that he wasa good Souldier, gave
him the place of the Lord Bosnivet, according to what the Author faith, The
great Bawler, &c. fhall be elected Governor inthe Army, \fyouask in what Army
he was eleted Governour? the third Verfeanfwereth, én the Army of his Gompeti-
ter, that is, the Marfhal of Briffac, who did chide him feverély for difobeying his
commands, and was like once to have killed him.

The fourth Verfe proved true at the taking of Qseiras,where the Bridge, through
which the füccours came to relieve the Town, being broken, the Town'grew{o
fearful, that ic furrendred it felf co the Marfhal of Brifac, “aerut sta Io mod:

LXXX.
French.


Erins, Antibe, villes auteur de Nice,

Seront vaftées fort par Mer & par Terre,

Les Sauterelles Terre & Mer vent propice,
Prins, morts, trouflez, piller, fans loy de guerre.


Englifh.
Erins, Antibe, and the Towns about Nices,
Shall be deftroyed by Sea and Land,
TheGrafbopers fhall bave theland,theSea,andW ind favourable,
They fhall betaken,killed,thruft up,plundered withontLaw of War.


ANNOT,

Evins and Antibe ate Towns of Provence, bordering upon Nice, which is a Towa
of Piemont, all chat Coaft is threatned here to be ruined by the Grafhopers, that is,
the Turks, which fell out about the year 1558. for the King of France having called
the Tarks to his fuccours againft Charles V. Emperour, they came and took Nice in
in see of the French, where they committed unheard cruelties, a$ alfo upon all
that Coaft. qe


Frénch,


King
Bois
Me
talk


pve
Th
Atm)
np


gl


roue
eye


of Michael Noftradamus:
LXXXE

Sats CNET , à French. |
L'Ordre fatal fempiternal:par chaifne;
Viendra tourner par ordre confequent;
Du Port Phocen {era rompue la chaine,
La Cité prinfe, l’ennemy quant & quant:

oS an LL,
The fatal and eternal order by chain,
Shall come to turn by confequent order,
Of Port Phocen the chain fball be broken,
The City taken, and the enenty prefently after.
sidi Eu MONT 59 sc74-23 vans’ leo,

This Ptophecy regatdethionely the City of Murfeilles , which is the moft famons
Port Town that the French have upon the Mediterranean Sea ; and which was an-
ciently a Greek Colony , peopled by the’ Phocen Seas, . This City is threatned here
to have the chain of her Port broken, and to be taken by her enemies , and the faid
eñernies to be alittle while after taken in it, | ER Sok

LXXXIL

Mae hy F rench.
Du Regne Anglois le digne dechafle,
Le Confeillér par ire mis a feu,
Ses adherdns iront fi bas. tracer,
Que le baftard ferademy receu:

are ba Ur Ur dr
Frowi the Englifh K ingdom the worthy driven away,
The Councellor through anger fball be burnt,
His partners [ball creep fo low, 3
That thé baftard ball be half received!
3 dics tty Mae S465)! oss clio wR

This is one of thofe Prophecies that concern the Englifh Nation, and which by
its event, hath madé this Book and the Author thereof famous, for nothing can be
more pldin to the meaneft capacity, then the fenfe and words of thefe four Verfes,

By the firft, is meant the Kings moft excellent Majefty Charles IL, now Reign-
ing, who being thetrue Heir to the Kingdom, and moft worthy torule , was driven
out of the Kingdom by a rebellious rout of his SubjeGs. :


The fecond Verfe exoreffeth, the punifhment inflicted upon the Councellors and
Abettors of fo hainous a crimes who were moft of them hanged, drawn and quarters


ed,their entrals burnt. ae
The third Verfe, fignifiech che low eftate of the Abettors of shat pernicious


Councel. | : ey
The fourth Verfe, isunderftood that baftard Fa@ion , which was like to fupplane
Crommel; upon the divifion of the Army. Fe


French}


Tes trhé Probe


LILX & II .
French:


Les longs cheveux dé là Ganle Celtique,
Accompagnez d'EftrangesiNations, ”
Mettront captif Agent Ainitaniqué,
Pour fuccombet à leurs intentions.


Eoglifh.
The long bairs of the Celtian France,
oyned with forrain Nations,
Shall put in prifon the Aquitanick Agent,
To make him yield to their intentions.


ANNOT.

The Celtan France is that part of Frasce included between the River Loire, and
tliat of Seheld in Flanders. they are called:herethe /oag hairs; becqufein antient
time they ufed to wear long hairs.

” ‘ LXXXIV.
French:
La grand Cite fera bien defolée,
Des bien un feul n *y demoura,
Mur, Sexe, Temple, & Vierge violée,
Par Fer, Feu, Pefte, Canon,peuple mourra;


Enghfh.
The great City [ball bé madevery defalates
Not one of the Inhabitants {ball be left in it,
Wall, Sex, Church, and Virgin ravifbed,
BySw ord, Fire, Plagne, Canon Peete [relat dié.
ANNOT:
This is concerning the Town of Sc, Qsestis, which was taken by the Spantards


in the year 1557. upon the 27 of Aaguff,and 17 days after the Battle of St, Lawrence,
it was taken by affault, and all the Inhabitants put to the Sword,


LX XX V.
French.


La Cité prinfe par tromperie fraude,

Par le moyen d Un bean jeune attrapé,

Affaut donné, Ranbine pres de Laude;

Luy & touts morts pour avoir bien trompé.
Englifh.

The City-fball be taken by cheat and deceit,

By the means. of a fair young.one caught. in it,

Affault fhall be given, Raubine near Laude,

He, and all fhall die,for having deceived.


RF 0 NIT I CES


a


and
tent


ad | }


rt


of Michael Noftradamus. -


ANNOT,


{c is a City that fhall be taken by the cheat and deceit ofÆyoung fait man, who


himfelf fhall be taken in his craft,


The difficulty lyeth in the third Verfe, viz. what he meaneth by Raubine and
Laude, 1 could find nothing by tranfpofition of Letters: therefore I fuppofe the
Author had a mind to referve the expofitionto himfelf, and to one that {hould be


he


clearer fighted than I,


LXXXVI,
French.
Un chef d’Aufonne aux Efpagnes ira,
Par Mer, fera arreft dedans Marfeilles.
Avant {a mort un long temps languira,
Apres fa mort on verra grand merveille.


Englifh.
A chief man of Aufone fhall go into Spain
By Sea, he fhall flay at Marleilles,
He fhall languifb a great while before his death,
After bis death great wonders (ball be fen.
| ANNOT.
Here is nothing obfcure but the word «ufone, by which is meantithe City of
Bourdeanx, fo namedby the! Author. every where, for having brought forth that
famous Latine Poet,and Counful of Rome, Aufonius,
LXXXVITL
French,
Clafie Gauloife naproche de Corfegne,
Moins de S'ardaigne.tu ten repeatiras,
Tretous mourreziruftrez de laide Greigne,
Sang nagera, captif ne -me croiräs.


Englith.
French Fleet do not come near unto Corfica,
Much lefs to Sardinia, thou fbalt repent of it,
Allof you fhall die fruftrate of the help Greigne,
Blood fhall fwim, being Captive thou foalt not believe me.


ANN OT.

The Baron of a Garde coming from Reme, where he had carryed the Cardinals
of Tournon and Lorrain, received order to go into Corfica, to relieve with ammunition
the two Towns, that the French kept {till in poffeffion in that Ifland, Glaffe and Sr.
Boniface, which after the general peace made at Cambray; anno 155 9. were reftored
to the Common-wealth of Gev4, when he was coming near the Ifland, there arofe
fucha ftorm, that they were conftrained to'go-ashear land as they could, viz. in St.
Florents, tilt the ftorm was over; .. \ Yi |

At the fame time, by reafon of the {aid ftorm;eleven Ships:loaded wich fix thou-
fand Spaniards, going for Italy, took fhelter in the fame place, a good way off from
the faid Baron, |


AG.


mu eee


The true Prophecies


At the firft, the Spanifh Ships did not (pie the French Galleys, but the Baron de
la Garde difcovered the Spaniards, and bid his Galleys to fet upon them, Twoof
the Spanifh Ships were taken, in which were 1200. or 1500: Spaniards,patt of which
were drowned,and the reft made flaves.

The Baron chafed the reft, but che ftorm fo fcattered chem, that the nine efca-

éd.
i Before this encounter the Gesocfe Captain, Andrew a’ oria, took all the Ifland
from the French, Anno 1553. and kept it ever fince, by fending continual fupplies.
On the other fide, the King of France [ent fapplies by the Lord of Termes, tothofe
that weré retired in the Ifland of Glaffe.

One time among the reft, about the latter end of the year 1555. there was fent 2
notable fupplie from the French , to which the Author fpeaketh now in chefe
tearms,

French fleet do not come near nto Corfica, not Sardinia, whichis another Ifland
near Corfica. The third Verfe giveth the Reafon of it ; ye fhall die, being fruftrated
of the help Greigne. Greigne isthe Provencal Language, which was the Maternal
One of our Author, fignifieth a Galley: The fenfe therefore is this, you fhall be
froftrate of the help of the Galleys, that are under the command of the Baron de Ia
Garde, who carryed unto you men, money, and ammunition; becaufe he fhall be
then in purfute of the Sparifh fleet, that were {cattered by a ftorm,

Inthe mean time B/cod fhall (wine in the fight of the Baron de La Garde,and thou,poor
Prifoner in that Ifland, Thow [halt not believe me ; thofe flaves were they, which went
in the year 1555. And the Author faying, Thou fhalt net believe me, fheweth, that
being very famous in Provence, for his Prophecies, the General of the Army had ask-
ed him concerning the fuccefs of his Journey, and that he did warn him not tounder:
takeit, but having an exprefs command from the King, his Mafter, he would need
go, Therefore he faith, Poor prifoner thom fhals not believe me, We find inthis
work many examples of thofe, who went to confult with the Author concerning
the fuccefs of their undertakings, as did the Earl of Sommerive, before the be-
fieging of Bagnale, to whom he anfwered, that he fhould leave the Trees loaded
witha new kind of fruit, that is to fay, of the Rebels, whom he caufed to be hanged
on Trees.


LX XXVIII
French.
De Barcelone par Mer fi grande Armee,
Toute Marfeille de frayeur tremblera,
{les faifies, de Mer aide fermee,
Ton traditeur en Terre nagera.
Englith.
There [ball come from Barcelona by Sea fo great a fleet,
That Marfeilles fhall quake for fear,
The Iflands shall be feixed, the help by Sea shut up,
Thy Traitor shall fwim to Land,


Barcelona isa Townin Spain, upon the Mediterranean Sea 5. Marfetlles is another in
France, upon the fame Sea, : The reft is eafie,


French,


L
in


need
this
ning
ie bes
ded
iged


Of Michael Noftradamus,


LXXXIX.
French.


En ce temps la fera fruftreé Cypre,

De fon fecours, de ceux de Mer Ævéz,
Vieux trucidez mais par Mefles & Lipre,
Seduit leur Roy, Roine plus outragée.


Englifh.
At that time Cyprus fhall be friftrated
Of its fuccours, of thofe of the Ægean Sea,
Old ones fball be killed, but by Mefles and Lipre,
, + * Their King fhall be feducted,aud theQueen more wronged.
ANNOT.
The cwo firft Verfes are plain, the two laft have need of an Oedipus,
D, & C4
French.
Le grand Satyre & Tyzre d'Hircanie,
Don prefenté a ceux de l'Occean,
Un chef de Claffe iftra de Carnrante,
Qui prendra Terre au Thyrren Phocean.


Englith,
The great Satyr and Tyger of Hircania,
Shall be a gift prefentéd to thofe of the Ocean,
An Admiral of a fleet foall come out of Carmania,
Who foal! Land in the Thyrrèn Phocean.


ANNOT.


By the great Satyr. and Tyger of Hircania, is meant, the King of Perfia, whois allo
King of Hircani a2, abounding with Tygers,
That King‘ of Perfia fhall be madea gift to thofe of the Ocean; thatis, fhall be


__ either drowned init, or.do fome wonderful things upon it,


Carmania is a Province in 4/4, belonging to the Turk,
The Thyrren Phocean is the City of AMarfeillesin France, fo called by the the Au-
thor in this Book; becaule it was 2 Colony of the Phocenfes in Greece; itisalte
alled Thyrren , becaufeit is feated upon the Tyrrbenean Sea, as Vrrgil {ait
Thyrrenum navigat AL7#Or,


7?
45


wate À


Ù


French.


Prophecies


The true
6 Ox F
French.


L’Arbre qu’eftoit par long temps mort féiché,
Dans une nuit viendra a reverdir ,

Son Roy malade, Prince pied attaché,

Craint d’ennemis fera Voiles bondir.


Englifh,
The Tree that bad been long dad and withered,
In one night [hall grow green again,
Bay His King fhall be fick, his Prince fhall have his foot tied.
ee Being feared by his enemies be fball make his Sails to rebound.
ANNOT,


The two firft Verfes are Metaphorical, and are to beunderftood of 1 confiderable
perfon, who having been for a long time defpifed and under a cloud, fhall on a fudden
rife again and be inrepute, The two Jaft Verfes are intelligible enough, |


French.


Le monde proche du dernier periode,
a Satura encor fera tard.de retour,
Tranflat Empire devers Nations brode,
L'œil arraché a Narbon par Autour.


| Englifh.
The world being near its laft period,
Saturn fhall come yet late to bis return,
The Empire fball be tranflated into brode Nations.
Narbon fall have ber eye pickt out by a Hawk.


|


ai Le


ANNOT.


The meaning of the firft and fecond Verfes is, that the world thall be at an end
before Satur» hath performed his whole courfe,which (if Ldo nor miftake) is thought
by the Aftronomers to be of 36000, years.
The third Verfe fignifieth, thac before the end of the world, ‘the Empire fhallbe M l:
tranflated or poflefled by a black Nation , for brodé in old French fignifiech black
whence it cometh chat to this day they calla handfom black woman, ume belle Brode.
thatis a fair black woman,


Nar boss is afamous City in Langasdoc, and the feat of an Arfhbifhop, 1


French.


pend,
ought


alle
black,
| Br


eee. ee


of Michael Rlodbeadainus,


X CII.
French.


Dans Avignox tout le Chef de l'Empire,

Fera arreft, pour Paris delole,

TricaSt tiendra |’ Annibalique. ire,

Liow par change fera mal confolé.
Eoglifh. —

fu Avignon all the Chief of the Empire,

Shall fiay, by reafon of Paris being defolate,

Tricaft fball flop the Annibalik anger,


Lion by change fball be il coweforted.
ANNOT,


yk he. fight and fecond Verfe fignifie, that the Pope once more fhall keep his feat in
Avignon, whichis a Town in France belonging to the Pope, and where formerly
they kept their See, for the fpace of above an hundred years. As for che word Trica/}
there mutt be a foul errour in the impreffion-or elfe ; I muft confefs I underftand if
not. By the Annibalik anger, is meant thofe of Barlary , where Annibal was born
Lion is a famous Towa in France, where is kept the greateft trading for Bills ie
Exchangé, ye
XCIV.
: French.
De cing cens ans plus compte l’on tiendra,
Celuy qu’eftoit l’ornement de:fon temps,
Puis a tn coup grande clarté 'donra,
Que pour ce Siecle Jes rendra tres-contens.
Englifh.
For five bundred years no account [ball be made,
Of bim who was the ornament of his time:
Then on a fudden he jball give Jo great alight,
That for that age be fball make them to be moft contented.


ANNOT.


The words and the fenfe are plain,
| X CV.

French.

Lu Loy Morique on verra defaillir,
Apres un autrebeaucoup plus fedudtive,
Borifthenes premier viendra faillir,

Par dons & langue une plus.ateractive,


The true Prophecies


Englifh.
We fhall fee the Morifh Law to decline,
After which, another more feducing fhall arife,


Borifthenes fhall be the firft that fhall fall,
By gifts and tongue that Law fhall be moft feducing.


ANNOT.

This foretelleth the declining of the et ahometan Religion, after which another
Religion fhall be fet up worfethen the Mabometan. The firft decay of it fhall begin
in Scyibia, a Kingdom belonging tothe King of Perfis » through which runneth the
River Berifthenes,

XCVH

French.
Chef de Foffan aura gorge coupée,
Par le Duéteur du Limiter & L’curier,
Le fait patré par ceux du Mont Tarpée,
Saturne en Leo x 3.. de February.

Englifh.

The Chief of Foflan hall bave bis throat cut,
By the Leader of the Hunt and Greyhond,
The fat committed by thofé of the Tarpeian Mountain,


Saturn being in Leothe 13. of February.


ANNOT. ARE à
Foffan is a City in Piemont , belonging tothe Dake of Savoy, the Chief man of
Governour of which is chreatned here to have his chroat cut by fome Souldiers,
either of Rome, or belonging to Rome, fignified here by the Tarpeden Mountain, up-
on which the Capitol was built, and this faét to be committed by one that fhall bea
famous Hunt{man 5 upon ther3 of February, Saturn being then inthe Sign of Zee,
XCVIL
Frénch:
Nouvelle Loy, Terre neuve occuper,
Vers la Syrie, Fudee & Paleftine,
Le grand Empire, Barbare corruer,
Avant que Phebe fon Siecle determine.
Englifh.
Anew Law fhalloccupy a new Countrey,
Towards Syria, Judea and Paleftina,
The great Barbarian Empire fball fall down,
Before Phoebe #aketh an end of her courfe.
ANNOT:


The words and fenfe are plain,


PRET ER ne


a ps


ne


of Michael Noftradamus:


XCVIITI:
French.


Deux Royal Freres fi fort guerroicront,
Qu'entreux fera la guerre ff mortelle,
Qu'un chacun places fortes occuperont,
De Regne & vie fera leur grand querelle.


Enghfh. ! |
Two Royal Brothers foall War fo much one againft the otb
That the War between them fball be nortal,


Each of them fball feixe upon ftrong places,
Their quarrel hall be concerning Kingdom and Life,


ANNOT,


This needeth no interpretation,


XCIX.
French,


Aux Champs Herbus d’Alein & du Varneigre,
Du Mont Lebron proche de la Durance,
Camps des deux parts confliét fera fi aigre,


| Mefopotamie defaillira en France.


| | Englifh.
In the Meadow Fields of Alein and Varneigre,
Of the Mountain Lebron near the Durance,
Armies on-both fides, the fight fball be fo fbarp,
That Mefopotamia fball be wanting in France.


ANNOT.


ro)
er,


‘Alain and Vernaigre are two {mall Towns in France,feated by the Mountain Lebron,


near the River called Durance, wherethe Author faith there fhall be fuch à fharp
fight, chat Mefopetamia thall be wanting in France, to underftand this you muft
know, that Mefepetamia is a Countrey between two Rivers from the Greek words
pers, which fignifieth middle, and rorauès which fignifieth a River, the meaning then
of the Author is, chat the Battle fo fharp, che ground fhall be wanting to bury the


dead.


Coe oi
French,
Entre Gaulois le dernier honoré,
D’homme ennemy {era victoricux,
Force & terreur en moment exploré,
D'Un coup de trait quand mourra l’envieux,


Eaglifh.


The true Prophecies


Englifh. |
He that is the leaft honoured among the French, |
Shall be Conqueror of the man that was bis Enemy.
Strength and terrour shall in a moment be tried,
When the envious shall be killed with an Arrow:


ANNOT:


This is plaine


om EN


THE


PROPHECIES
Michael Noftradamus.


GENT TV.


I,
French,


22. Era du refte de fang non efpandu,
NS Ri Fr ° è : A ?
Venice quiert fecours eftre donné,
Apres avoir bien lon temps attendu,
Cité livrée au premier Cor fonné.


Englih.
There fhall be a remnant of blood unfpilt,
Venice fhall feek for faccours ,
After having long waited for it,


The City fball be furrendred at the frff found of the Trumpet.


ANNOT,


This to my judgement is concerning the Siege of Candia, in which the Venctians
for the {pace of about twenty years delired and expected fuccours from the Chriftian
Princes, which came fo flowly, that the City was tained to furrender upon honorable
terms,which is the meaning of che firft Verle, There ball Lea remnant of bleodan[pitt,


French,


RS Ere ee


ee


att ati
+ *


==


The true Fropbecies
II.
French.
Par mort la France prendra voiage à faire,
Clafle par Mer, marcher Monts Pyrenees,
Efpagne en trouble marcher gent muftaire,
Des plus grands Dames en France émmenées.
Englith.

By reafon of a death, France fall undertake a Fourncy, ’
They fhall have a Fleet at Sea, and match towards the Pyrenes,
Spain fball be in trouble by an Army, |
Some of the greateft Ladies in France carried away.

ANNOT.


The whole fenfe of this is, thatby reafon-of fome bodies death, France fhallmake


waragainit Spais by Sea and Land , and put Spais in great trouble,
The fourth Verfe faith, that fome of the greateft Ladies in France hall be carried
away, but the queftion is, whether by the Spansards, or (which is more probable) by


their own Husbands going to war againft Spain,
Il},
French.
LD Arras & Bourges de Brodes grands enfeignes,
Un plus grand nombre de Gafcons battre a pied,
Ceux long du Rhofae faigneront les Efpagnes,
Proche du Mont ou Sagunte faflied.
Englifh.
From Arras and Bourges many colours of black men {ball come,
A greater number of Galcons fball go on foot,
Thofe along the Rhofne fhall let Spain blood,
Near the Mountain where Saguntus zs feated.
ANNOT.


Arras and Bourges ate Cities of France. As for brodes, we have faid before thacit
fignifie brown men,fuch as arethe Gafcoins, inhabiting the Province of Aguitania
near Spain.

Saguntus is a Cicy in Spain, chat was deftroyed by the Rens,


IV:
French.


L'Important Prince fafché, plaint & querelle,
De rapts & pillé par Cogs & par Libiques,
Grand & par Terre, par Mer infinis Voiles,
Seule Italie fera chaflant Celtiques.


es,


latte


tanh


of Michael Noftradamus. 193
Englifh.


Le,
The confiderable Prince vexed, complaineth and quarelleib.
Concerning rapes and plunderings done by the C ocks and Libiques


Great trouble by Land, by Sea infinite Sails,
Italy alone fhall drive away the French.


AN NOT,


This confiderable Prince was Philip the II. King of Spain | who was vexed to fee
the Cocks, thatis the Fre#ch, and Libiques that is the 7: #rks joyned together, under
Barbarof[ato commit fo many Rapes and violences upon his Subjects,


Vie
French.


Croix Paix, foubs un accomply Divin Verbe.
L’Efpagne & Gaules feront unis enfemble,
Grand clade proche & combat trefacerbe .
Cœur fi hardy ne fera qui ne tremble.


Englith.
The Crofs shall have peace under an accomplished Divine Word
Spain and France shall be united together, .
A great Battle near band and a moft sharp ficbt,
No heart fo flout but shall tremble.


ANNOT,


t


We have faid before that by Divine Word, we muft not underftadd the fécond
perfon of the Trinity , «but à Divine or Theologian, ‘called in Greek Bebroyos, which
alfo fignifieth Divine Word,. Therefore the meaning of the firft Verfe is,that under
the Goverment of fome eminent Divine, (be like. a good Pope) the Crofs fhall
have peace, that is, the Chriftian Religion fhall be in Peace ; and perfecution fhall


ceafe.


The laft three Verfes are plain.
VAY

L French.
D’ Habits nouveaux apres faite la treuvé,
Malice, trame, & machination,
Premier mourra qui en fera Ja Preuve,
Couleur Venife, infidiation.

Esglifh.

After the new Cloaths shall be found ont.
There shall be malice, plotting and ntachination,
He shall die the firft that sball make trial of it,
Under colour of Venice, shall be a coufpiracy.


ANNOT,


Every body may be as wife as I in the interpretation. of this,


French


SCOR : PAS I eee —


MeN ETE REE SPRITES a


Le fils mineur du grand & hay Prince,


This great City was the City of St. Quentin in Picardy, taken by affaule by Philip
the Il, 4nno 1557.


The words and fenfe are plain.


The true Prophecies


VIL.
French.


De Lepre aura a vingt ans grande tache,
De dueil mourra trifte & mince,
Ec1l mourra la ou tombe chair lache.
Englifh.

The younger Son of the great and hated Prince,
Being twenty years, old [ball have a great touch of Leprofre,
His mother fhall die for grief, very fad and lean,
And be fball die of the difeafe loofe flefb.

AN NOT,


This is eafie to be underftood , if we remember that: Charles IX, King of France,


younger fon to Hesry II, died of a foul difeafe , and his Mother Catharine of Medicis
died of grief,


VIILE
French.


La grand Cite daflaut prompt repentin
Surpris de nuit, gardes interrompus,
Les Excubies & veilles Saint Quentin,
Trucidez gardes, & les Portails rompus.

pm Englifh,
The great City, fball be taken by'a fudden affault,
Being furprifed by night, the Watch being beaten,
The Court of Guard and Watch of Saint Quentin
Shall be killed, and the Gates broken.


ANNOT.


IX,
French.
Le Chef du Camp au milieu de la preffe,
D'un coup de flefche fera bleffé aux cuifles,
Lors que Geneve en larmes & deftrefle,
Sera trahie par Loxanne & Souiffes.


Englifh.
The Chief of the Camp in the middle of the crowd,
Shall be wounded with an Arrow through both his thighs,
When Geneva being in tears and diftrefs, à |
Shall be betrayed by Lozane and the Switzers. :


ANNOT.


of Michael Noftradamus.
Mut
| French.
| Le jeune Princé accufé faucement,
| Mettra le camp en trouble & en querel! les:
Meurtry le chef par le fouflevement,
Sceptre appailer, puis guerir efcrovielles


Englith.
The young Prince. being falfely accufetl,
Shall put the Camp in ‘tronble. and in quarrele, A
The chief [ball be murdered by the tumult,


The Scepier fhall be appeafed, and after cure the Kings-evil.


ANN OT.
Mt This Prophecie muft needs be concerning England or France ; for there is but
i ‘thofe two Kings that challenge the cure of the Kings-evil.
XI.
French,


Celuy quavra couvert de la grand Cappe;
Sera induit a quelque cas patrer,

Les douze rouges viendront foiiiller la nappe,
Soubs meürtre; meurtre fe viendra perpetrer.


Eng lith.
He that [ball bé covered with a great Cloak,
Shall be induced to commit fome great PE.
The twelve red ones foall Soil the -Table-cloth,
Pander murder, murder fball be committed,
ANNOT.
‘8 Every one may interpret this as well as I, provided that by the twelve red ones;
ip he underftandeth twelve Cardinals,


XII
French.
Le Camp plus grand de route mis enfuite,
Gueres plus outre ne fera pourchaflé,
Oft recampe & legion reduite,
Puis hors, ae Gaules du tout ers chafcé.


Englifh.

| The greateft Camp being in di iforder , foall be routed,

| And fhall be purfned not much after,

| The Army fball incamp, again, aud the Troops fe. in order
| They afterwards they foall be wholly driven out of France;


A NNOT:


XIIL
French.
De plus grand perte nouvelles rapportées,
Le rapport fait le camp feftonnera,
Bandes unies encontre revoltées,
Double Phalange, grand abandonnera.
Englifh.
News being brought of a great lofs,
The report divulged the Camp fhall be aftonifbed,
Troops being united and revolted,
The double Phalange fhall forfake the great one.
AN NOT, DANCE | eae
This hath a connexion with the precedent; for while the Prince of Parma was


bufied in France, news was brought to his Camp, that the Hodanders had taken


Antwerp, which difcouraged his whole Hoft, and made him retire wichallfpeed, _
The Word Phalange fignifieth a Battailion or part of an Army, which being ex-
preffed here by the word double Phalange, fignifiech, that both Horfe and Foot de-
ferted the Duke of Parva upon the hearing of this news,
XIV.
French.

La mort fubite du premier perfonage,

Aura changé & mis un autre au Regne,

Toft, tard venu afi haut & basage,

Que Terre & mer faudra que lon le craigne.


Englifh.
The fudden death of the chief man,
Shall caufe a change, and put another in the Raign,
Soon, late come to fo high a degree,in a low age,
So that by Land and Sea he muft be feared,
ANN OT;
The two firft Verfes are plain,
The two laft fignifie, that a youth fhall come to the Kingdom, foow, that is, by
reafon of the fudden death of the chief man, and /are ; becaufe being but young, he
fhall Reign folong, chat he fhall be famous, and feared by Sea and Land,


Frenchy


5


of Michael Noftradamus.
X Vi
French.
D'ou penfera faire venir famine,
De la viendia le raffafiement,
L’œil de la Mer par avare canine,
Pour de l’un lautre donra Huile, Froment.


Englifh.
Whence one thought to make famine to come,
Thence fball come the fulnefs,
The eye of the Sea through a doggish coveton [nels ,
Shall give to both Oyl and Wheat. *


This |Prophecie was fulfilled at the famous Siege of offend, which lafted three
years and three Monthss, for the Hollanders that brought relief to the Town, did
for covetoufnefs fell the ammunition to the Spawiards that befieged it, for which
éomplaint being made by the States to the Prince of Orenge, Maurice of Naffaw,
as alfo that they did the like to Newport, which he had befieged . hereplyed {mart-
ly, do you not know that your Countrey men would Sail into Hell, were it not for A
fear to have their Sails burnt, : M

XVI

French. | |
La Cité franche de liberté fait ferue, | a
Des profligés & relueurs fait azyle, | #
Le Roy change a eux non fi proterue,
De cent feront devenus plus de Mille.


Englifh.
The free City from a free one shall become flave
And of the banished and dreamers shall be a retreat,
The King changed in mind, shall not be fo froward to then.
Of one hundred they shall become more than a thoufand.


ANNOT. |

Here you muft obferve that the Author being a Papift, fpeaketh this con:
cerning the City of Geneva, which he faith from a free City became a flave, whenit
fhook off the Duke of Savoy's domination, and became a retreat to the Proteftants, Ae tied
whom he called the banifhed and dreamers, ut

Inthe thirdVerfe,by sheKing changedin his mind that [hall not be [0 froward to them; |
he meaneth, Henry IV. who having changed the Proteftant Religion, to be a Ro-
man Catholick, did undettake their proteétion againft the Duke of Savoy their
Prince,

Hence followeth the explication of the fourth Verfe, when he faith, that of oné
hundred they {hall become more than athonfand ; fox in few years the Proteftants be-
came fo numerous, that theydrove the Roman Catholicks wholly out of the Town,
and fo have remained tothis day Mafters of ir,


———


French,


The true Prophecies
XVII:
French:
Changer a Beaune, Nuis, Chalons, & Dijon,
Le Duc voulant aneneler la barrée,
Marchant pres Fleuve, Poiffon, bec de plongeon,
Verra la queue: Patte {era ae,
Englifh.
There fhall be a change at Beaume, Nuis, Chalons, Dijon,
The Duke going about to r'aife Taxes.
The Merchant near the Riz persed fee the tail
Of a Fifb, having the Bill vf vf a Cormorant : the door shail be shut,
ANNOT.
Beaune, Chalows, and Dijon, are Cities in France, Nuisisa Town in Germany neat
the Rhyne, three or four Leagues below Coles.
For the reft, every one may make his own interpretation , for itis hard to cuefs


who chis Duke fhould 1 be, or that Fifh either, that fhall havea Gormotants Bill: after
whom the door fhall be thut,


XVIIL
French:
Les plus.Lettrez deflusles faits Ceeleftes,
Seront par Princes ignorans réprouvez,
inis dE nth chaflez comme {celeftes,


rt la ou {feront trouvez.


Englifh.
The oft Learned in the Cele eftial [ciences,
Shall be found fault with, by ig norant Prince
Punifbed by proclamation, chafed away as wicked;
And put to leat where they shall be found.
ANN OT.


Thisis plain, and fignifieth no more then a perfecution againft the Profeffors of
Heavenly fciences, fuch as are Aftrologers, Aftronomers, ef.


X IX.
French.
Devant Rouan d'Infubres mis le Siege,
Par Terre & Mer enfermez les paflages,
D'Hainant, de Flandres de Gand & ceux deLiege,


Par leurs LA raviront les Rivages.


Englifh.
FIGE Rouan a Siege fhall be laid by the Enfubrians:
By Sea and Land io paffages fball be [but uv,
Thof of Hainaut, Flanders, Ghent , and Liege,
With their Troops “foal plunder the Sea-fbore:


This


fut
fen,


ft


y


(4


He
Hans, C


| Counc


«HS €


of Michael Noftradamus, £5 9


7
aad


ANNOT.

This is ftill concerning the Duke of Parma’s Army , when he came into France
againft Hezry che IV. in favour of the League,for his Army wherewith he Befieged
Ronen, was compounded of all thofe Nations ; the greareft part of which were Jta-
lians, called here Infutrians , from the Latin word Infubria , which fignifieth che
Countreys of Savoy and Piemont,


XXI)
French.
Paix uberté long temps on ne lotiera,
Part tout fon Regne defert la fleur de Lis,
Corps mort d’Eau, Terre on apportera,
Sperants vain heur d’eftre la enfevelis,


Englifh.
Peace and plenty fhall not be long praifed,
All the time of bis Reign the Flower de Luce fball be deferted
Bodies fhall die by water, Earth [hall be brought,
Hoping vainly to be there Buried.


ANN OT,


This only foretelleth a great Famine and Inundation in France » fignified here by
the Flower de Luce,


OAC LS
French.


Le changement fera fort difficile,

Cité Province au change gain fera,

Cœur haut, prudent mis, chaffé l’Inhabile.
Mer, Terre, Peuple, fon eftat changera.


Engli(h.
The change shall be very hard,
The City and Countrey shall gain by the chan 16,
A high prudent heart shall be put in the unworthy expelled,
Sea, Land, People shall change its condition,
ANNOT,
This needeth no Interpretation,


XX Es
French.


La grand Copie qui fera dechaffée,
Dans un moment fera beloing au Roy,
La Foy promife de loing fera faucée,
Nud fe verra en piteux defarroy.


The true Propbecies


Englith.
The great Army that shall be rejethed,
In a moment shallbe wanted bythe King.
Th: faith promifed a far off shall be broken,
So that be shall be left naked in a pitiful cafe,
ANNOT.
This is plain,
XXIIL
French.
La Legion dans la Marine clatie,
Calcine Magnes, Souphre & Poix bruflera,
Le long repos de l’afleurée place,
Port Selin chercher, feu les confumeràa.
Englifh.
The Legion in the Maritine Fleet,
Calcineth Magnes, shall burn Brimftone and Puch,
The long reft of the fecure place,
They shall feek Port Selyn, but fire shall confume their.


ANNOT.

Here we mutt obferve four things,the firft is, that Calais is called by the Author,
The long reft of the [ceure place, Becaufe then viz, in the year 1555. it was yet in the
power of the King of England, and had been quietly before, for the {pace of 287.
years, that is, from the year 1347. till the year 2555, and was fo ftill, till che year
1557. whenthe Duke of Guife took it, whence we gather that it was afecure place
that had enjoyed fo long areft,

The fecond is, that thofe.of Diepe did watch for the Spaniards , in the paflage be-
tween Dover and Calais, therefore the Author faith, They fhall feck Port Selyn, Selyn
Port or Harbour is always taken by the Author for an Harbour in the Ocean,

The thirdis, thatche great fight between the Freush and the Spaniards was by
fire, fo that moft part of the Ships on each fide were burnt,and the Spanzfh and French
Souldiers did caft chemfelves into the Sea, to fave their lives in their enemies Ships,
where they were flain,

The fourth is, that thofe of Diepe being extraordinary skilful in Sea-fights had
made great quantity of artificial fires , to caft into the Spamifh Ships, but the Ships
grapling one with another, they were burnt on both fides,

Upon chofe four circumftances the two firft Verfes fay, chat the Legion in the Fleet
Calcineth macnes what is Loadftône burnt,and fhall barn Pitch and Brimflone, to make


Fresch.


tri


Tu
tit? Ty


fete {n
Ww W


of Michael Noftradamus.


XXIV.

French.
Ouy foubs Terre Sainte Dame voix feinte,
Humaine flamme pour Divine voir luire,


Fera des fœurs de leur fang Terre tainte,


Et les Saints Temples par les impurs deftruire.


Englifh.


Under ground fhall be heard the fained voice of a Holy Dusne,


An bumane flame to fee a Divine one,


Shall canfe the ground to be died with the fifters blood,


And the Holy Temples to be deftroyed by the wicked.
ANNOT,


‘Every one may underftand this as well as I.


XXV.
French.


Corps fublimes fans fin a l'œil vilibles,
Obnubiler viendront par ces raifons,
Corps, front compris, fens & chef invifibles,
Diminuant les Sacrées Oraïlons.

Englifh.
The Ccleftial bodies that are always vifible to the eye,
Shallbe darkened for thefe reafons,


The body with the forebead fenfe and head invincible.


Diminifbing the Sacred Prayers.
ANNOT.


This is of the fame nature as the foregoing,


XXVI.
; French.
Lou grand Cyfame fe levera d’abelhos,
Que non lauran don te fiegen venguddos,
Denuech lenbonfq,lun gach deflous las treilhos,
Ciutad trahido per cing lengos non nudos.
| ~ Englith.
The great fwarm of Bees fball rife,


And it fball not be known whence they come,


Towards the Ambufb the Fay fhall be under a Vire,


A City foall be betray'd by five tongues not naked.
ANNOT.


The Author having made this Stanza in the Provencal Language, that was his Mo-
ther Tongue,which hath very little relation tothe reft of the Freach tongue,hath pur
me to fome troubleto uaderftand itsat laft I found the meaning to be this,that when a

Y


16) The irue Prophecies


great {warm of Bees (hall light on fome place, and it (hall not be known whence
they came, then fhall be feen a Jay undera Vine, anda City thall be betrayed by
five feveral Nations, |

XXVII.

French.


Salon, Manfol, Tarafcon, de Sex, Larc,
Ou eft debout encor la Pyramide,

Viendront livrer le Priuce Denemark,
Rachat honny au Temple d’ Artemide.


Englih.  ,
salon, Manfol, Tarafcon, Deiex, the arche,
‘here to this day flandeth the Pyramis,
Shall come to deliver the Prince of Denmark,
A foamefulranfom [hall be paid inthe Temple of Artemis,
ANNOT.

Salon, Manfol, Tarafcon, Defex, are Townsin Provesceand Langnedo.

By the e4rch, here is meant the Triumphal Arch of Cas Marius, which he
ereted atter the defeat of the Cimbres and Tewtons, and remaineth to this day in that
Province, within two or three Leagues off the Town of Orenge,

Artemis is an Epethete of Diana, fo called ‘mes rer , & fecande
atr em,

XXVILL
French,
Lors que Vens du Sol fera couvert,
Soubs la fplendeur fera la forme occulte,
Mercure au feu les aura defcouvert,
Par bruit Bellique fera mis a l'Infulte.


Englfh.
When Venus [ball be covered by the Sun,
Under the {plendov of it {ball be an occult form,
Mercury in the fire fball difcover theut,


And by aWarli ke rumor [ball be provoked.


ANN OT.
If this Book cometh ever into the hands of Hermes’ Difciples, I {hall defire
they would confider diligently this Stanza, and the three following ; for they are


ail concerning the Eléxir of the Philofophers, or the making of the Philofophers
ftone, To begin with this :


When Venus fhall be covered by the sur,


This is the Aftral point, fomnch fought after by the Philofophers, for the be- :


ginning of their work, without the knowledge of which they cannot begin their
work, or come to any good,


Under the [plender of it [ball bean occult form, that is, under that conjunétion
lyetha great myftery.


Mercury 27 te fire [hall difcover them, viz.the Mercury of the Philofophers, made
by Coeleftial fire. -


And


d |
Aw


(On KO


Het


Sal


he
ht


TT


Of Michael Nofademus,


Oppofitions, Conjunctions, &'¢. ‘Icis not poffible to fpeak more plainly,
Te oan
| French.
Le Sol caché, ecliplé par Mercure, :
Ne fera mis que pour le Ciel fecond,
De Vulcan Hermes fera faite Pafture,
Sol fera veu pur, rutilant & blond. :
_. Englifh. |
The Sun fball be hid and eclipfed by Mercury,
And {hall not be fet but for the fecond Heaven,
Hermes /ball be‘made a prey.to Vulcan,
Audafier that the Sun [ball be feen pure, fhining and yellow,
" ANNOT. | : |
Here I muft lead the Reader with Aviadnes Thread, that he may extrecate him:
felf out of this Labyrinth, we? |
The Su fhall be bid and Eclipfed by Mercury.that is, Gold fhall be Eclipfed and dif=
folved by the Philofophers Mercury, whichis theKey and foundation of all the work,


"And foal not be fet but for the fecond Heavens thatis, thall not beufed till you
come to the fecond part of the work, whichis that of the Furnace,


- Hermes /hall be made 2 preyto Vulcan ; thatis, the matter and compofition of the
Elixir, {hall be put upon the fire in a Furnace,


.… And after that the San fhall be (een pure. frining, yellow . thatis, itt conclufion after
projection made, thou fhalt fee pure, fhining, and Yellow Gold, |


XXX.
| ce French.

Plus d’unze fois Luna Sol ne voudra,

Tous augmentes & baiïflez de degre,

Et fi bas mis que peu d'Or. on coudra,

Qu'apres faim, pelte, defcouvert le fecret,

Englifh. . 3

The Moon will not have the Sun. above eleven times.

Then both [ball be encreafed and leffened in degree,

And put fo low, that a little Gold foall be fowed up,

So.that after hunger and plague,the Jecret ball be difcovered.

~ pian DL et ANNOT,
~ The Moon will nos have the Sun above eleven times: that is, ‘the Moon of che Phi:
lofophers will not imbibe their Sun above Eleven times. | ;
Then both fhall be encreafed and lefened ix degree; thatis, both fhall beencreafed in

quality, and leffened in quantity. . © = | |
_ And put fo low that alittle Gold jhall be fowrd sp:
or Philofophers ftone fhall be fo.fmall:in Bulk} th
hide ic in his Cloth’. : suis: 64 mél élite ! |
… After famine and plague the [ecret fhall be difcovered ,. that is, fomebody fhall die,
with famine or plague, about which the fecret fhall be found'and difcovered,
Aitusett a fi ep tall.


thar is, the powder of projection,
at one may {ow it about him, and


163
| nd h à Warlike rumor Jhall be provoked: that is, the Planet of Mercury thal] be
provoked to mix his variable and changable difpofition with theirs, by his A fpeas,


ett a


The true Prophecies
XX Ie
Ms SBPEREs 2 yee
La Lune au plain de nuit fur le haut Mont.
Le nouveau Sophe d'Un feulicerveau la veu,
Par fes Difciples eftre immortel fernond,
Yeux au Midy, enfin, mains corps au feu,


| Englifh. | Te
The Moon at full by night upon the bigh Mount, me
The new Sophe with one onely Brain bath [een it,
Invited by bis Difciples to become immortal,
His eycs.to the South, conclufion, bis bands dnd body to the fire.
BNO ee ?
Sopbe in Greek Ggnifierh a wife man or Philofopher, who fhall find the Philofo-
bhers ftone, when the Moon fhall come to the fall in the night upon a high Mount,
His Difciples {hall perfwade him to make himfelf immortal, they being perlwaded
thar the Elixir cureth all difeafes. - : |
The laft Verfe faith, His eyes tothe South, his hands and body tothe fires that is,
this Chymift or Adeprae,, (hall retire into fome Southern Countrey to work, |
1 cannot omit here that a conceited Chymift in Paris, whofe name was Hawment} |
in Enclifh, Highmennt, could not be diffwaded but our Author fpake of him in this


Stanza, and that he could not die till he had got the Philofophers ftone, but to other
tnrtrers, We


XX XIE. x:
| French.

Es lieux & temps chair au poiffon donra lieu,
La loy commune fera faite au contraire,
Vieux tiendra fort puis ofté du milieu,


Le Panta, Choina Philon mis fort ärrieré.
Englifh, 1

In places and times, flefb fhall give place to f ib,

The common Law fhall be made againft it,

The old man [hall ftand faft then being taken away

The Panta, Choina, Philon, fhall be fet afide.

. ANNOT. 1 ies

_ Panta, Choina, Philen, are three Greek words, mr va lens, which fignifie if


Latine, omnia inter amicos communis, and in Englifb, all chings are common among
friends: ‘The reft is eafie, SRT TT aS


XX XUT
; : French. |
Jupiter joint plus Venus qu'a la Lune, ul
Apparoiflant de plenitude blanche,
Venus cachée foubs la blancheur Neprune;
De Mars frappée par la gravée branche,


‘mind.


of Michael Noftradamus.
Englith.


Jupiter being more joyned to Venus then to the Moon,


Appearing in a full whitenefs, |
Venus bling hid under the whitenefs of Neptune,


Stricken by Mars through the ingraved branch.


ANNOT.


= Theféterms being Aftronomical and Affrologieal, it is hard to guefs at the Authors


XXXIV,

| French.
Le grand mené.captif d’eftrange Terre,
Dor enchainé au Roy Cheyren offert,
Qui dans Aufonne, Milan perdra la Guerre;
Et tout fon Of mis a Feu & a Fer,
Englifh. os |
The great one brought Prifoner frow a far Countrey, |
And chained with Gold, fball be prefented to the King Chyrer,
Being then at Aufone. Milan fhall loofe the War.
And all its Hoft [ball be put to fire and fword.

ANNOT.


The meaning of this is , that when a great one from a far Countrey ; {hall be
brought Prifoner chained with gold, and prefentedto a King called Henry (for


Cheyren by tranfpofition of letters is Hemry) who then thall beat Berdeawx? oUilan


ei M
An


fhall loofe a great Army.


r? MXXV.
Mare rn ay | 2
Le feu efteint, les vierges trahiront,
La plus grand part, de la bande nouvelle,
Ponldre à feu les feuls Rois garderont,
Hetrufque & Corfe; denuit gorge alumelle;

5 0 Englifh.
The fire being put ont, the Virgins fball betray,
The greateft part of the new troup,
Gunpowder, Lance, [hall keep only the Kings, — .
In Hetruria and Corfica by night throats foall be cut.
ANNOT.


" Hetruriais the C ountrey of Ti ufcany now under the Duke of Florence, and Corficd
15 an land in the cAtedserrantan Sea belonging tothe Genvefe, The réft is plain.


French,


T be true Prophecies. .
¥XXVL
French
Les jeux nouveaux en Gaule redreflez,
Apres Victoire de l’Infabre Campagne,
Monts d’'He/berie, les grands liez trouflez,
De peur trembler la Rowagne & l'Efpagne.
tars) Ve Engfh, 14;
The new plays [ball be fet up again in France,
After the Vittory obtained in Piemont, |
Mountains of Spain,the great ones tied carried away,
Romania aad Spain fball quake for fear.
~ ANNOT.. Paie 2
This is a Prognoftication of the rejoycing that {ould be in France; after the win:


hing of that famous battle of Serizeles in Piemont , againft the Armies of the Empe-
tour and the King of Spain,


es ul ers a


XXXVIL

French.
Gaulois par faults Monts viendra penetrer,
Occupera le grand Mont de P'Infubre,
Au plus profond fon Oftfera entrer,
Genes, Monech poufieront claflewrubre,


Englifh,


|
sa


The. French by\léaping fhall go ower the Mountains,

And [ball feixe upon the great Mount of the Savoyard,

He fball canfe his Army to'go to the furthermoft,

Genoa, and Monaco fhall fet ont their red Fleet, '

ANNOT. LR

This Prophecy is concerning Henry the IV, King of France; who went over the
Alpes and conquered the Duke of Savoy's Gountrey , becaufe he would not reftore
the Markdom of Salures, :* Genoa and Monaco are Cities near Savon ©


XXXVIIT
French.


Pendant que Duc, Roy, Roine occupera,

Chef Bizantin captif en Samotbrace,

Avant laffault un l’autre mangera,

Rebouts ferré fuivra du fang latrace,

| | dy SNOT os

While the Duke hall buftethe King and the Queen... :

A great man of Conftantinople ball be prifoner in Samothracia,

Before the affault one shall eat up the other,

Rebours shod shall trace oie by the blood, |
ANNOT,


of Michael Noftradamus. r6


7
ANNOT. if
The three firft Verfes are plain, as for the fourth, either it is falfly Printed, orI
mutt confefs I underftand it not.


XX XIX.

French
Les Rhodiens demanderont fecours,
Par le neglect de fes hoirs delaifiée,
L'Empire Arabe ravalera fon cours,
Par Hefperie la caufe redrefée.

Foglifh,
The Rhodiens fhall ask for fuccours.
Being forfaken by the neglect of her Heirs,
The Arrabian Empire fhall flack bis courfe,
By the means of Spain the cafe foall be mended.

ANNOT,


By the Rhodéans are underftood the Knights of ewalthe, becaufe they dwelt frft
at Rhodes,


By the fecond Verfe ic is faid, it was the neglect of her Heirs, that is of the Heirs of
Rhodes the Knights of Maltha , who being carelefs of themfelves, were befieged by
Solyman, which conftrained them to ask fuccours of all the Chriftian Princes, which
came very flowly,at laft Dom Garcia Viceroy of Sicily relieved them, and drove away
the Turks that had fuffered great lofs, therefore the Author faith in the third Vere,
The Arabian Empire Jhall flack his conr{e.


X L.
French.
Les Forterefles des Affiegez ferrez,
Par poudre a feu profondez en abÿfme,
Les proditeurs feront tous vifs ferrez,
Onc aux Sacriftes navint fi piteux {chifine.
Englifh, =
The ftrong places of the Befieged fhall be firaightned,
By Gunpowder they fball be plonged into a pit,
The Traytors fhall be fhut up alive,
Never did happen {0 pitiful a fehifnretothe Sacriltes.
ANNOT.
By the Sacriftes, he underftandeth the Cletgy of the Roman Religion,
AL
French; :
Gynique Sexe captive par Hoftage,
Viendra de nuit cuftodes decevoir,
Le Chef du Camp deceu par fon language,
Lairra la gente, {era piteux a voir. À


| 4


The true Prophecies
Englifh.
Gynical fexe being captive by Hoftage ,


Shall come by night to deceive her keepers,

The Chief of the Camp being deceived by her Language,

Shall leave ber folks, a thing pitiful to bebold.
ANNOT,


Gynical Sex isa woman from the Greek word wi, which fignifieth a woman,
The meaning then of this Stanza is, that a woman being given in Hoftage , and
made prifoner, fhall deceive her keepers, and among thereft, the chief Captain who
hall forfake his Troopsand run away with her,
X LIL.
French.


Geneve & Langres par ceux de Chartre & Dole,
Et par Grénoble captif au Montlimar,


Seyffet, Laufane, par fraudulente dole,
Les trahiront pour Or foixante mark.


Englith.
Geneve and Langres by thofe of Chartres and Dole,


Aud by one of Grenoble captive at Montlimar,
Seifler, Lozanne by a fraudulent deceit,


Shall betray them for thirty pounds weight of Gold.
ANNOT.


Alt thofe Towns are in France, the fenfe is plain,
XLII.
French.


Seont ouis au Ciel les Armes battre,
Celuy an mefme les Divins ennemis,
Voudront Loix Saintes injuftement debatre,
Par Foudre & guerre bien crotans a mort mis.
Englifh.
There fball be beard in the Air noife of Weapons,
And in that fame year the Divines [ball be enemies,
They ball unjuftly put down the Holy Laws,
And by the Thunder and the War true believers fhall die.
ANNOT.
There is no obfcurity inthis,


=


r= Ae ers


—S


of Michael Noftradamus,


XLIV.
French.
Deux gros de Mende, dé Rhudex, & Millaud,
Cahors, Limoges, Caftre, malo fepmano,

De nuech l'intrado, de Brurdeanx an cailhau,
Par Perigort au toc de la Campano,


| Enblifh. !
0 s ¢ re 4 ‘ if ?

th Tivo great ones of Mende, of Rhodez aud Milliaud,
lo Cahors, Limoges, Caftres az evil week,


By aight the entry fhall be from Bourdeaux one cailban,
Through Perigort at the ringing of the Bell,
ANNOT,

This Stanza is half French and half PrBencal language.

All che Citiesnamed here, Afende, Rhodez, Millisud, Cahors, Limoges, Caffres,
Bourdeaux, Perigort, are Cities of France, bordering upon Provence , which is the
Countrey wherein our Author was born, |

The meaning of itis, that all thofe Cities thall rife againft the Collectors of the
Kings Taxes, and fhall fet upon them by the found of the Bell which is already come
to pafs, and may come to pals yer. |

XL Vi
ek French.
Par conflit, Roy Regne abandonerä,
Le plus grand Chef faillira au befoing,
Morts, profligez peu en rechapera,
Tous deftrenchez ‘un en {era tefmoin.
Englifh. Pay
By @ Battle the King fhall forfake his Kingdom,
The greateft Commander, shall fail in time of need,
They shall be killed and rontéd, few shall efcape, ;
They shall be cut off, one only shall be left for awitnels.
| ANNOT,. À: ie
| ‘this is a Prognoftication ofa great Battle, by the lofs of whichra King fhall for+
|| fake his Kingdom, his chief Commander having deferted him intime ofneed. The


||  flaughter {hall be fo great, that none fhall be lefr but one for awitriefs,
| | XLVI: |
| | | French, :
Bien defendu le fait par excellence,
Gardetoy Tours de ta proche ruine,
i Londres. & Nantes par Rheims:fera defence,
i] Ne pañles outre au temps de-la‘bruine. >”


Z


The irte Prophecies


| .. . |. Englith.
The fa& {hall be defended excellently well
Tours beware of thy approaching ruine, | |
London and Nantes by Rhemes /hall fiand npoñ their defence,
Do not go further in foggy weather. {
MAR" me QU
Tours is the chief City of a Provincein France, called Towraine, which is com:
mended here for Having refifted excellently well; butis forewarned to look to her
felf after that, and to beware of her approaching ruine, |
X LVIL
| French.
Le noir farouche quand aura eflayé,
Sa main fanguine par feu, fer,.arcs tendus,
Treftout le peuple fera tant rayé,
Voir les plus grands par col & pieds pendus.
Englifh.
The wild black one, after he hall bave tryed,
His bloody hand by fire, Sword, bended Bows,
All the people fball be fo frighted,
To fee the greateft hanged by the neck and feet.
ANNOT,


Ic is a defcription of a Tyrant, who after he fhall have tryed his bloody hand by
Fire, Sword, and bent Bows, fhall caufe his chief mento be hanged by rhe neck
and feet. Since the Author did write there had been facha Tyrant in the world:
oe À Fohn Bafilides, great Duke of Rufiis, in the year 1572: Read Pas/Osburne
in his Life. FRS


XL VIII.
French.


Planuré Aufone fertile fpacieufe,

Produira taons, & tant de fauiterellés,

Clarte folairé deviendra nubilenfe,

Ronger le rout, grand pefté venir delles.
v: Englifh,

The Plain abont Bourdeaux fruitful and fpaciôus,

Shall produce fo many Hornets and fo many Grajbopers ,

That the light of the Sun fball be darkened,

They foall crap all, a great plague fball come from them.

ANN OT;


i cannot find in Hiftory that chis hath yet happened, fince the writing of thefe
Prophecies, therefore I reckonit de futuro, |


>


+ Com. D
to bi |


andby BI


leneck À


id, Al
ro |


ns |


Libra is one of che twelve figns of the Zediack, w
that the meaning of thisis, that Zibra hall fee Spain to Reign,

And befides that, to have the Monarchy of Heaven a
command of the Pope, and of the beft part of Europe, So that no Afian or Turkifb
forces {hall receive damage by the Chriftians, till feven
have Reigned fucceflively, and one after another,


Of Michael Noftradamus,
XLIX.

French:
Devant le peuple fang fera refpandu,

Qui du haut Ciel ne viendra efloigner,
Mais d'un long temps ne fera entendu,
L’Efprit d’un feul le viendra te{moigner,

y : a Enelifh.

Before the people blood fpall befpilt,

Who Shall not come far fromthe high Heaven,
But it [ball not be heard of for a great while,
The Spirit of one foall come to witnefs it.
ANNOT.


This Prophecie is concerning fome juft perfon, that fhall bemurdered openly :
His blood fhall cry to Heaven, but fhall not be heard fora good while, ‘till at laft ie
fhall be difcovered by fome body, si


L.
French,


‘Libra verra regner les Hefperies,


De'Ciel & Terre tenir la Monarchie,
D'Afre forces nul ne vefra peries,
Que fept ne tiennent par rang la Hierarchie,
| : Englifh.
Libra fall fee Spain to Reign, |
And bave the Monarchy of Heaven and Earth,
No body hall fee the forces of Afia to perifh,
Till fever have kept the Hierarchy fucceffively,
A NNOT. ,
hich is favourable to Sr, fo


nd Earths that is, to have the
Popes of the Spavt{h faction


ODE
| French,
Un Duccupide fon ennemy Pourfuivre,
Dans entrera empefchant la Phalange,
Haftez a pied fi pres viendront pourfuivre;
Que la Journée. conflite aupres du Gange.


Englifh,


The true Prophecies
Englifh. |
À Duke being earneft i the purfute of his enemy
Shall come in, hindering the Phalange,
Haftened on foot fball follow them fo clofe,
That the day of the Battle fhall be near Ganges.
ANNOT.


A Phalaage, in Latine Phalanx, is a Squadron of Souldiers, which word was
aritiently proper only tothe Macedentans.  Gangesis@ River in Jadia,.
Lit,
French.


Fn Cite obfefle aux murs hommes & femmes,
Ennemis hors, le chef preft a foy rendre,
Vent fera fort encontre les gens darmes,
Chaffez feront par chaux pouffiere & cendre.


Englih.


In a befieged City, men and women being upon the walls,
The enemies without, the Governour ready to furrender,
The Wind {ball be ftrong again$t the Souldiers,

[hey foall be driven away by lime, duft, and afbes.
ANNOT.

This is a peculiar and remarkable accident,. wherein the befiegers of a City thalll
Se driven away from their enterprife, by Lime, Duft, and Afhes, {cattered and dif-
perfed againft them by a mighty wind, | HOUR ae

LIU.
French:


~ COLE où , 7 e +

Les fugitis & bannisrevoques,

Peres & Fils garniflant les hauts puits,

Le cruel pere & les fiens {ufioquez,

Son Fils plus pire fubmerge dans le puits:
Englifh.


be rinnaways and banifbed men being recalled,


Tr
Fathers and Sons garnishing the high wells,
The cruel father and his retinue shall be fuffocated;
His Son being worfe;fball be drowned in the Well.
ANNOT.
The words are plain, oùt of which every One may make his own fenfe:


/


dy


till Al
1 dll


froth A


of Michael Noftradamus,
LIV.

a French. __

Du nom qut onc ne fut au Roy Gaulois,
amais ne fut un Foudre fi craintif,

Tremblant l'Italie, Efpagne,& les Anglois,
De femmes eftrangeres grandement attentif.
A Englifh. |
Of the name that, a French King never was,
There was never a Lightning fo much feared,
Italy fball tremble, Spain and the Englith,
He fhall be much taken with women firangers,
ANNOT..


This foretelleth that when a French King fhall have a name that never any of his


Predeceflors had , he fhall be fo much feared as that 744, Spain, and England fhall
tremble, and that befides he fhall be much given to women


ALY,
je French, .
Quand la Corneille fur Tour de Brique jointe,
Durant fept heures ne fera que crier,
Mort prelagée, de fang Statue teinte,
Tyran meurdry, aux Dieux peuple prier.

| Englifh.
When the Crow upon a Tower made of Brick,
For feven-bours foall do nothing but cry, “le
Death fball be foretold, and the Statue dicd with blood,
Tyrant [ball be murdered, and the people pray to the Gods.


ANNOT.


, This extraordinary Prodigy of a Crow crying for feven hours together upon
Brick Tower, foreteileth that fome notorious Tyrant {hall be put to death, and his


ftatuefprinkled with blood, and withall, that the people either for joy or fear thall be
much given toprayer,


LV

French,
Apres Victoire de rabieufe Langué,
L'Elprit tempte, en tranquil & repos,
Victeur fauguin par confh@, fait Harangue,
Rouftir la Langue, & la Chair & les Os.

esc be Pies UU Rag ia

After the Viory got over a raging tongue, — |
The mind that was tempted, foall be in tranquility and reft,
The bloody Conqneror by Battle fball inake a Speech,
And roaft the tongue, the flefo,and the bones. :
ANNOT,


147 T he true Prophecies
ANN OT,
Ic is a Conquerour who having been much railed at by his enemies , fhall in con-
Clufion after he hath overcome them, take a fevere vengeance of them,
LVAT.
| French.

ignare envie au grand Roy fupportée,

Tiendra propos deftendre les efcrits,

Sa femme non femme par un autre tentée,

Plus double deux ira au fortde cris.


Englifh.


Tonorant envy being fupported by the great King,

Shall talk of prohibiting the writtixgs,

His wife no wife, being tempted by another,

Shall more then they two prevail by crying.
ANNOT,

Some ignorant envious perfon being in favour with the King, fhall go about to
fupprefs learning, but the Kings wife no wife, that is his Concubine; fhall perfuade
him to the contrary; and fhall prevail,

LVIIL
French.
Soleil ardent dans la gofier couler,
De fang humain arroufer Terre Etrufque,
Chef feille d’eau, mener fon fils filer,
Captive Dame conduite Terre Turque.
Englifh,
Burning Sun [ball be poured into the throat,
This buman blood fhall wet the Hetrurian ground,
The chief pale. of water, fball lead his fon to Spin,
A captive Lady fhall be carried into the Turkifh Countrey.
ANN OT.
_ By burning Sun muft be underftood melted gold, which hall be poured into ones
throat, in the Hetrurian ground, that is in Tufcany.
By the chief Pale of water is to be underftood, fome Water-bearer , who fhall
make his fon an Eunuch to makebenefitont, The fourth Verfeis plain,
LIX.
French.
Deux affiegez en ardante ferveur,
De foif eftaints pour deux plaines Taffes;
Le fort lime & un vieillard refueur,
Nu Genois, de Nizxa monftrera trace;


Engilth?


NCOs | |
4


The two firft Verfes are plain, The wwo fat V
man fhall thew to the Genoefes the way-how.to take Niz
by filing ome Iron Grates, by which they fhall get into the Town,


This Stanza is divided into ewo
to the middle of the fourth. The meaning is,

prived of his place by a ftranger chat {hall fub
ther fhall be eaten up before his face in the To
eaten up, is hard to guefs, whether it beby po
_ The Hemifthikion of the ‘lat Verfe ;-Or
Orleans (hall betray Rewep Din


of Michael Noftradamus:
paths" or Bnglifh. , .

Two befreged, being in a burning heat,

Shall die for thirft, want of two Bowls full,

The Fort being filed, an old doting man, |

Shall fbow to the Genoefe'the way to Nizza.


ANNOT.


LX,
AR French.
Les fept enfans en Hoftage laiffez,
Le tiers viendra fon enfant trucider,
Deux par fon fils feront d’eftoc percez,
Genes, Florence les viendra feconder.
Me Englifh, |
The feven Children being left in Hoftage,


The third fhall come to kill his child,


Two by their fons fall be run through,
Genoa and Florence fall fecond them,


The words being fo plain, every body may give as cood an interpretation as 1)


LXI.

SRE 4, Pee! 2. |
Le vicux mocque & privé de fa plate,
Par |’ Eftranger qui le fubornera,

Mais de fon filz mange devant {a face,
Le Frere a Chartres. Orl! Rouen trahira.

L . "Englifh. , ae owas ae.
The old man fall be baffled and deprived of his. place,
By the ffranger that fball fuborn hittay io
But of bis fon fhall be eaten before bis face, °° ‘
The Brother at Chartres. : Or. foall betray Rouen.
ANINOT....


€


ie ge 5


erfes fignifie that an old dotin


$


%4, a Town hard by them,


parts, The firft part runneth from the firft Verfe ”
that an old man fhall ‘be bafHled and
ornhim:, but thac ftrangers fons bro~
wn of Chartres ; what he meaneth b
verty, futes at Law, Envy, Lice, @c.
L, jhall betray Rouen , figaifiech, that


ee -; ermhnsene—-oem


Thetrue Propbecies
‘LXIL
French.
Un Coronel machine ambition,
Se faifira de la plus grande Armee,
Contre fon Prince feinte invention,
Ft defcouvert fera foubs fa ramée.
Englith.
A Colonel devifeth a plot by his ambition,
He fhall fetxe upon the beft part of the Army,
Againft bis Prince he fhall have a fained invention,
And fhall be difcovered under the Harbour of the Vine.
ANNOT.,
I never faw the Jaft Tyrant Cromwel better painted tothe life , then in the thrée
firft Vertes, |
As for che fourth, it iscertain that his intention among his Camerades was firft


difcovered by him unto them at the Star Tavern is Coleman-ftrect, which is che place
thatthe Author callech the Harbour of the Vine,


LXIIL
French:
L’ Année Celtique contre les Montagnars,
Qui feront {us & pris a la pipée,
Paifants irez pulferont toft faugnars,
Precipitez tous au fil de l'Efpce.


Englifh.
The. Celtique Army fhall go againft the Highlanders,
Who fhall ftand upon their guard, and be taken with Bird-lime twigs,
The Peafant being angry, [ball roll down the flones,
They fhall be all put to the edge of the fword.
ANNOT.

This is a defcription of the attempt made by the Fresch upon Savoy, which Cour:
trey lieth in, the Mountains of the A/pes, therefore called here Highlanders 5 where
the Peafants being incenfed for the lofs of their goods and therwine of their Coun-
trey, rolled ftones from the top of the Mountains againftthe French Army, which
could not hinder chem from being deftroyed ; this came to pafs under Henry che IV.


King of France, ia the year 1662
LXIV.


| French
Lé'defaillint en habit de Bourgeois,
Viendra le Roy tenter de fon offence,
Quinze Soldats. la plufpart, Villageois,
Vie derniere & chefde fa chevance."


thrée


srt
place


pli |


|


|
4


of Michael Noftradamus.
Enghh.


The guilty, in a Citizens habit ,

Shall come to tempt the K ing concerning his offence,

Fifteen Soldiers the moft part Countrey sen,

The laft fhall be bis life, and the beft part of his Eftate.
ANNOT.


This fignifieth thata great man having committed an offence againft the King, fhall
come to him in a mean habit,to {ue for his Pardon,and {hall be carried away by fifteen
Souldiers, the moft part Countrey fellows; and in conclufion he fhall have his life


faved, and the beft part ofhis Eftate,
LX Vv.
French.
Au deferteur de la grand Forterelle,
Apres qu’aura fon lieu abandonné.
Son adverfaire fera fi grand provefle.
L'Empereur toft mort fera condamné.


Englith.
After that the defertor of the great Fort,
Shall have forfaken his place,
His adverfary fball do fogreat feats,
That the Emperor, shall joon be condemned io death.


ANNOT, .
This is plain.


LX VI.
French.
Soubs couleur feinte de fept teftes rafées,
Seront formez divers explorateurs,
Puits & Fontains de poilon arroufées.
Au Fort de Gezes humains devoratcurs,
| Eñglh:
Under the fained colour of [even shaven heads.
Shall divers [pies be framed, |
Wells and Fountains shall be [prinkled with poifon,
In the Fort of Genoa shall be humane devourers.


| AN NOT.
The three firft Verfes belong to the fame fenfes viz. that feven men thall be


|| fpies, under pretence to be Prieftsor Monks , (whichis the meaning of the fhaven
{| heads) and fhall poifon the Wells and sprites.


The laft Verfe fignifiech chat in the Fort of Genoa,their fhall be devourers of men,


| thatis, Ufurers and Extortioners, which is no new thing in that Nation,
B


Aa French:


7 be true P rophectes
LX VIL
French,
L’An que Saturne & Mars efpaux combuit,
L’ Air fort feiché, longue trajeGion,
Par feux fecrets d’ardeur grands lieux aduff,
Peu pluyé, Vent chauds, Guerres, Incurfions.
Englifh:
Inthe year that Saturn and Mars shall be fiery ,
The Air shall be dery dry, in many Countreys,
By fecret fires, many places shall be burat with bear,
There shall be fcarcity of Rain, hot Winds, Wars, in-roads.
ANNOT,


This is the Prognoftication of a mighty dry feafon, and other accidents chat
fhall happen when Saturn and «Mars fhall be in a fiery difpofition, which whether
it be by Oppofition, Conjunction, Afpe&, &c. Letthe Aftrologers judge.


LXVIIL
French.
En l’an bien proche non efloigné de Venus,
Les deux plus grandsde l’Afie & d'Afrique,
Du Rhine & Iffer qu’on dira font venus,
Cris, pleurs a Malthe, & cofte Liguftique.
, Englifh.
In a year that is to come shortly, and not far from Vents,
The two greateft ones of Afia and Affrica,
Shall be faid to come from the Rhine avd Ifter,
Crying, and tears shall be at Maltha and in the Ligurian shore.
ANNOT.


The Rhine is a River in Geresany , Iffer is anothet in the Countrey of s/riz, be:
longing to the Venetians,


By the firft Verfe, I conclude that this Prophecy came to pas a little while after


the Author wrote this Book, when the grand Segnor Selymas befieged Malthe, and
put in fear all che Zigwrian Coaft, whichis chat of Genes, =


L XI Xz

French.
La Cité grande les exilez tiendront,
Les Citadins morts, meurtris & chaffez,
Ceux d’ Aquilee a Parme promettront,
Monftrer l’entrée par les lieux non tracez,


Enolith,


pol


be poifoned, and die b


Of Michael Noftradamus.


Englifh.
The banifbed fball keep the great City,
The Citixens being dead, murdered and expelled,
Thofe of Aquileia fhall promife to Parma,
To fhew the entrance by unknown paths,
ANNOT.


Aqueleiaand Parma are two Cities in Italy. The reft is eafie.


xX,
French.


Bien contigu des grands Monts Pyrexces,

Un contre l’Aïgle grand. copie, adrefler,

Ouvertes veines, forces éxterminées,

Que jufqu’au Pau le chief viendra chaffer.
Englith.

Near the great Pyrenean. Mountains,

One foall raife a great Army againft the Eagle,

Veins foall be opened, forces driven out.


So that the chief foal be driven as far as the Pau.
ANNOT,


By the Eagle hereis underftood the Empire; becaufe his Enfign is an Eagle;


LXXI,
Fremeb, 1
En lieu d'Efpoufe les Fillés trucidées,
Meurtre a grand faute,-ne feta fuperftilé;
Dedans le puis veftues inondées,
L’Efpoufeeftemte par haut d’Aconite,
~ Englifh.
Inflead of the Bride, the Maid (ball be killed.
The murder [hall be a great fault, none (hall be furviving ;
Inthe Well they ball be drowned withtheir Cloaths,
The Bride fhall be extinguished by an high Aconite.
ANNO T.


This is a Prophecie of a Tragical Nuptial, where all the Maids fhall be drowned
with their Cloaths ina Well; infomuch that none (hall furvive, and the Bride {hall
y Aconite, which ‘isone of the moft poifonous herbs that is,
witnels Favinal,  Luridaterribilesmilcent asonita noverta:


LXX ET;
| French.
Les Artomiques par Agen & Lecioure;
A faint Felix feront leur Parliament,
Ceux de Bazas viendront ala malhoure,


Saific Condon & Marfan promptement.


Aa 4 Enelith,


a ES


T he-true Prophecies


Englifh.
The Artomiques through Agen and Lectoure,
Shall keep their Parliament at Saint Foclix,
Thefe of Bazas shall come in an unhappy hour,
To feixe upon Condoa and Marfan fpeedily.
ANNOT,


By the Artomiques he meaneth the Proteftants ; becaufe they take the Commu-
nion with leavened Bread. which in Greek is called Artes,

Agen; Lectoure, {aint Felix, Bazas, Conden and CMarfan.are Cities of Gafcony. The
reft is plain,


LXer:
French.


Le neveu grand par force prouvera,
Le peche fait de Cœur pufillanime,
Ferrare & Aft le Dac efprouveta,
Par lors qu'au foir fera le Pantomime.
Englifh,
The great nephew by force shall provoke,
The fin committed by the pujillanimous heart,
Ferrara and Aft shall make tryal of the Duke,
When the Pantomime shall be inthe evening.
ANNOT.


To underftand the whole fenfe of this, we muft firft know what is meant by the
particular terms.


The great Nephew is the Brother ot Sifters fon of fome great petfon; who by
force {hall difcover the Treafon or Cowardife, committed by fome pufiilanimous or
fearful man,


Ferrara and Af are two: towns in Italy, fhall makea tryalofa Duke, by being
either taken or affaulted,


When the Pantomine [hall Le in the evening ; that is, when the Comedy thall be
acted ; for Pantomime in Greek fignifieth a Comedian,


LXXIVY,

French,
Du lac Lenan & ceux des Brannonices,
Tous aflemblez. contre ceux d'Aquitaine,
Germans beaucoup.encores-plis Sovifles,
Seronts des faits avec ceux dû Maine.


of Michael Noftradamus.
Enolith.


From lake Leman, ad from the Brannonues,:

They fhall be gathered againft thofe of Aquitania,
Great many Germans, and many more Switzers,

| Shall be routed together with thofe of Maine.


| ANNOT.
i: | Lake Leman, isthe Lake ofGeneva, The Brannenices are thofe of Sens, fo call-
_ || eds becanfe they took Rome under the Conduct of their Captain Brennus, and after- | |
Th || Wards built Brewona, a, Town belonging fince to the Venetians, who calls it À At


Verona,


Aquitania is that Province of France, called now Ga[cony, Maine isa Province in
France. Thereft needeth no explication,


Lov
French.
Preft a combattre fera defection,
Chef adverfaire obtiendra Ja: viétoire,
Larriere garde fera defenfion,
Les defaillans morts au blanc:terretoire.
| | Englifh.
| One being ready to fight, (ball faint, ;
The chief of the adverfe party fhall obtain the victory,
The rearegard, (hall withftand it out.
Thofe that fall away [hall die inthe white Terretory,
ANNOT.


yte | There is nothing difficult here, but whac he meaneth by the white Terretory,
| whether it be pofitive,or Allegorical, I leave che judgement of it to che Reader:


LX XVI.
French.

Les Nitiobriges par ceux dé Perigort,

| Seront vexez tenants jufques au Rhone,

hale 4 L'Aflocié de Gafcons & Bigorre, k
| Trahir le Temple le preftre eftant au Profne. i

Englifh.

The Nitobrigesby thofe of Périgort,

Shall be vexed as far as the Rhofne,

The affoctate of.the Galeons and Bigorre,


Shall betray the Church while the Prieft is in bis Pulpit. 4
ANNOT. . |
|


hoby
ousor fF}


being


Widtobriges in Greek fignifieth a people living in a dark and moift Countrey.
Perigers and Bigorrearetwo Towns in France. The reft is plain.


ral |


French.


T he true Prophecies
LXX VII.
French.
Selyn Monarque, l'Italie pacifique,
Regnes unis, Roy Chreftien du monde,
Mourant voudra coucher enTerre Blefique,
Apres Pyrates avoir chafle de L’onde.
Enghfh.
Selyn being Monarch, Italy fhall be in peace,
Kingdoms ball be united. a Chriftian King of the world,
Dying, fball defire to be bein in the Countrey of Blois,
After be foall bave driven the Pyrates from the Sea.
ANN OT.
Selys is the name ofa Tarkifb Emperour, the meaning therefore of this, is, chat


under the Reign of one Se/yna Turkifh Emperour, Jtaly thall be in peace, and all the
Chriftian Princes united,


LXXVIITI.
French,


La grand Armée dela pugne civile,

Pour de nuit Parme a l'Eftranger trouvée,
Septante neuf meurtris dedans la Ville,
Les eftrangers paflez tous a l’Efpée.


Englifh.
The great Army belonging to the Civil War,
Having found by night Partha poffefsed by. Strangers,
Shall kill feventy nine inthe Town,
And put all the Strangers to the Sword,

ANNOT.
Parma isa City in Italy, The reft is plain.

LX XIX,

French,
Sang Royal fuis, Monbeunrt, Mar. Aiguillon,
Remplis feront dé Bourde di les Landes.
Navarre, Bigorre, pointes & Aiguillons,
Proféud: de faim, vorer dé Liege, Glandes,

Englifh.
Royal blood run away from Monheurt, Marfan Aïguillon,
The Landes hall be full of Bourdel. ir, ;
Navarre, Bigorre, /ball have poinis and Pricks. |
Being deep in binger, they fball' devour the Cork and Akorus: .«


ANNOT,


of Michael ‘Noftradamus, 183
AN NOT,
Monhenrt, cM ar[an, Aiguillen are Towns in Gafcony.


Landes is a defert Countrey, wherein nothing groweth but Pine-trees ,. Bowrdeloss


are thofe of Bourdeaux,
Navarre isa Kingdom , and Begorre a’ Province joyning to thofe Landes, or Pine:


trees Countrey,
LXXX.
French.
Pres du grand Fleuve, grand fofle, terre egefte,
En quinze parts l’eau fera-divilée,
La Cité prinfe, feu, fang, cris, conflict mettre,
Et la plus part concerne au collifée.
Englifh.
i tht | Near the great River, a great pit, Earth digged ont,
FU In fefteen parts the Water fhall be divided,
| The City taken, fire, blood, cries, fighting,
And the greateft part concerneth the Collifée.
ANNOT. |
This Prophecy was fulfilled,when Rome was taken and facked by Charles Duke of
Bourbon, and Philibert of Chalon Prince of Orenge, Genetals of the Emperour Charles
| the V. with fuch cruelties , as never was committed by the bloody Goths and Van-
| dales, and to fhew that the Author intended Rome,is apparant by two inftances, The
firft is by the great River, which isthe TyZer , which chough not very great in its
Channel and depth, yet is very great, yea, the greateft in Europe by itsfame, The
other is the word Colifée | whichis that famous Arch of Traian in Rome, remaining
yet to this day.


LX Xa.
French.


Pont on fera promptement de nacelles,
Pafler | Armée du grand Prince Belgique,
Dans profondres, & non Joing de Bruxelles ,
Outrepatiez detrenchez fept a picque.
Englith.
A Bridge of Boats fhall fuddenly be made,
To pafs over the Army of the great Belgick Prince,
In deep places, and not far from Bruxelles,
Being gone over there foall be feven cut with a Pike;


ANNOT:


ae | This is concerning the Siege of e<utwerp by the Princeof Parme, Govetnour of |


the Low-Countreys for the King of Spain, who having befieged, caufed a Bridge of
Boats to be made upon the River Scheld , to hinder the faccours of che Hollanders,
who by chat-means were conftrained to furrendet it,


NOt | Engilfh}


The true Propbecies


LXX XIT.
French.
Amas fapproche venant d'Efclavonie,
L’Oleftant vieux Cité ruinera,
Fort defolée verra fa Romane,
Puis la grand flamme eftaindre ne {caura.


Englifh,
A great troop gathered, fhall come front Sclavonia,
The old Oleftant fhall ruine à City,
He fhall fee his Romania wery defolate.
And after that, fball not be able’ to quench that great flaute,
ANNOT,
That great troop from Sclavonia (hall be the Venetians, becaufe they poflefs moft


partofthatCountrey. The old oleffant is their Duke, becaufe he is not chofen un-
lefs he be very old , by Romania is underftood what the Venetians poffels in that


=


Countrey.


LX XXIII.
French.
Combat nocturne Je vaillant Capitaine,
Vaincu fuira, peu de gens profligé, :
Son peuple efmeu, {edition non vain
Son propre fils le tiendra afliegé.


)


Engdifh.
In a fight by night, the valliant Captain,
Being vanquifbed [ball run away, overcome by few,
His people being #oved, [ball make 20 {mall mutiny ,
His own fon foall befrege hing.
ANNOT.
This needeth no interpretation,
LXXXIV,
French.
Vn grand d'Auxerre mourra bien miferable.
Chafñlé de ceux qui foubs luy ont efté,
Serre de chaines; apres d’un rade cable,
En l'an que Mars, Venus & Sol mis en Efté.
Englifh.
A great man of Auxerre ball die very miferably,
Being expelled by thofe that have been under hint,
Bound with Chains, and after that withia firong Cable,
In the year that Mars, Venus, and Sol fhall be ina conjunttion
in the Summer.


ANNOT,


‘Of Michael Noftradamus,
eal ANNOT. Hs
Auxerre is a City of France, diftant from Paris 40. leagues to the South.
LXXXV.
DE French. |
Le Charbon blanc du noir fera chaffé,
Prifonier fait, mené au.Tombereau,
More Chameau fus pieds entrelaflez,
Lors le puifné fillera l’Aubereau.
| Englifh.
‘The white Coal [ball be expelled by the black one,
He fall be made Prifoner, carried in a Dung-cart,
His feet twifted upon a black Camel,
Then the youngeft, [ball fuffer the Hobby to bave more thread,


Me | SPA NOR A ER
_ The firft Verfe is altogether Allegorical and Metaphorical, therefore I leave ft to
the judgement of every Reader. I fhall only deliver my Opinion upon the whole :
I cake it to be fome white Prince , that {hall be overcome by a black one, put in à
Dungcart,after that, tied upon a black Camel and then the younger fon of that black
Prince fhall give the prifonner a little more liberty,
LXXXVL

2 |

L’An que Saturne en eau {era conjoint,

Avecques So/ le Roy fort & puiflant,

À Rheties & Aix (era receu & oingt,


Apres Conqueftes meurtrira innocens,

| | Englifh:. rd

Inthe year that Saturn in Aquarius fhall be is conjunction

With Sol, the King being firong and powerful. |

Shall be received and Anointed at Rheines and Aix;

After Conquest be fhall murder innocent perfons.

Pit oe F je à A é ANNOT, ney j a :

, This Prophecy is remarkable for the things chatit foretelleth, wiz. that in the
year that Saturn {hall be in conjun@tion with Solin the Sign of Aquarius, a King of
France {hall be annointed both at Rhemes and aix, for Rhemes is a City in France;
where the Kings ufe ro be Annointed and Crowned » and Aix is another in Gersivany,


where the Emperours ufe to be fo, Butthelaft Verfe is ominous, where he faith,
that after his Conquelts he thall murderinnocent perfons,
LXXXVIL
ee - : French:

Un fils de Roy,tant.de Langues apprins '

À lon. Aïfne awRegne different: 3 |

Son Pere bean au‘ plus grand fils COMprins,.… |

Pera perir principal adherent, — 7 iss"
Bb : Enoliffi,


1 be true ‘Prophecies
Englith.


A fon of aK ing having learned divers Languages,
Shall fait out with his elder Brother for the Kingdom,
His faiber in Law being more concerned with bis elder fon,
Shall caufe the principal adhérent to perifb.
ANNOT. ee à
One King fhall have two Sons, the eldeft hall fucceed him in the Kingdom, the
voungeft having been well brought upand educated, fhallraifetroubles, againft
the King his Brothers but he fhall be deftroyed by the means ot his own Father in
pa LXXXVIIL
French. À
La grand Antoine du nom de fait fordide,
De Phryriafe à fon dernier rongé,
Un qui de plomb voudra efte cupide,
Pailanc le port d Eflen fera plongé,
Englith,
The great Antony by namie, but in effect fordid,
Of Pheyriafis fhall at laft be eaten up,
One that [ball be covetous of Lead,
Going upon Port d'Efleu fhall fall into the Water.
AN NOT,
Phtyriafis in Greek is the difeafe called by. the Lacines eMorbue pedicularis, when
pe a “ba by Lice, as were Herodes, Sylla, Pherecydes, and Philip, King of
As for Port d'Efles, the queftionis, whether it be che proper name ofa place; or
the naine ofa man, that fhall chrow another in the water,


L'XX KT OE,
French.
Trente de Londres {ecret conjureront,
Contre Leur Roy, fur le pont l'Entreprifé,
Les Satellites la mort defgouteront,
Uu Roy efleu blond & natif de Frixe.


Englith.
Thirty of London fhall fecretly confpire
* Againft their King, upon the Bridge the Plot foall be made,
Thefe Satellites fall tafte of death,
A King shall be ele&ted, fair, and born in Friezeland.


H be alleadged th PA a
ere may be alleadged chat paflage ofScriprure, There à norhing [o fecret bar (hall à
yevealed , for here is plainly told the number of thofe wicket Fh ake c'e
fpired againft their lawful Sovereign King Charles I, of bleffed memory, asalfothe
place where the Plot was firit laid; for it is well known that they ufedto affem-
ble atthe Bear at the Bridge foot: r | i


|
AE |


|
lita Ay
ives Of


ju
con: |
othr |

C1 À


of Michael Noftradamus.


XC,
French.
Les deux copies:au' murs ne pourront joindre,
Dans cet inftant trembler Milan, Thefin,

Faim foif,doutance fi fort les viendront prendre,
Chair, pain, ne vivres:nauront un {eul boucin.


Englith.
The two Armies feall not be able to Joymby the W alls.
At that inftant Milan and Thefin foalltremble.
Hunger, thirft, and fear (ball fo feixe upon them,
They hall not have a bit of meat, bread, nor victuals.


ANNOT,
Milan is a City in italy, and Thefin isthe River that paffeth by it,
X CI.
French.


Au Duc Gaulozs contraint battre au Dueile,
La nef de Mole, Monech naprochera,

Tort accufe, pgifon perpetuelle,

Son Fils regner avant mort tafchera.


Englifh.
À French Duke compelled to fghta Duct
The Ship of Mole fhall not cone near Monaco,
Wrong fully accufed hall bave a perpetual Prifon,


His fon hall endeavour to Reien before. bis death,


S


ANNOT,

To underftand this Stanza, we muft fuppoe four Hiftories, Paradin relateth the
firft, which is, chat the French and Spantlb Armies having their Winter quarters in
the Dukedome of Milan, Anno155 5.

The Marquefs of Pefcaire, fent word tothe Duke of Nemours,by a French Gentle-
man, that he and three more defired to break a Lance with him upon the borders of
Aft,

The Duke accepted the challenge, without giving
Briffac, then General of the French Army, who w
he advifed the Duke to 80, but not witha Guilt and light Armour, but witha
Wrong one, fuch as became a Cavaliero, which he did not do, nor the other three
that went withhim: whence it came, that the Lord Claffea French man, running
againft Malefpine, was wounded to death inthe fhoulder |


t. neverthelefs one of the
feconds to the Duke of Nemours, the Lord Moncha ki


lled upon the place Caraffs;
Nephew to Pope Marcel 1]. and the Lord Manoa, one’of the Duke of Nemours


party, falling fromhis Horfe a little wounded, broke his neck.
. As for the,Duke of Nemours, he ran twice againft the faid Marquefs, without hir-
ing: one another, but at the third time they both brake their Lances, without
doing any harm, . Thus, the French Duke was compelled to fight a Duel
We have the fecond Hiftory from T#rpin, and many others, which is, that the
Marquels of zafferan, having put himfelf into the King of France's fer
| Bb 2


notice to the Marquefs of
as very angry atit, neverthelefs


vice, in hopes
fo


RS CR mene


Em a eH PEs


The true Prophecies
to have the Government of Béelais ; and proving a Traitor, che Marfhal of Briffac,
who had difcovered his perfidioufnefs, refolted to take him in his houfe of Gaillany,
which he had fortified to fecure his retreacafter his Treafon,

The Lord de Termes was commanded to doit, which he did fo dexteroufly, thac
he took him into his houfe after dinner, and chen compelled him prefently to fur-
render the Caftle of Famaglia, the Marquefs obeying, fent thither prefently his
fon Claudius, to par it into the hands of the Lords dela Mante, and of yillars.

Thele two viewing the Caftle, to obferve thé places that might be fortified, and
going from room to :oom, heard a lamentable voice, crying. Have merey upon
me. They caufed prefently the Prifon doors to be opened, and found a poor Gen-
tlemam of Vercelle,. whom the Marques had detained there 18 years, for endeavour-
ing to feive anexecution againft him, inthe Duke of Savoy's behalf,

And itisremarkaole chat his Imprifonment was all this while concealed, fo char
no body ever heard o' it, info much that his friends fufpecting hehad been killed by
One of his enemies, they profecuted him fo hard, that after much tortering, he con-
feffed what he had notdone, andwas confequently put to death in the prefence of


the {aid Marquefs of cÆafferan, who knew the Countrey. Thus we fee one rong ally


accufed that was executed, and this Gentlemans Imprifonment, which was tobe
perpetual,

_ After this,they carryed the poor Gentleman almoft all naked, and being nothing
but skin and bones, to the Lord of Termes, who caufed him to be clothed, and gave
him Money to goback to his friends.

The third Hiftory is, that che Duke of Nemeurs Sonmwas one of the chief ring-
leaders of the League againft Henry 1V, and did what he could before he dyed to get
the Kingdom of France, endeavouring firft to make himfelt Sovereiga Prince of
Lion, Forreft, and Beancolois,

The fourth Hiftory is, that at the latter end of the year 1 555. the Lord /s catyle
catrying to Rome the Cardinals of Tournon and Lorrain, went dire@ly to the {land
Of Corfica, whence he drew (ome Forces, which he joynedto his, and to thofe of
Monluc, and would not Land at Menace for fome reafons, but went directly to Civita


Vecchia; By this we underftand that Verfe of the stanza. The Saip of she Mole (halt
xotceme near Monaco.


X CII.
French.
Tefte trenchee du vaillant Capitaine,
Sera jettée devant fon adverfaire,
Son corps pendu de Ja Gaffe a Antenne,
Confus fuira’ par rames avent contraire.
Englifh.
The head cut off the walliant Captain
Shall be thrown down before his adverfary,
His body hanged at the Sails Yard,
Confufed, they fhall fly with Oars againft the Wind.
ANNOT.


Thefe words are plain enough, thoughno body can tell whether the thing is pat
already, or thal] come to pafs hereafter.


Tat


shar W
sas


ace of
Metall
tobe


nothing

J
Id Pave
trig.
dt pet
rinceol


Up, 1


[land
tholeof
)Crutts
le Ra!


of Michael Noftradamus.


X CIIL
French.


Un Serpent veu.proche du liét Royal,

Sera par Dame nuict chien n'abageronts
Lors naltreen France un Prince tant Royal,
Du Ciel. venutous les Princes verront,


Englih.
A Serpent fhail be [een near the Royal bed,
By a Lady in the night, the Dogs fhall not bark,
Then fall be born in France a Prince fo Royal,
Come from Heaven all the Princes fhall fee it,
ANNO,

This feemeth to be anallufion to the Bitth of .dlexawder the great; forit is faid,
that when his mother Olympia proved with Child of him, chere was feen in her
Bed, and about her Beda great Serpent, which was the prefage of his future grear-
nefs: therefore our Author alfo will have, that when fuch a Prodigie (hall appear in
France, that then fhall be born fuch a Prince as he mentioneth here : the circumftan-
ces are, that this Serpent fhall be feen by a Lady in the night time, and that the Dogs
of the houfe fhall not bark at him.


X CI V,
Épenchr
Deux grand, freres feront challez d’E/pague,
Laifné vaincu foubs les Monts Pyrences,
Rougis Mer, Rhofne fang Leman,d’ Alemagne,
Narbon, Blyterre, d’ Agath contaminées.
Englith.
Two great Brothers fball be driven from Spain,
The elder of them [ball be overcome under thePyreneanMountains
Bloody Sea, Rhoïne, Blood Leman of Germany,
Narbon, Blicerre of Agath poluted.
ANNOT. mu,
The two firft Verfes are eafily underftood by rhofe that know the Pyrenean
Mountains, to be thofe that part Spain from France. The two laft Verfes
fignifie chere fhall be bloody VVars in thofe places, the K4ofneis a {wife River


of France, that paffech through the City of Lyons; Leman isthe Lake of Geneva,
and Narbon is a City of Languedock,


XCV.

French.

Le Regne a deux Jaili¢ bien peu tiendront,

Trois ans fept mois paflez feront la guerre,
Les deux veftales contre rebelleront,

Victor puifnay en Armorique Terre.


LR REE Ta


rss


T be true Prophecies
Englifh.


Three years and feven months being paft.they (hall make War
J g pafe,they f


The two Veftals fhall rebel againft them,
The youngeft fhall be Conquerour in the Armorick Countrey.
ANNOT.


This fignifies,that a Kingdom fhall be left to two , who fhall keep it but a little
while, about the {pace before mentioned.

By the two Veftals that fhall rebel, are to be underftood two Nuns, who having
Intereft in the ftate by their nearnefs of blood, fhall challenge a title inthe Kingdom,
The laft Verfe fignifies, that che youngeft that contended for the Kingdom, {hall
overcome the eldeft, in the Province of Gafcony,


Ai Ress:


ea French.
a La fœur ailree del’I fle Britannique,
ee Quinzeans devant le frere aura naïffance,


Par fon promis moyenant verifique,


Succedera au Regne de Balance.


Englifh.
The eldeft Sifter of the Brittain Ifland,
Shall be born fifteen years before ber Brother, .
By what is promifed her, and help of the truth,
She ball fucceed in the Kingdom of Libra.
ANNOT.
This fignifies,that the Princefs born fo long after her Brother, fhall be married to
a King of France, which ts underftood here by che Kingdom of Zibras therefore the
laft King Lewis the XLII. was called the Fw/f, becaufe bornunder the Sign of Libra,
X CVI.
French.
[An que Mercure, Mars Venus retrograde
Du grand Monarque Jaligne ne faillit,
Ef]
_ Jt


5


leu du peuple Lufitant pres de Pactole,


el Qu'en Paix & Regne viendra fort enveillir.


Englifh:
When Mercury, Mars and Venus fball retrograde,
The Line of the great Monareh {ball be wanting,
| He ball be eleGted by the Luficanians near Pa@ole
i And {hall Reign in Peace a good while,
ANN OT,


This fignifies the late change of ftate in Portugal, when they chrew off the Spanifh
yoke , and chofea King amongft themfelves, Fob the IV, Duke of Branganza, Fa-


ther


y


The Kingdom being left to two,they fball keep it but a little while,


| 7
| 1
| \


i of Michael Noftradamus. 193


ther tothe prefent Queen of England; for by the Lufitanians are meant the Ports=
gals, fo called from their Countreysname Laftanie; Paéfoles is the River that runs
by Lisbonne, otherwife called Tagws, in Greek xpecec0@- from the Sands,


XCVIII.
French.


Les Albanois pafleront dedans Rome,
Moyennant Langres demipiler aftubles,
Marquis & Duc ne pardonnes a l'homme,
Feu ,fang, morbilles point d’eau,faillir les bles,
| Englifh.  -
The Albanians fall vafs through Rome,
By the means of Langres covered with half Helmets,
Marquefs and Duke fhall {pare no man,
Fire, blood, {mall Pox, Water fhall fail ns, alfo Corn.
. ANNOT,
The meaning is, that when the people of Albania lying between the /exetian
Territories, and Grecia,{hall come to Rome, by the means of a Bifhop of Langres, who


isa Duke and Peer of Frasce ; being covered with half Helmets, a kind of a Cap that
they wearin War; then fhall be fire, blood, fmall Pox, and want of Corn,


XCIX.
French.


L’Aifne vaillant de la filledu Roy,

Repouflera fi profond les Celtiques,

Qu'il mettra Foudres, combien en tel arroy,

Peu & loing puis profond es Hefperiques.

| yas aig RUMI a, CE

The valliant eldeft fon of the daughter of the King,

Shall beat back fo far thofe of Flanders,

That he will caft Lightnings, O how many in fuch orders

* Little and far, after foall go deep in Spain.
. ANNOT.

_ Thisisfcarce to be underftood of any body , but the prefent King of France Lewis
the XIV. who was the elder fon, and born of Queen Avs, Daughter to the King of
Spain , who by his valour and fortune made laft year fuch progrefs in the Conqueft
of Flanders, that it hath caufed admiration in every body, infomuch that if he do


the like this year, it may be propably fufpected,he will afterwards go deep into Spain
according to the contents of this Prophecy:


OF
French.
Du feu Celefte au Royal edifice, :
Quand la lumiere de Mars defaillira, |
Sept mois grand Guerre, mort gent de malefice,
Rouen, Enreux au Roy ne faillira. y
Englifhi,


The true Frophecies.


| Englifh,
Fire hall fall from the skics'on the Kings Palace,
When Mars’s light fhall be Ecclipfed, | US RE |
A great War fball be for feven months,people fball die by witchcraft,
Rouen, and Eureux fhall not be wanting to the King.
The meaning is,chat when Mars is Ecclipfed , the Lightning fhall fall on fome‘of
the King of Frances Palaces, then fhall be a great VVar, for the fpace of feven


Months, and many fhall die by witchcraft ; and Rowen the chief City of Nermandy,
and Ewrewx another of the fame Province, fhall ftick faft to che Kings Intereft,


; N KE iy = ne (7: :
SG \ Eh! {ll LE :


AA, A d


KE Ny Ey
AN : Viv
À TS


Ÿ San :
yy (SR


y) SZ %
PRES ,
Kime


PROPHECIES
Michael Noftradamus.


CENTURY V.


ae PES

French.
GES Vant venue de ruine Celtique,
Dedans le Temple @eux parlementeront,
Poignard cœur d’un monté au courfier & picque,
Sans faire bruit le grand enterreront.


Englifh.

Before the coming of the ruine of Flanders,

Two ball difcourfe together in the Chureb,
Dagger in.thé heart by.one, on Horfe-back and Spurring;
Without noife they Jhall bury the great one...


ANNO-T. |
This is a further fpecification of che wholeruine of Flanders, before which it thall
happen, faith our Author, that two fhall talk together in the Church, and one fhall
ftabb the other with a Dagger , and then take Horfe, and fly, che dead one being
buried without Pompe or Ceremony. te


ce Frenths


Serer


The true Prophecies
ys Ee
; 3 French...
Sept conjurez au Banquet feront luire,
Contre les trois le Fer hors de Navire :
L'un les deux clafles au grand fera condüire,
‘Quand par le mail dernier au front luy tire.
Englifh. | sé
Seven Confpirators at a Banquet [ball make their Iron glifter |
Againft three, out of a Ship: | dr
One fhall carry the two Fleets to the great one, | id
When iz the Palle-malle the laft fhall {hoot hin in the forebead,
AN NOT: | |
ee _ The two firft Verfes foretell a Confpiracy of feven againft three, oneof which M :
aa feven thal carry both Fleets to fome eminent perfon > at which time he (hall be thet
Hl in the forehead by the laft of the feven,
ea Li ITT. | |
ul di French. 4 Lit
Le Succefleur de Ja Duché viendra, |
Beaucoup plus outre que la Mer de Tofcane; |
Gauloife branche la Florence tiendra,
Dans fon Giron d’accord nautique Rane,


Enghfh.
a The Succeffor to the Dukedom fhall come,
ul far beyond the Tufcane Sea,

A French branch foall bold Florence

In its Lap,to which the S ea-frog fhall agree.


AN NOT.


By the two firft Verfes is meant à lawful Succeffor to the Duke of Tusany who


iy hall come to recover the faid Dukedom ; Which fhall chen be in the pofleffion
a of the French. |


… Avis hard to guefs what he means by the Sea-frog ; unlefs it be fome confiderable
Prince at Sea, which fhal then be in League with'the French, és tél


L Vs %
| | French,
Le gtos Maftin de Cité dechäffé,
Sera fäfché de l'eftränge Alliance,
| Apres aux Champs avoir le Cerf chaffe,
Le Loup & I’Ours fe donront defiance:


f tl


heed,


which


bel |


mynd


efiog


ee |


i


of Michael Noftradamus,


Englith.
The great Maftif being driven from the City, *
Shall be angry at the flrange Alliance,
After he fhall bave buntedthe Hart in the Fields,
The Wolf,and the Bear fball defte one another.


ANNOT.


By che ftrange Alliance is meant chat which Cromwel had with France, tothe
prejudice of his Majefty of England , who is here meant by the Mattif, a Creature,
for which England hath been tamons,


By the V Volf and the Bear are meañtthe French King and the switzers , or thofe
of Savoy.


Vv.
French,
Sous ombre fainéte d’ofter de lervitude,
Peuple & Cite l’ufurpera luy-mefme,
Pire fera par fraus de jeune pute,
Livre au Champ lifant le faux preé{me.

v | Englifh. |
Under the fained fbadow of freeing people from flavery,
He fhall-ufurpe the people and City for bimfelf;

He fhall do worfe by the deceit of a young Whore, —
For he [ball be betrayed in the freld reading a falfe proewm.
ANNOY,


The two firft are plain , and may be referred to the foregoing Stanza concerning


The laft Verfes are plain; and I leave them tothe judicious Reader:


Th Mike
French.
Au Roy l’Augur fur le chef le main mettre,
Viendra prier pour la Paix italique,
A la main gauche viendra changer le Sceptre,
De Roy viendra Empereur pacifique.


Englifh.


The Augur fhall come to put bis band upon the Kings head,


And pray for the Peace of Italy,


In the left hand he foal) changethe Scepier.
Of a King, be fhall beconte. a peaceful Emperour.
ANNOT.


Although the 4wgwr in Latine fignifiech one that relleth events of matters by the
flying voices, or fitting of Birds,yet it is taken alfo (as here) for a Prelat or Clergy-
man, Who fhall put his hand upon à Kings head , and pray for the peace of Italy,
and fhall put a Scepter in his hand, and inftall him Emperour, what King this fhould


Cc 2 be


196 The true Prophecies


be, is eafie to be conjectured by the Author, being a French-man, and fecting down
a King without any Epichite , and this Prophecy is a confirmation of one before of
the fame nature, 7


VII.
French.


Du Trinmuir feront trouvez les os,

Cherchatit profond Threfor znigmatique,

Ceux d’alenrour ne feront en repos, ;

Ce concaver Marbre & plomb Metallique,
|


Englifh.
The bones of the Triumuir shall be found ont, ; :


}


| l 3357! !


| Dy à D és sane f De A pr
When they shall feck for à deep and ænigmatical Treafure, |
Wi om} r r eee Fa . ?

mi Thole there about sball not be in ref, 4
|
|
|


Fe This concavity shall be Marble and Metallick Lead.


ANNOT.

I fuppofe none fo ignorant in the Roman Hiftory , but knows, that there was a |
combination between Oéfauins Cafar, Marcus Antonius, and Lepidus, to make them- :
felves Matters of the Ronean Empire, and co divide it amongft themfelves,this Plot (M 4,
being made by three,was made by the Trismairisthe meaning then is, that when they |
fhall go to feek for a Treafure , they fhall find the bones of one of thofe three per-
fons, andin that cavity chat they fhall have digged , they hall find Marble and


|

Lead. fl
ia
|


RE A RE TS SE À PS AE Mee us


VIII,
French.


Sera laiflé le feu vif, mort caché, |
Dedans les Globes horrible efpouventable, |
De nuiét a clafle Cite en poudre lafché,
La Cité a feu, l’ennemy favourable.

| Englifh.

| {be fire shall be left burning, the dead man shall be bid,
Witpin the Globes terrible and fearful,
By night the Fleet shall shoot againft the City,
The City shall be on fire, the enemy shall be favourable unto if.

ANNOT,


The two Verfes fignife, chat fire fhall be hid within Globes, I fuppofe them to be
Granado’s,or a Mine,

The two laft Verfes fignifie, chat che Fleet in the Harbour, or near it, fhall fet che
City on fire, and that they fhall come out of che Fleet to help co quench the fire,
and fo fhall the enemy be favourable,


a all


==
=


CR


French,


of Michael ‘Noftradamus.


IX.
~~ French, |
Jufques au fond la grand Arche Malie,
Par chef Captif l’amy anticipé,
Naiftra de Dame front, face chevelué,
Lors par aftuce Duc a mort attrape
Englifb.
To the bottom of the great Arch Malue, |
By a Captain that is a Prifoner, the friend fball be anticipated,
One fhall be born of a Lady with a hoary face and forehead,
Then by craft fhall a Duke be put to death.
ANNO T,
The meaning of che firft is unknown to me: I leave it tothe Reader.
The {enfe of the laft isas obvious to the meaneft capacity, as the rivo precedent
are obfcure, j
17 x.
ne | French. .
a Un chef Celtique dans le conflict blefle, _
che Aupres de Cave,voiant,fiens mort abattre,
ead De fang & playes & d’ennemis preffe,


Eft fe couru par incogneus de quattre.


| Englifh.
À General of Flanders wounded in Battle,
Near a Cellar, feeing death to overthrow his people,
Being much dppreffed with blood, wounds and enemies,
Is fuccoured by four unknown.
ANNOT.. |... ee
This néedeth no further interpretation, chan that it feemeth to be neat its e-
vent.


l0fe gf


XL
Py French:
Mer par folaires feure pañlera
Ceux de Venus tiendront toute l'Afrique;
| Leur Regne plus Saturne n’occupera;
nb F Et chañgéra la part Afratique.
be | Loc Englifh:
fre, By folaries fhe shall pafs fecure, _
Thofe of Venus shall hold all Africa,
Saturn shall bold their Kingdom no longer,
And shall change the Afiatick part;


198 ooo Thetre Prophecies
ANNOT.


This is fo obfcure in words and fenfe, chat I can judge no more chan that it figni-


fies a great change in Africa and 4/4, which I fuppofe isalready come to pats by
Taffaletta,


XII.
: French.
Au pres du lac Leman fera conduite,
Par garle eftrange Cite voulant trahir,


Avant fon meurtre a Ausbourg la grand fuite,

Ft ceux du Rhin la Viendront'envahir,

| Englifh.

Near the Leman dake hall beia Plot,

By a frange Whore to betray a City,

Before fhe be kill d-her great retinue will come to Aulbourg,

E x S i & | Cc

And:thofe of tbe Rhine ball .come:to invade her.

ANNOT.


We have faid often before, that the Leman Lake is that ofGeneva,. Thereftis


fo manifeft, that it needs no interpretation:
X ITI,
French,
Par grand fureur le Roy Romain Belgiquey
à f &
Veexer voudra par phalange Barbare;
Furent grinflant chaflera gent Lybique,
Depuis Pannons jufque Hercules la bare.
Englifh.
Through great anger the Roman Belgick King,
Shall come to vex with Barbarian Troops, |
Guafbing with fury, be [ball draw away the Lybian people,
Fromthe Pannons as far as Hercules,
ANNOT.


By the Roman Belgick King, is underftood Philip the fecond King of Spain ; be-
caufe he was made King in Féauders, by his father Charles V.


The fecond Verfe fignifieth the diverfe Nations that his Army was compofed


of,
Inthe third, by the Lyéan people are underftood the Fes, which he drove away


from Spaininto Africa


The Pannons are thepeople of Hungary, called Pannones, and the meaning that he


drove them out as far as Hercules Pillar, at the mouth of the Scraits, fignifies the
great expulfion he made of them, which’ weteabout the number of 200000. :


XIV,
French.


Saturne & Mars en Leo Efpagne captifue;
Par chef Lybique au confli@ attrapé,
Proche de Malte, Herede Prinfe vive,

Et Romain Sceptre fera par Coq frappé


Enptifb,


1 Livy


of Michael Noftradatnus.
Englifh. - |


..
i | Saturn and Mars being in Leo Spain fball be captive,
By a Lybian General taken in the Battle,
Near Malta, an ‘Heir fe fball be taken alive,
And the Roman Scepter {ball be firucken by the Gock.
; Le SE ANS BA 2°
By the Cock is meant the King of France... The reft is plain.
+ MNT À
French. ..:
En navigant Oaptif prins grand pontife,
Grand apres faillir les clercs tumultuez,
Second eflewabfent fon bien debife,
Son favory Baftard a mort tue,
— Englith.
| In Sailing a Pope fball be taken Captiv:3 |
A À After which, fhall be a great uproar among ft the Clergy,


]
à) |


2.


A fecond abfent eleéted , confumeth bis goods,
His favourite BaStard fball be killed.
ae FANNO% oy) ret tye
. Thefe Verfes fignifie no more, but that a Pope going by water, fhall be takeit
Prifoner, for which, all the Clergy fhall be in diforder, and electa new one, who
{hall confume his Goods, and fhall have a favourite Baftard, that hall be killed,
pons
aes French...

A fon haut prix plus la Jarme Subce,

D’humaine chair par mort en cendre mett'e,

LI fle Pharos par Croifars perturbée, ,

Alors qua Rhodes paroiftra dur e!pectre.
r Str DAB, ws Te > Englith.
The SabxanTear shal! be no moré at its bigh price, .
To turn bumane flesh by death into ashes,
le The fland Pharos shall be troubled by Croifars,
When at Rhodes shall a hard Phantafi appear.

LIN, Saath iret, + AE NEO uD. d ent >:
uk || "The Sabean Tear, is Frankincente,*fo called ; becaufe it isthe GumofaTreé
the that groweth in that Countrey, whence che. Poet faith,

India mittit ebur, molles (nathura Sabai. bia |

The meaning thereforeof the two firft Verfes, is, that Frankincenfe fhall be nd
more fo dear as it hath been ; becaufe it fhall be no more ufed, in enbalming and
burning of dead bodies.


The third verfe faith, the Ifland Phavas ( which is that licele Ifland that lyèth be-
fore the Harbour of i4lexandris) {Mall be troubled by Croifars, that is, Chriftians;
when there fhall appear a Phancafme, or a Vifion fhall be feen at Rhodes, pe
GS Yea EP d'a | Frenchà


a À


T he true Prophecies
X VIT.

French. |
Denuit paflant le Roy pres d'une Andronne,
Celuy de Cipres & principal de guerre,

Le Roy failly lamain fuit long du Rhofue, ba
Les‘conjurez liront la a mort mettre. [om
Enghfh.
The King going dlong by night near 2x Andronne,
He of Cyprus and chief of the War, ; . |
The King baving mifsed the band, runneth away along by theRhofne,
The Confhirators shall put bin to death there.
KH ANN OT.
eae { could not find what he meaneth by Andronne, therefore believe it is a barba- |
re rous and forged word, which the Author hath foifted in, tomake the firft Verfes |
| La thime with the word Rhofae; in the third Verfe, which isa famous River in |
aA ee France
uni x VILE
French.
De duel mourra l’infelix profligé,
Celebrera fon viétrix  Hecatombe,
Priftine loy franc edi& rédigé, | What
Le mur & Prince feptiefmé ira au tombe. EU
out Englifh,
| The unhappy being overcame,shall die for grief,
His Vittrix shall celebrate the Hecatomb,
The former Law and free Edi shall be brought again,
The wall and feventh Prince shall go to the Grave,
ANNOT. M on
Vittrix is a Latine wotd, and the Feminine Gender of ww, and fignifieth à


woman that is vitorions: Hecatemb isa Sacrifice, wherein an hundred Oxen are
killed. : RSS


XXIX.
French.
Le grand Royal d'Or, d’Airain augmenté,
Rompu la pache par jeuné, ouverte guerre,
Peuple affligé par un chef lamenté,
De fang barbare fera couverte Terre,
owt | | Englifh, |
Ube great Golden Royal, being increafed with Copper, |
bal agrecusent being broken by.a young man, there shallbe open War,
| eople afflicted by the lofs of a Gentral lanrented, P,
ial ‘92 ground shall be covered with barbarous blood. À


AN NOT]


st nl


Ole
One


Mb£
Vers
Wet fy


eth’ MN


gent


of Michael Noftradamus.


ANNOT.
By the great golden Royal , is underftood (if I miftake not) a King


201


rich in Gold


and Silver,who being joyned with onerich in Copper, thall make open V Var againft


one that fhall have broken his agreement.


Quere: VVhether this came not to pafs when Guftapkus Adolphus King of Sweden


and rich in Brafs, being helped by the French Gold and Silver,; wasnot
fo mach lamented, after he had almoft ruined the Emperour,whom hed


the General
id challenge


to have broken his word, and had covered the'ground with German and Swedish


blood.
x X.

French.
De la les Alpes grand Armée paflera,
Un peu devant naiftra monftre Vapin,
Prodigieux, & fubit tournera,
Le grand Tofcan a {on lieu plus propin.

Englifh.
Beyond the Alpes fhall a great Arm go, and
A little before fball be born a Vapin Monfte
Prodigious and fuddenly the great Tofcan
Shall returnto bis neareft place.


‘‘ANNOT,
What the Author meaneth by 1495, is unknown to me » as forthew


ord propin,


it is adiminutive of the Latine word propinguns: by the figure of Rhetorick, called


Tmelis,
TERE
French.
Pat le trefpas du Monargue Latin,
Ceux quil aura par Regne fecourus,
Le feu livra divife le burin,
La mort publique aux hardis accourus.
Enelith.
By the death of the Latine Monarque,
Thofe that he foal have fucconred in his Reigz.
The fire fhall (bine, the booty fhall be divided,
The flout comersin fhall be put 10 publick death.


ANNOT,


Every bodyimay judge of chis as well 4s I,’ therefore to troublé my felf it fhould


be to no purpofe,
XXII.
French
Avant qu'a Rome grand ayeiréndu PAme,
Effrayeur grandea l'Armée eftrangere.
Par efcadrons |’embufche pres dé Parme.
Puis les deux rouges enfemble feront chéré:


Dd


Enalith.


a ==


Tbe true P rophecies


Englifh,
Before that a great man yeildeth up his Soul at Rome,
The Army of ffrangers fball be put into a great fright,
By Squadrons the ambufb foall be near Parma.
After that, the two red ones fall make good chee together.


ANN OT,


Here is nothing difficule , but what he meaneth by the twored ones , for my part
I fuppofe them to be two Cardinals,
XXIIL.
French.
Les deux contens feront unis enfemble,
Quand la plufpart a Mars leront conjoints,
Le grand d’ Affrique en eftrayeur a trérdtte
Dunauirat par la chaflé desjoint.
Englifh.
The two contented shall be united together,
When the wioft part shall be joyned to Mars,
The great one of Atrica shall be in fear and terrour
Duumuirat shall by the purfuit be disjointed.
ANNOT.
This fignifieth,that two powerful Princes hall joyn together , to make VVar in


Africa, which fhall be much terrified at it, but this Dewmuwirat, that is,this agreement
of two Princes fhall be broken off,and disjoyned,


XXIV,
French,


Le Regne & Roy foubs Venus eflevé,
Saturne aura fur Fupiter Empire,
edie 3 k
La Loy & Regne par fupiter levé,
Par Saturnins endurera le pire.
Englifh.

The Kingdom and King being raifed under Venus,
Saturn shall bave power over Jupiter,
The Law and Reign raifed by Jupiter,
Shall be put to the worfe by the Saturnins,

ANNOT.


I fhali leave this to be expounded by thofe that have more skill in Aftronomy then
I have.


?


XX V.
French


Le Prince Arabe, Mars, Sol, Venus, L ion,
Regne d’Eglife par Mer fuccombera,

Devers la Perfe bien pres d’un Million,
Bixance, Ægypte, Ver. Serp. invadera.


| phone.
| Yadethe
| Hs


Phan aN


Le —


of Michael: Noftradamus,


| Englith.

| The Arabian Prince, Mars, Sol: Venus, Leo,
The Kingdom of the Charch fhall be overcome by Sea
Towards Perfia very near a Million,

| Byzance, Agypt, Ver. Serp. hall invade.


| ANNOT,
y pare This is of the fame nature as the foregoing , cherefore I leaveit to the fame ex<
poficors,
XX VIL
French,


La gent,efclave par un heur Martial,
Viendra en haut degré tant eflevée,
Changeront Prince,naiftra un Provincial
Paffer la Mer, copie aux Monts levée,
ci Englifh.
1 The Slavifb Nation fhall by a Martial luck
| Be raifed to fo high a degree,
hat they foall change their Prince,and eleff one among themfelves,


They foall crafs the Sea with an Army raifed in the Monntains.


ae . ANNOT.
Vain à This is fo plain, that it needeth no interpretatiog.
“aa à X XVII.
French.
Par feu & armes non loin de la Mar negro,
Viendra de Perfe occuper Trebifonde,
Trembler Pharos, Metelin, Solalegro,
De fang Arabe d’ Adrie couvert l'Onde.
Englifh.
By Fire and Sword not far from the black Sea,
They fhall.come from Perfia to feixe upon Trebifonde,
Pharos and Methelin /ball quake, Sun be merry,
The Sea of Adria fball be covered with Arabian blood,
ANNOT,
This Prophecy foretelleth clearly and plainly, that the Perfians {hall come to in-
vade the Turkifh dominions, a part of which isthe Empire of Zreb:(ond , and thac
nyt Pharos and Methelin two Iflands in the Mediterranean Sea, thall quake for fear.


As alfo that the Adriatick Sea, whichis that Sea chat belongeth to the Penetians
fhall be covered with Turkith blood, at which the Aurhoris fo jocund, as with an ex-
clamation he inviteth the Sun to be merry,and rejoyce at it.


Dd a French,


The tine Prophecies’.


XXVIFI.
French.


Le bras pendu & la jambe liée,
Vilage pafle, au fein poignard cache,
Trois qui feront jurez dela meflée,
Au grand de Genes fera le Fer lafché. i
Englifh, | rhs
The arm hanging, and the leg bound, | opi
With a pale face, a Dagger in the bofom, ogee
Three that fball be fworn to the fray,
To the great one of Genoa the Iron ball be darted,


ANNOT.


This manifeftly foretelleth a confpiracy of three men againft the Duke of Genoa,
one of which threemen, under the fhew of a fore Arm, and an impotent Leg, thall :
carry a Dagger in his bofom, with which he fhall ftabb the faid Duke,


PAE UN X XIX,

ay French.

La liberté ne ferarecouvrée,

L’Occupera noir, fier, vilain inique ;

Quand la matiere du Pont fera ouvrée,

| D'Hifier, Venife fafchée la Republique.

iil Englith.

| The liberty fhall not be recovered,
It fhall be occupied, by a black, fierce, and wicked villain ;
When the work of the Hifter- Bridge fall be ended.
The Venetian Common-wealth [ball be vexed. |


ANNOT.


This Stanza is divided into two parts, the firft of which is comprehended in the
two firft Verfes, v/z, that the liberty of fome politick body (he nameth not which)
fhall not be recovered, but fhall be feized upon, by a black, fiere,and wicked villain, R
| The fecond part is contained in the two laft Verfes, wherein he faith, that the
Hi Common- wealth of Venice (hall be in trouble, when the Bridge made over the River
ve Hiffer thall be finifhed, |
XXX. DL
| French. |

Tout a l'entour de la grande Cité, | rly
Seront Soldats logez par Champs & Villes,

Donner l'affaut Paris, Rome incité,
Sur le Pont fera faite grand pille.


— ey


of Michael Noftradamus.


| Exieli{h:
Round about the great City
Soldiers fhall lye in the F elds ‘and Towns.) |
Paris fhall give the Affault Rome fhall be attached: à
Then npon the Dridgé[ball be Gréar plundering. |
ANNOT. |
Thisis concerning the taking and facking of Rome, b


y the Dukeof Bourton. Ge-
netal of Charles V, Forces, therefore hé faich chac Paris hall give che Affaule,becaufe
the faid Duke of Bourbon was aFrenchman, | \


| French.

| Par Terre Attique chef de laf apience,

DA | Qui de prefent elt la Rofe du Monde, :, 1... .

fa] LE Pônt-ruinc & [a grand preeminence,

A Sera fubdite & naufrage des Ondes.

l Englith. ae
In the Countrey of Attica which is the head of wifdowr, DE

And now is the Rofe of the POPE. wis || |

A Bridge foall be ruinated with its great preeminence, a i 4h

It fhall be fubdued, and made à wrack bythe Waves. | | i

ANNOT. : : ae
He foretelleth the deftru@ion of a famous Bridge in the Countrey of Attica , of
which Athens is the chief City ;: and becanf


eit wa$always famous for learning, he
calleth it here the head of VVifdom 5 and that VVifdom, the Rofe of the
D VVorld,


XX XIL
French.
j Ou tout bon eft, tout bien Soleil & Lune,


‘ats SE: Eft abondant, fa ruine s'approche, i
mc) À Le Ciel s advance à changer ta fortune, | 4
lin, | En mefme eftac qué Ja feptiefiné Roche: at
sta a | oies 3 Eepelaly. |
| Whereall.well.is, all good 0 Sun and Moon;
Hl Is exiftent, bis ruine draweth near


The Heaven is making haft to change thy fortune,
Into the fame cafe as the feventh Rockis.
: ANNOT,
By this dark Stanza , the Author feemeth to foretell the woful condition of a HA
Countrey that was happy before, bur fhall fall to ruine, I fufpeét he intended France, i
becaufe being a Freachmau he did not name it, for I think there was never fuch a |


}l change in the world as was in that Kingdom, in the time of the Civil VVars between
| the Roman Catholicks, and the Proteftants,


ra TES L
French.


eet een oe ns


=. 4


TS ae 1 EG ue
Sm


am eth RE


oui bettue Prophectes


XX KIL
French.
Des principaux de Cite rebellée,
Qui tiendront fort pour liberté r’avoir,
Detréncher mafles, mfoclice meflee!
Cris, hurlemens a Nantes pitieux voir.
aa To st à 3 Engliths Las pei
Of the chief mex tna rebelled City,
Who fball ftand out to recover their liberty,
The Males (ball be cut in-pieces, O unbappy quarrel !
Cries and houlings, it [ball be pity to fee at Nantes.
ANNOT. |
The Author applyeth this Prophecie to the City of Nawfesin Brstany, but want


of Books that treatof the Hiftory of that Countrèy ; I could neither fatisfie my felf,
nor the Reader, if this hath come to pafs already or:not,
XXXIV,
‘French.
Du plus profond de l’occident Anglois,
Ou eft le chef de l’Ifle Britanique,
Entrera clafle en Garonne par Blois,
Par Vin & Sel faux cachez aux barriques.
Englith. |
From the deepeft Wefterly part of England,
Where the chief of the Britain Ifland zs,
A Fleet {hall come into the Garonne by Blaye,
By Wine and Salt fire fball be hidden in Barrels,
A NNOT.

There isa notable and fenfible error in the Freach Copy, and withoutreforming
it, the fenfe is not only obfcure, but alfo impoffibles for inftead of 8/45, which the
Author hath put here, I fuppofe to make the rime good, it muft be written Blaye,
which is a Sea Town of the mouth of the River Garonne, and Blois is a mid- Land
Town, upon the River Loire, about a hundred Leagues diftant from the other, à

The reft fignifeth no more, but that there fhall be fome V Varlike Stratagem ts
made ufe of by the French ( underftood here by the names of Wine and Sais ) in Nar
puting fire into Barrels.


LUA ?


Rec A
French.


Par Cité franche de la grand Mer Seline,
Qui porte encor l’eftomach la pierre,

A ngloife clafle viendra foubs la bruine,
Prendre un rameau de grand ouverte guerre,


Engilh,


Ut want


ny el


orming


ich the D!
a Blt, B]


de Lund |


auger |


Sat) i Hi


of Michael Noftradamus.


Englifh.
By a free City of the Selyne Sea,
Which carrieth yet the ftone in the Stomach,
An Englith Fleet hall come under a fog,
To take a branch of great open War.
ANNOT. -

Whatfhould the Author mean by the free City of the great Sedge Sea that car-
ryeth yer the ftone in the Stomach, is hardto guefs ; for my part I believeit to be
Venice, Firft, becaufe by che Selise Sea, he always underftands the Mediterranean 5
becaufe the great Twrks name in our Authors time was Se/yz, who was Mafter of
the greateft part ofit. Secondly, there is no other free City fo confiderable as this.
Thirdly, by the ftone in the Stomach, may be underftood, the Pillars that are in
the Piazza of St, Mask, and as it were inthe Centre of Venice, as the Stomachis in
the Body. The fenfe therefore is this, as Itakeit, thataconfiderable Fleet {hall
come to Venice, or rather to Molamocce,which is the Harbour and there take a branch
of great open V Var, that is, co be either againft the Venetians, or againft the Turk in
cheir behalf,

XXXVI.
French.
De Sœur le frere par fimulte feintife,
Viendra mefler rofee en Mineral,
Sur la placente donne a vieille tardive,
Meurt Je gouftant, fera fimple rural.


Engbfh.
The Brother of the Sifter, with à fained diffinmlation,
Shallmix Dew with Mineral,
In a Cake given to a flow old woman,
She dieth tafting of, the deed fhall be fimple, and Countrey Like.
ANNOT, |
This foretelleth a notable poifoning that fhall be done by a Brother upon his
Sifter, which, becaufe fhe died not faft enough, according to his mind: and there-
fore called her flow, he would fet her forward witha poifoned Cake, the Poifon was
Mineral, and therefore Arfenick or Sublimate, mixed with A¢anaa, called here Dew ;
becaufe Afanna is nothing but a Dew, condenfed upon the Bark of à certain Tree;
aie PRES ÿ
the Conclufion is, that the woman fhall die eating of it, though the meat feemed to
be fimple and rural.
XXX VEL
French.
Trois fens feront d’un vouloir & accord,
Qui pour venir au bout de leur attainte,
.  Vingt mois apres tous eux & leurs records,
Leur Roy trahy fimulant haine, feinte


T be irne ‘Prophecies
Englifh :


Three bundred fball be of one mind and agreement,

That they may compafs their ends,

Twenty months after by all them and their partners,

Their King fhall be betrayed, by dillembling a fained hatred.
ANNOT,

The difficulty of meeting in any Countrey three hundred:men of onemind, hath
perfwaded me that our Author writ this for Exgland s) but by reafon there-hath been
fince a general pardon, I will keep my mind tomy (elf.

| XXXVIIL
French.
Ce grand Monarque qu’au mort fuccedera,
Donnera vieillicire & Iubrigue,
Par nonchalance a tous concedera,
Qua la parfin faudra la loy S'alique.
Englith.
The great Monarch that fhall fucceed to the great one,
Shall lead a Life unlawfull, and lecherous,
By carelefuels be fhall give 10 all,
So-that in Conclufion the Salique Law hall fail,
ANNOT.
This hath a Relation to the precedent Stanza, therefore, Ge
XXX LX.
French.
Du vray rameau de fleur de Lis iffu,
Mis & loge heritier d'Hetrurie,
Son fang antique de longue main tiffu,
Fera Florence florir en!’ Armoirie.
Englith.
Iffued out of the true branch of the City,
He fhall be fet for Hezr of Hetruria,
His ancient blood waved by a long while,
Shall caufe Florence to flourifb in the Scnutcheon:
ANNOT. |
This is only in commendation of the Family ofthe Medicis, and of their Alli-


ance with the Crown of France; for Catharine of Medicis, wife to Henry II, was
Queen of Frasce when our Author lived,


French.


Le
Ci
()
1
oT
Lh
|
|
D Ths
Liu
{le
|
|
|
|
‘
| #
| :
|
|
Mi;


Of Michael Noftradamus.


XL,
French.


Le fang Roial fera fi trefmeflé,
Contraints feront Gaulois de l’Hefperie,
On attendra que terme foit coule,
Et que memoire de la voix foit perie.
Englifh.
The Royal blood shall be fo much mixed,
be French shall be conftrained by the Spaniards,
They shall ftay till the term be paff,


And the remembrance of the wice be over.
ANNOT.


This only fignifieth a ftriG Union between the French and che Spaniards, by feve-
ral Alliances,


LXI,
French.


Nay foubs les ombres & journée noGurne,
Sera en Regne & bonte Souveraine,
Fera renaiftre fon fang de l’antique Urne,
Renouvelant fiecle d’Or pour lairain,
Englifh.

Being bora in the shadows and noSurnal time,

He shall be a Soveraign in Kingdom and bounty,

He shall canfe his blood to come again from the-ancient Ura,
Renewing a golden Age inftead of a braxen one,


ANNOT.


This foretelleth the greatnefs and goodnefs of a Prince that fhall be born in the


|| beginning of the night,


frat, |


|
|
|
|
|
|
|


XLII
French.

Mars efleve en fon plus haut betroy,
Fera retraire les Aflsbrox de Fraitce,
La gent Lombards fera li grand effroy,
A ceux de l’Aigle comprins foubs la Balance.

Englifh.
Mars being elevated in its higher Steeple,
Shallcaufe the Allobrox to retreat from France,
The people of Lombardy /ball be in fo great fear
Of thofe of the Eagle comprehended under Libra.

ANNOT,


The Allobrox ate the people of Savey, | Thofe of the Eagle comprehended under
| Libra, are the fubjects of che Empire chat ufe the French tongue,


E € ‘ French.


uN
Al
i
‘te
Abita)
|


SRD em br


The true Prophecies
XLII:

French.

Le grand ruine des facrez ne fefloigne,
Provence, Naples Sicile, Seex & Ponce,
En Germanie au Rhin & la Coloigne,
Vexez a mort par tous ceux de Mogunce,


Englifh.
The great ruine of the facred things is not far off,
Provence, Naples, Sicily, Sez and Ponce,
In Germany towards ibe Rhyne and Colen,


They fhall be vexed to death by thofe of Moguntia.
ANNOT.


He foretellech the troubles that were to be fhortly in thofe Countreys for Reli-


XLIV.
French.


Par Mer le rouge fera prins the Pyrates,
La paix fera par fon moyen troublée,
L'une & l’auare commettra par fainéte atte,
Au grand Pontife fera l’Armée d’oublée.
Englifh.
By Sea the red one fball be taken by Pyrates,
The peace by that means fball be troubled,
He fhall commit anger and coveteonfnefs by a feigned aëtion,
The High Prieft fhall have a double Army.


ANN OT.


By the red one is underftood fome Cardinal that fhall be taken by Pyrates, for
which the peace fhall be in danger to be broken, the fame Cardinal fhall by a feigned
ation be guilty of choler and covetoufnels , and for his recovery and the defending
the Rites of che Church, che Pope fhall have a double Army granted to him.


X LV.
French.


Le grand Empire fera toft defolé,
Ec tranflate pres d’Arduenne filve,
Les deux batards par I’ailné decolle,
Et Regnera Ænodarbnex de milve.


Englith.


The great Empire [ball foon be made defolate,
And fball be tranflated near the F orreft of Arden,


The two Baftards fball have their heads cut off by the eldeSf fon,


And be that foall reign, foall be Ænodarbnez nofed.
ANNOT,


ULLAL e


4nan


t Rel


!


of Michael Noftradamus,


ANNOT.

By the great Empire is meant thac of Germany, which he fays fhall be tranflated
near the Forreft of Ardens,which is near the borders of France. Two Baftards thall be
beheaded by command of the elder Brother of the Houfe , and he that fhall Reign
(hall have a reddith beard, and a Hawks nofe.

X LVI.
French.
Par Chapeaux rouges querelles & nouveaux fchifines,
Quand on aura efleu le Sabinois, ,
On produira contre luy grands fophifmes,
Et fera Rome leflée par Albanoir.


Englifh.
By red Hats, quarrels and new fchifnes


When the Sabin fhall be Eleéted


>
Great fophifmes fall be produced againft bing,
And Rome fhall be endainaged by the Albanois.
ANNOT,
By red Hats are underftood Cardinals of Rome , Who fhall raife great quarrels and
fchifmes, when a Pope of the Countrey of the Sabins which is near Rome) fhall be
Ele&ed , againft whom many things fhall be objected , and chat Rome (hall be enda-


maged by the Alanians, which area V Varlike people, and for the moft parc fubject
to the Common-weaith of venice,


XLVII.
French.
Le grand Arabe marchera bien avant,
Trahy fora par le Bifantinois :
L’ Antique Rhodes luy viendra au devant,
Et plus grand mal par Auftre Pannondis,
Englifh.
The great Arabian fball proceed a great way,
He fball be betrayed by the Bifantines,
The ancient Rhodes foall conte to meet hint,
And a greater evil by a South wind from Hungary.


ANNOT.


By Bifantine is underftood the great Turk, Mafter of Conftantinople , formerly cal
led Byfantinns.


XLVIII.
French.
Apres la grande affli@ion du Sceptre,
Deux ennemis par eux feront defaics :
Clañles d'Afrique aux Pannons viendra naifire,
Par Mer & Terre feront horribles Fais.


Fe 2 Englih,


Tbe true Prophecies


Englifh.


After the great affli€tions of the Scepter,
Two enemies fhall be overcome by themfelves,
A Fleet of Affrica shall be born to the Hungarians.
By Sea and Land shall be horrid fatts.
ANNOT,
The words of this Stanza are plain, though the fenfe be fomething obfcure,


ALT
French.


Nul de l'Efpagne, mais de l’antique France,
Sera efleu pour le tremblant nacelle,

A l’ennemy fera faicte fiance,

Qui dans fon Regne fera pefte cruelle.


Englifh.
Mere out of Spain, but of ‘the ancient France,


ai
all be Elected to govern the tottering Ship.


ede a Thi Bem) [ball be trufted,
| Who, to. bis Kingdom fhall be a cruel plague.
ANNOT.


The two firft Verfes foretell a fchifme in the Church of Rome, underftood bya
| tottering Ship, and that a Frewch- man (hall be Ele@ed Pope to remedy it.
' The two laft Verfes are eafie to be underftood.


LA
French.


L’An que fee Freres du Lys feront an Aage,

L’Un d’euz tiendra da grand Romanie :
| Trembler les Monts ouvert Latin’ pañlage, ts
Bache marcher contre Fort d’Armenie,

Englifh.
In ihe Jear that the Brethren of the Lillies fall be at Age,
| 1 ii One of them fhall bold the great Romanie :
Wie The Mir ins fball tremble, the Latine paffage [ball be opened,
A Basfha /ball march againft the Fort of Armenia.
ANNOT.


By the Brethren of che Lillies are meane the Heirs of the Crown of France; the |
reft is plain, |


fr i


This is of the fame obfcurity with the foregoing one.


of Michaël Noftradamus.


LI,

French.
La gent de Dace, d’ Angleterre, & Polone,
Et de Boéfme feront nouvelle ligue,
Pour pafler outre d’Hercules la Colonne
Barcins, Thyrrans drefler crüelle brigue.

Englifh,
The people of Dacia, England, and Poland,
And of Bohemia hall make a new League,
To go beyond Hercules Pillars, |
Barcins avd Thyrrens fall make a cruel lot.


ANNOT.


By Barcins he means thofe of Carthage, which is now Tunis , and by the Thyrrens,
thofe that live near that Sea,


8


LTÉE
French.

Un Roy fera qui"donra l’oppofite,
Les exilez eflevez fur le Reone,
De lang nager la gent cafte hyppolite,
Et florira long-temps fous telle enfeigne.

Enelith,
A King [hall be, who shall be Opponent
To the banished perfons railed upon the Kingdou,
The chaft Hippolite Nation shall fwin in blood,
And shall flourish a great phile under fuch an Enfign,

ANNOT. |


Here is Demorritus’s Well where the truth may be, but I cannot find it.


LITI.
French.

La Loy du Sol, & Venus contendans,
Appropriant PEfprit de Prephetie :
Ne l’un ne l’autre ne feront entendus.
Par Sol tiendra la Loy du grand Meffz..

Englih.
The Law of the Sun and Venus contending,
Appropriating the fpirit of Prophecy,
Neither one nor-thé other shall be heard :
By Sol the Law of the great Méfias shall fubfift

ANNOT, —


e
eo


ee


The fenfe and che words are plain,


T be true Prophecies


LIV.
French.


Du pont Euxine, & la grand Tartarie,

Un Roy fera qui viendra voir la Gaule,

Tranfpercera Alaue & l’Armenie,

Et dans Bifance Lairra fanglante Gaule.
Englith.

From the Euxin Sea, and great Tartaria,

A King fball come to fee France,

He fhall go through Alanea and Armenia,

And fball leave a bloody rod in Conftantinople,


AN NOT.


This is {o plain, that itneedeth no interpretation,


LV,
French.
De la felice Arabie contrade,
Maiftra puiflant de la loy Mahometique,
Vexer l’E/pagne, conqueftre la Grenade,
Et plus par Mera la gent Liguftique.
Englifh.
Out of the Countrey of Arabia the happy,


Shall be born a powerful man of the Mabometan Law,


Who fhall vex Spain and conquer Grenada,
And by Sea feall come to the Ligurian Nation,


ANN OT.
The Zigwrias Nation are thofe of Genoa,
LV i.
French,


Par le trafpas du tres-vieillard Pontife,

Sera efleu Romain de bon aage,

Qui fera dit que le fiege debiffe,

Et long tiendra & de picquant courage.
Englith.

By the death of the very old bigh-Prieft,

Shall be a Roman eleéted of good age,


Of whom it fhall be faid, that he difbonoureth the Seat,


And fhall live long and be of a fpeerce courage,
ANNOT,.


ae wo rs


The Mountains of Ganlfier and Aventine are two of the feven Mountains of Rowe,


out of which, it feems, one fhall go out to give notice to the Arm
Booty of the Pope, called Sextus, fhall be taken,
But what he meaneth by (Manfol, I am ignorant:


of Michael Noftradamus.


LVII.
French.
Iftra du Mont Gaul fier & Aventine,
Qui par le trou advertira |’Armée,
Entre deux Rocs fera prins le butin,
De Sext. Manfol faillir la renommée.


Englifh.


One fhall go out of the Mountains Gaulfier andAventine,
Who through a hole fhall give notice to the Army,
Between two Rocks the booty fball be taken,

Of Sext. Manfol fball loofe bis renown.


ANNOT.


LVIIt.
French.
De l'Aqueduët d'Uricenfe, Gardoing,
Par le Foreft & Mont inacceffible,
Emmy du pont fera taché ou poing,
La chef Nemans qui tant {era terrible.
Englifh.
From the Conduit of Uticenfe and Gardoing,
Through the Forreft and unaccelfible Mountain,
In the middle of the Bridge fball be tyed by the Wrift,
The chief Nemans, that [hall be fo terrible,
A NNOT.


_ By the Conduit of Gardoine, he means that of the River Gardon, tharpaffech by
Nifmes, where there is a famous Conduit.


But what he meaneth by the chief Newmans, 1 canniot find,


LIX,
| French.
Au chef Anglois a Nifinés trop fejour,
Devers PEfpagne au fecours Ænobarbe!
Plufieurs mouront par Mars ouvert ce jour,
Quand en Artois faillir eftoile en Barbe.


y without, and che


T he true Prophecies


Englifh.
The chief Englifh fhall ftay too long at Nifmes,
A red haird man [ball go to the e fuccours of Spain,
Many shall die by open War that day,
When in Artois the Star shall fail in the Beard.


ANN OT.


All the difficulty lyéch i in the laft Verfe: for my part I believe he meaneth by it
a bearded Comet, fuch as the Latines call Comseta barbatus,


La
French.
Par telte rafe viendra bigs mal eflire,
Plus que fa charge ne pe rte pat flera,


Si grand fureur & rage fera dire;
Qua feu & fang tout Sexe pu ra.
En elifh,


By ashaven head shall be made anill ch oie,
That shall go beyond bis commi (zon,

He i tll proceed with fo great fury and rage,
That be shall put both Sexes to fire and Seiad,


ANNOT.


By a fhaven head muft be underftood a Prieft of the Romi{b Religions becaufe
they all have their heads fhaven,


Bait, Le
French.
L'Enfant du grand neftant a {a‘naiflance,
Subjugera les hauts Monts Apennins,
Fera trembler tous ceux de la balance,
Depuis Monts Feurs Ro a Mont Sezzis.


yo lifh.


Som *


The Cl ild of the great man LA was not at bis birth,


Sball f bdue the high Apennin Le rl
Shall make all thofe under Libra to quake
From Mount Feurs, as far as Mount Ps.


AN NOT,


The Apennine Mountains, are thofe that divide Italy in two parts.
Thofe under the Sign of Libra are the people of France, FeursisaCity in
France, in the Province of Forrefl, Mount Sess is a high Mountain in


À LIU VE


‘by


|


This paffeth my underftanding,


of Michael Noftradatnus,


LXIL

French.

Sur les Rochers fang on verra pleuvoir,

Sol Orient, Saturne Occidental,

Pres d’Orgon Guerre, a Rome grand mal voir,

Nefs parfondrées, & prins le Tridental,
Englifh.

It fball rain blood upon the Rocks,

The Sun being in the Eaft, and Saturn in the Weft,

War fhall be near Orgon, and great evil at Rome,

Ships foall be caft away, and the Trident be taken,


ANNOT.


I could not find what he meaneth hy orgon, As by the Trident being taken , ¥ fup:
pofe he meaneth a Ship called Neptune, becaufe Neptune is always painted with a
Trident,


LX III,

| | French,
De vaine emprife l'honneur indue plainte,
Galliots errants par Latins froid, faim vagues,
Non loin du Tybre de fang la Terre teinte,
Et fur humains feront diverfes plagues,

| _Englifb. — |
Honour bringeth a complaint againft a vain undertaking,
Galleys fball mander through theLatin Seas, cold, bunger, W aves,
Not far from Tyber the Earth fhall be died with blood,
Aud upon Mankind fball be feveral plagues.

ANNOT:


yber is the River of Rome, the reft are feveral prodigies that fhall come 15 pals}


L'XA V:
French,


Les affembles par repos du grand nombre,
Par Terre & Mer confeil contremandé,
Pres de I’ Autonne, Genes, Nae, de lombre,


Par Champs & Villes le Chef contrebandé.
Englith.


¥


| The gathered by the reft of the great numbers;


By Land and Sea fhall recall their Councel, —
Near Autonne, Genes, and Nue of the fhadow,
Iu Fields and Towus the Chief {ball be one againft another,


ANNOT:


FF 7 ÆFremil


Tbe true Prophecies
LXV.

| French.

Subit venu l’effrayeur fera grande,

Des principaux de l'affaire cachés :

Et Dame Embraife plus ne fera en veué,

Et peu a peu feront le grands fachés.


Englith.
One coming upon a fuddain fball caufe a great fear,
To the Chief men that were hidden and concerned in the bufinefs,
Andthe Lady Ambraife hall be feen no more,
And by little and little the great one fall be angry.


ANNOT. de de
What he meaneth by the Lady Ærbraife, I cannot find, the ref is eafie,
LXVI.
French.


Sous les antiques edifices Veftaux,
Non efloignez d’Aquedué ruiné,
De Sol & Lune font les luiffans metaux,
Ardente Lampe Trajan d’or burine.
Englith.
Under the ancient edifices of the Veftals,
Not far from an Aqueduct ruinated,
Are the bright mettals of Sun.and Moon,
“ A burning Lamp of Trajan of ingraven gold,


ANNOT.
_ Monfieur Catel in his fecond Book of Languedoc Chap. V. faith; that there was à
famous Aquednif, which the Romans builded from the River Gar to the Town of
Nifmes:, which ac prefentis ruinated, 1

Secondly, Near the Town there was a famous Temple dedicated to Diana, where
there is a Spring of water fo great, that it feemeth rather a Lake then a Fountain,

Thirdly, I find chat the Emperour Adr/amcaufed a Temple to be built in the ho-
hour of Plotina Traj an's wife, .

Fourthly, He relateth that-Pean Poldo found in the Town of «47x a Marble with
this infcription: Plotina Trajamis wxor, {umma honeftate © integritate fulzens, [terili-
tatis defcétu fine prole fecit conjugem qui ejus opera Adrianum adoptatum in Imperio Suc-
cefforews habuit, à quo in bencficit memoriam Nemanfi ede (acra maxime Sumpts , {ubli-
mique firuciura, ac Hymnorumcanth decorata, poft mortem donatae/t : That is to fay,
Plotina, Trajans wile , famous for her honeftyandintegrity , was barrenand left no
Children to ber Husband , which -fhe perceiving, intreated the Emperour to adopt
Adrian for his’ Son, and to.make him his Succeflor in the Empire,which being come
topafs, the new Emperour in acknowledgement of fucha benefit , did build het a
Temple’ of à magnificent Structure, and caufeditto be Confecrated with Mufick
after her death. (1

Pifthly, The faid Author faith, chat this Matble.ivastakemourofthat Temple,
Wwhea the River of Gardon did fo ove: flow, as we have faid,

By


mm vere


a Wasa


}
|


voi El


mes FI


AiO,
theho-


feyith
Juil
rp Site
il
tolty,
Jen
padone
À come


‘het 4 |
fyfick |


ls,


i


Æ, ,


of Michael Noftradamus. 219


By all this we fee, chat there was a Temple of Vc/fals at Nifmes , Diana the Maid
being their chief Patronefs,which is made now a Nunnery.called la Fontaine. There is
alfo to be feenthe Temple of Plotiza , Trajans wife, built by Adrian his Succeffor,
And as it was the manner of the Ancients to put fome of thofe inextinguifhable
Lamps in their Graves ; itis very likely,chere was one of chemin this Temple, and
becaufe it fhould be known whofe Grave it was, he caufed Trajans name to be En-
graven in the foot of the faid Lamp.

Let us explain now the Stanza: Under the Ancient Veftal Luildings of the Temple
of Diana, not far fromthe rained Aqueduct, which carrieth che water from the River
Gar to Nifmses, fhall be found fhining mettals of Sol and Luna, that is, Meddals of gold
and filver, witha earning Lamp. of gold , wherein the.name of Trajan was Engraven.
Hiftories make mention of feveral burning Lamps inthis manner, that have been
found ftill burning-in the ground, and not confumed; though they had been there
above 500, years; certainly the Oil of ic mult have been incombultible, and could
be extracted out ofnothing but gold, quia nil dat quod non habet,


LX VIL.
French.
Quand Chef Peroufe n’ofera {a Tunique,
Sens au convert tout nud s’expolier :
Seront pring fépt faiét Ariftocratique,
Le Pere & Fils morts par poine te au collier.
Englifh.
When the Chief of Peroufe fhall not dare without a Tunick ,
To expofe bimfelf naked in the dark ,
Seven fhall be taken for fetting up Ariftocracy, |
The Father and the Son fball die by pricks in the Collar.
ANNOT,
Peronfe is aCity in Ztaly ; the reft 1s plain,”
LX VILL
| French. |
Dans Je Danube & le Rhine Viendra boire,
Le grand Chameau, ne fen repentira :
Treinbler le Rhofne & plus fort ceux de Loire,
Et pres des A/pes Cog le ruinera.
Englifh.. |
In Danubics a#d ihe Rhine. fball come to drink,
The great Camel, and shall not repent,
The Rhofne shall tremblé and more thofe of Loire,
And near the Alpes the Cock shall ruine him.
ANNOT. . “#
This foretelletha great incurfion of the Turks into Germany , infomuch that they
{hall water their Camels in the Rivers of Danubins, and of the Rhyne, to the great


terrour of France, wherein thofe Rivers of Rhofne and Loireare, À
But the laft Verfe,faith the Cock; that is,the Fresch.fhall overcome and ruine the


Turks, gear the Mountains of the eA/pes. ERE
FE 2 French,


LEA VAT EU
RAA)


PMP PA


HA thm Aes


This is concerning fome great Prince, who fhall rai
quer Africa with it,


This foretelleth the detru@ion of Conffantinop
thofe that live under the Sign of Libra, that
French, |


Tbetrue Propbecies


LX IX.
French.
Plus ne fera le grand en faux fommeil,
L'Inquictude viendra prendre repos,
Drefler Phalange d’Or, Azur, & vermeil,
Subjuguer Afrique & ronger jufqu’aux os.
Englifh.

The great one shall be no more in a falfe fleep,
The refilefsnefs feall take reff,
He shall raife an Army of Gold and Azure

y ;
He shall conquer. Africa and gnaw it to the bones,

ANNOT. |

fe a powerful Army, and con-


LXX

French.
es Regions fubietes a la Balance,
eront trembler les Monts par grande Guerre,
Captiis tout fexe, avec toute Bixance
Qu'on criera a l'Aube Terre a Terre.

Englifh,
The Regions under the fign of Libra,
Shall make the Mountains quake with great War,
Slaves of all fexes, with all Bizance,


So that in the dawning of the day,they foall cry to Land to Land.
ANNOT,


L
[mn
I


le, anciently called Byzantium , by
iss the Ewropeans, and chiefly the


LX XI.

French,
Par la fureur d’un qui attendra l’eau,
Par la grand rage tout l’exercite cfmeu,
Charge des Nobles a dixfept Bateaux,
Au long du Rhofne tard Meflager venud.

Englifh.

By the fury of one flaying for the W, ater,
By bis great rage the whole Areny shall be troubled
There shall be feventeen Boats full of Noblemen ”
Along the Rholne.the Me fenger shall come too late.


ANNOT;


Mi Uf}


nea,


5 bY


y the |


|| Civil VVars for Religion; that it needer


hall always be perfecuted, the Apoftle
| that will live piou[ly in Christ, want {uffer


of Michael Noftradamus.


ANNOT.
The words and fenfeare plain.
LX XII,
_ French,
Pour le plaifir d’Edi@ voluptueux,
On meflera la poifon dans Ja Loy,
Venus fera en cours fi vertueux,


Qu'obfufquera du Soleil tout alloy.


Englifh.
By the pleafure of 4 Voluptuous proclamation:
The poifon shall be mixed in the Lam,
Venus shall be in fogreat requeft,


Thaï it shall darken all the allay ofthe Sur.
| Ê _- ANNOT.
By a Proclamation, favouring or promoting

in the Law, and leachery| fo much countenance


Sun , that is, piety fo much commended int
under Chrifts Banner,


LXXIITE

French,
Perfecutée fera de dien lEglife,
Et les Saints Temples feront expoliez,
L'Enfant la mere mettra nud en chemife.
Seront Arabes au Polous ralliez,


Englith.
The Church of God fhall be perfecuted.
And the boly Temples foall be ff poiled,
The Child fhall turn out his Mother in her Sutoch,
Arrabians fball agree with the Pelonians.


ANNOT.

The Author could not be miftaken in this Prophecié; for the Church of God
confirmeth it, when he faich, that al thofe
perfection : As for the (poiling of Churches,
nfeen {0 often is France, inthe time of the

hno confirmation,
The laft Verfe concerning a peace between the Twrks and the Polonians. was ful-
filled in the year 1623, when Sigé{sundws King ot Poland, by his Embaflador the
Duke Sharasky, and by che mediation of the Exglsfh Embaffador, concluded:a Peace


with the great Turk Mfapha, the Articles of which youmay read at large in the
Tarkifh Hiftory. "


and other barbarous a@ions, it hath bee


French,


Licentioufnefs, poifon {hall be mixed
d, as it fhall obfcurate the allay of the
he Gofpel , to all thofe chat wil! fight


Tbe true Propbecies


LX XIV.
French.


De fang Trojen naïftra cœut Germanique,
Qui deviendra en fi haute puiffance,

Hors chañflera gent eftrange Arabique,
Tonrnant I Eglife en priftine préeminence.


Englih.


Of Trojan blood fhall be bora a German heart.

Who {ball attain to fo high a power,

That be fhall drive away the ftrange Arrabian Nation,
Reftoring the Church to her former fplendor.


ANNOT.


It feemeth to fignifie, that by Alliance made between a German Emperour, and
a Daughter of France, which derive their Pedigree from the Trojans , a Prince
thall be born of fo ftout and valiant a beaït, as fhall drive away all ithe: Twrki/h power
out of Germany, and fhall reftore the Church to her former fplendor.


LX XV.
French.


Montera haut fur le bien plus a dextre,
Demourra aflis fur la pierre.carrée,

Vers le midy pofe a la feneftre,
Bafton tortu en main, bouche ferrée.


Englifh:


He fball go up upon the good more on the right band,
He fhall ftay fitting upon the [quare Stone,
Towards the South ; being [et,on the left hand,


A crooked ftick in his hand, and his mouth fut.


ANNOT,


Ido acknowledge my Ignorance in this.


LX XVI
French.


En lieu libere tendra fon Pavillon,

Et ne voudra en Citez prendre place,

Aix, Carpentras, Lifle Volce, Mont Cavaillon,
Par. tous ces lieux abolira fa trace.


Englifh.


He shall pitch bis Tent in the.open air,
Refufing to lodge in the City,
Aix, Carpentras, Lifle Volce, Mont Cavaillon,
In all thofe places, be shall abolish his trace.


pO. Ten 20 es — a pus


ael Noftradamus:
ANN OT.
Aix, Carpentras, Lille Valse, Mons Gavaillon, are Cities of Provence:
LXX VII:
French...
Tous les degres d'honneur Eccleliaftique,
Seront change en Dial Quirinal,
En Martial,guirinal, Flaminique,
Puis un Roy de France le rendra Vulcanal,
Englifh.
All the degrees of Ecclefiaftical honour,
Shall be changed into a Dial Qnirinal,
| Into Martial, Quirinal,F laminick ;
Ot, an After that,a King of France fball make it Vulcanal.


of Mich


Aud | ANNOT.
ub poner |


: Allwhat Ï can fay upon this, is, chat Déalis in Latineis a Prieft of Fwpiter, and
iQuirival is a Prieft of Remulns , Martin! Flamen is a Prieft of Mars > Valcanal is a


Prieft of Yuicaw, let che ingenious Reader make of all thefethe beft conftrution
he can.


LXXVIIT.
French,
Les deux unis ne tiendront longuement;
Et dans treize ans au Barbaré Satrape,
c Aux deux coftez féront tel perdement,
Qu'un benira la Barque & fa cappe.
Englith.
~The two united fball not hold long,
| Within thirteen years to thé Barbarian Satrape,
| They fall caufe {uch lofs or both fides,
| That one fhallblefs the Boat and its covering.


ANNOT,


| | The word Satrape isa Perfas word, fignifying one of the Grandees at Court, By
| the laft Verfe is meant, one that {hall faverhis life and make his efcape, by the means
| Ofa covered Boat or Barge,


LYXIX.

: Ra ea ETOAC: :

i La facree Pompe viendra batflér les aifles,
Bas Parla venue de grand Legiflateur, |
h + Humble haufféra, vexera les rebellés;

fl - Naiftra far Terre aucum Æmulateur,


Enigliftij


T be true Prophecies
Englifh,

The facred Pomp fall bow down her wings,

At the coming of the great Lawgiver,

He fhall raife the humble and vex the rebellions,

No Emulator of bis fball be born.

ANNOT.


This (eemeth to have a relationto the birth of Chrift, or Chriftmas-day.


| By. ty OO
French.


L’Ogmiongrande Bixance approchera,
Chaflée fera la Barbarique ligue,
Des deux Loix l'une unique lachera,
Barbare & France en perpetuelle brigue.
Englifh.
The Ogmion fhall come near great Bizance,
Aad fall expel the Barbarian League,
Of the two Laws, the wicked one fball yeild,
The Barbarian, and the French shall be i perpetual jar.


By the word Ogmion, every wherein his Book; the Author meaneth the King of

France, who according to his words thallcome near Con/tantinople, and fhall breaks

he Barbarian League,and of the two Laws,thacis,the Chriftian and the Mahometan;
the Mahometan fhall yield cojthe other. | RAT NE


LXXXI.
: French.
L’Oyfeau Royal fur la Cité folaire,
Sept mois devant fera nocturne augure :
Mur d'Orient cherra Tonnerre elclaire,
Sept jours aux Portes les ennemies a l'heure,
Englifh.
The Royal Bird upon the folar City,
Seven Months together shall make a noSura augury,
The Eafterr Wall shall fall, the Lightning shall shine,
Then the enemies shall be at the Gate for [even days.


ANNOT.


By the Royal Bird is meant an Eagle , which for feven days together fkall beob:
ferved upon fone Eaftern City ; and fhall be taken for a prefage, that the Eaftern
Wall of that City fhall fall by Lightning , at which time*the enemies fhall be at the


Gate for feven days together,


Frincb)


| oN

1 fe
| Q
=.
1


iil od


|


pebatert D
he che


of Michael Noftradainus,


ar LXXXIL
| io CRTC RNA
Au conclud pache hors de là Fortereffe,
Ne fortira celuy en defefpoir mis :
Quand ceux d’Arbois de Langres, contre Breffe,
Aaront mis Dolle boufcade d’ennemis,
Englifh.
Upon the agreement made; out of the Fort,
Shall not come he that was in defpair, :
When thofe of Arbois,of Langres, againft Brefle,
Shall have put in Dolle an Ambifcado of foes.
ja ANNOT. a
… The fenfe is , that according to the Articles or agreement made between the Be?
fieget ofa Fort, and the Governour of it, che faid Governour by defpair will not
come out, and this fhall happen , when thofeot Arbeis and Lasgres, {hall be againft
thofe of Brefiia, and {hall have put an Ambufcadoin the City of Dalle. a


LX XXIII nh a
French. || +
Ceux qui auront entreprins fubvertir, ” || = |
Nompareil Regne; puiflant & invincible; a
Feront par fraude, nuicts trois advertir, a a
Quand le plus grand a Table lira Bible, vie |:
ty Englifh. | ay
Thofe that fhall have undertaken to fubvert ; al a
The Kingdow- that hath no equal in power and victories, | on à
Shall caufe by fraud, notice to be given for three nights together: |
When thegreateft fball be reading à Bible at the Table,
c GANS ao ane aaah Sole dives
What place is meant by the unparalell’d Kingdom , the Author hath hid äs Well, ee
from meas the Reader, | Minds VITRE EU
pts doi EXX XIV: > a |
iD pr: ; French. : ree,
“"*Nailtre du Gouphre & Cité immefurée, | i
: Nay de parens ob{curs & tenebreux :
Qui la puiffagce du grand Roy reverée,
Voudra deftruire par Ronen & Enrenx. -


4 à hs: Englifh: su Oy bathe a
One: fhall be born-ont of the Gulf and the sinmeafurable Gity,
Born of Parents obfcure and dark | |

Who by the means of Rouen and Eureux, : ie
Will go about to deftroy the power of the great King, A
. Gg ©  ANNOT


236 The tine Prophecies
ANNOT: see AT
VVithout doubt by this Gulf and unmeafured City the Author means Paris , by
reafon of its greatnefs, and the multitude of its Inhabitants,
LXXXV.
: French.
Par les Sueves & lieux circonvoifins,
Seront en guerre pour caufe dés nuees :


Gammares, locuftes & coufins,
Du Lesan fautes feront bien defnuees.
© Yer, eben.
Through Swedeland and the Neighbouring places;
By reafon of the Clouds fhall fall to War,
The Lobftars, Grafs-hoppers and Gnats,
The faults of Leman hall appear very naked.
ANNOT.” :
By Leman is meant the City of Geneva, the eft needeth no further interpreta:
tion,
LXXX VI,
French:
Par les deux reftes, & trois bras feparez,
La grand Cité fera:par'eaux vexée::
Des Grands d’ entrée €uxipar efparez;
Par tefte Perfe Byxance fort prefiee.
| Englifh.
Divided in two heads'and parted into three\arnis,
The great City ball betroubled with Waters,
Some greatones among them {catered by banifbment,
By à Perfian head Byzanoefhall be fore oppreffed.

This Prophecy containeth three things, the firft is an Inundation by which Paris
is threatned, for without doubt he meaneth here that City, at the head of which the
River Seine is divided in twoheads,and makes an Ifland where the Cathedral Church
and the Palace are fituated, and then parted into three branches , one of which run-
neth by the Church of the Augaftines , the other by the Qway of /4 Megifferie , and
the third paffeth under the great Hofpital; this City then is threarned here of an
Inundation , to which it is very:fubjecty by reafonof the lqwnefs' of her ficuarion,
and the confitence of feveral Rivers:that fheesat the head of-ic; | The fecond part of
the Prophecy hinteth that ac that time, fome great ones of that City fhall be banifh-
ed; andthe third, that Conffantinople;' which was anciently called Byzantinm; or
rather Wié great Turk by-a figure ofR hetorick; called Synecdoche, {hall be much op-

preffed by the Perfians,


CS LS eee A


of Michael Noftradamus,


LXXXVII:
French.

L’An que Saturne hors de fervage,

Au franc terroir fera d’eau inonde,

De fang Troien {era fon mariage,

Et {era {eur d'Efpagnols circondé.
Englifh.

In the year that Saturn out of flavery,

In the free Countrey fballbe drowned by water,

With Troian blood bis marriage fhall be,

And for certain he fall be hedged about with Spaniards.

ANNOT.


By Troian blood is underftood the French Nation, the meaning therefore is, that
in the year that a great Inundation fhall be in France, then fhall a notable marriage be


iret made, by which the French fhall be hedged about, or fenced by Spaniards,
LX XXVIII.
French.
Sur le Sablon par un hideux Deluge,
Des autres Mers trouve Monftre Marin;
Proche de lieu fera fait un refuge,
Tenant Savone efclave de Turin.
> Englifh.
Upon the fand through an bideons Deluge,
Of other Seas, fball be found a Sea Monfter,
Near to that place fhall be made a Sanéinary;
Which fball make Savone a flave to Turin.
ANN OT.
cal VVhen by the overflowing of the Neighbouring Seas, a Sea Monfter fhall be caft
ra ie upon the Sand, near to chat place fhall be buile a Fort, chat {hall make Savons a flave
whi :
to Tarin. y iy
| Cac h Savona isa Town by the Sea fide; belonging to the Gensefe , Turin is the chief
vip || City of Piemout, belonging to the Duke of Savoy,
(rity am À
ce Non
feat, à
gpa Dedans Hongrie par Boheme, Navarre. k
vs Et par Banieres feintes feditious,
gins 0 | CS:
wih Par fleuisde Lis paix portant la barre;


A Contre Orleans fera émotions.


Gg à Énëlih,


pre |


PTE


FRS net Le


DRE AU


PSS ST CNN RE mn NT ot


LE ih ERIN: NE ta ee ARS NN AO Am


Ÿ be trne Frophecies
Engli fh.


In Hungaria, through Bohemia and Navarre,
And by banners fained feditious,
Through flower de Luce the Countrey that wears the Bar,
Againft Orleans fball make commotions.
ANNOT.

This Stanza is divided into two parts; the two firft Verfes foretell che troubles
that were to happen in Hungaria, Bohemia, and Navarre for Religion fake, The two
laft ones were fulfilled,when the Prince of Conde, who in his Arms wears the flower
de Luce with the Bar, did feize upon Orleans for the Proteftant party,


XG}
French.
Dans les Cyclades, en Corinthe, & Lariffe,


Dedans Sparte tout le Peloponefe;
Si, grand famine pelte far faux conifie,
Neuf mois tiendra & tout le Cherroneffe.
Englith.

In the Cyclades, in Corinthe, and Larifle,
In Sparta, and all Peloponelus,
There fball befo great a famine and plague by falfe arts,
That fhall laft nine months in Cherlonelus.

ANNOT.


Cyclades arethe Iflands in the Ægean Seas Corinth, Lariffa,Sparta, Peléponefus;
and Cherfenefus, are Countreys of Grecia,
X CI,
French.
Au grand marche qu’on dit des menfongers,
De tout Torrent & Champ Athenien,
Seront {urpris par les Chevaux legers,
Des Albanois, Mars, Leo, Sat. au Verfien.
Englifh.
In the great Market called of the Liars,
Whieh zs all Torrent and Athenian Field,
They fball be furprifed by the light Horfe,
Of the Albanefe,Mars iz Leo,Saturn iz Aquarius.
ANNOT,
VVhen tars fhall be in the fign of Leo, and Satarnin that of Aquarias; then the
Countrey of Athens fhall be over-run by light Horfemen of Albania,


Fresch,


UU À


Of Michael Noftradamuas,


‘XCIE
French.
Apres le fiege tenu dixfept ans
Cinq changeront en tel revolu terme
Puis fera l’un efleu de mefme temps,
Qui des Romains ne fera trop conforme,
Englifh.
After the feat poffeffed feventeen years,
Five fball change in fuch a {pace of time:
After that, one fhall be cle&ted at the fame time,
Who fball not be very conformable to the Roma ns.
ANNOT,


The meaning is, that when a Pope fhall have {atin the Chair,
years, within the fame {pace of 17 years, five others hall be el
another, that fhall not be well approved of by the Remaxz Cler
my memory doth not fail me, this is come to pafs al
Chronology,1 could not make it good,


X CITE,

French.
Soubs le terroir du rond’Globe Lunaire,
Lors que fera dominateur Mercure,
L'Ifle d'Efcoffe fera un Lumenaire,
Que les Anglois mettra à defconfiture.


Englifh.
Under the Territory of the round Lunary Globe,
When Mercury fball be Lord of the afcendant,
The Ifland of Scotland foall make a Luminary,
That fball put the Englifh to az overthrow.


ANNOT,


This Prophecie mutt of neceffity be paft; for fince the


under one King, füch a thing hath not happened, nor is
after:


for the {pace of 17
ected; and after them


ready 3 but wanting che Popes


union of both Kingdoms
it likely ic thould be here-


XCIV,

French.
Tranflatera en la grand Germanie,
Brabant & F landers, Gand, Bruges & Bologne,
La trefue fainte le grand Duc d’Arwmerie


Affaillera Vienne & la Coloigne,


2


8y; and Nobility, If


The true Prophecies
Englifh.


He fhall tranflate into the great Germany,
Brabant, Flanders, Gand, Bruges ,+7d Bullen,
The truce fained, the great Duke of Armenia,
Shall affault Vienna and Colen.


A NNOT.
It is concerning an Emperour that fhall add all chofe Countreys to the Empire of
Germany,
x GY,
French.


Nautique rame invitera les umbres,

Du grand Empire lors viendra conciter,
La mer Agee des lignes des Encombres,
Empefchant londe Tirrhene de flettet.


Engli(h.
The Sea Oare fball invite the hades,
Of the great Empire, then [hall it come to ftir,
The Aegean Sea, with lines of Encumbers,
Hindering the Tirrhene Sea to roll.
ANN OT.
This is either Miftica or Metaphorical, or I underftand itnot.


XC VI.
French.


Sur le milieu du grand monde la Rofe,

Pour nouveaux faits fang public efpandu,

A dire uray on aura bouche clofe,

Lors au beloing viendra tard lattendu.
Englifh.

The Rofe [ball be in the middle of the great world,

Blood [ball be publickly fpilt for new deeds;

To fay the truth, every one fhall ftop bis mouth,


Then at the time of need [hall come long looked for.


 ANNOT.
The words are plain, out of which every one may make what conftruétion he
pleafeth.
XCVIL
French.


Le na difforme par horreur fuffoque,
Dans la Cité du grand Roy habitable,
L’edit fevery des captifs revoqué,

Grefle & Tonnerre, Conden ineftimable.


pie


ution |


of Michael Noftradamus.
Englith,

The deformed born fhall through horror be, fuffocated,

In the habitable City of the, great King


The fevere Proclamation againft banifbed feall be recalled, qi
Hail and Thunder feall do incftimable harm at Coude WE
ANNOT. 13)


faGondon ist Townin Frances the reftis plain,


KCVIIL.
French. et
A quarante huit degré Climaéterique, No à
A fin de Cancer fi grande fecherefle, ay :
Poiflon en Mer, Fleuve, Lac cuit hedtique, an) à
Bearn, Bigorre, ‘par feu Ciel en detreffe.


Englith.
At the Clima&terical degree of eight and fourty,
At the end of Cancer, fall be fuch a drougth,
That Fifb in the Sea, River, and Lake foall be boiled to a confur: sption,
Bearn and Bigorre by Heaveiily fire fhall be in diftrefs.
| ANNOT. | à
Upgesen and Bigorre are two Provinces of Frances thereft is plain: He | a
XCLX, | 1 |
French. pt
Milan, Ferrare, Turin & Aquilee,
Capne, Benndis, vexez par gent Celtique,
Par le Lion & Phalanpe Aquilee,
Quand Rowe aura le chief vieux Britannique.


Enpliff.
Milan, Fetrara, Turin, amd Aquileia, A
Capne, Brandis: fhall hs wexed by the French, Hi
By the Lion and troop of Aquileia, Nes
When Rome fball have an old Brittanick Hedd. |


ANNOT,
The Cities here mentioned are all in Zta/9.


French.

Le boutefeti par fon feu attrapé,
Du feu du Ciel.a Tartas & Comminge,
Foix, Aux , Maxere, haut vieillard efcapé,
Par ceux de Hefs, de Saxe & de Turinge.


The true Prophecies


Englifh.

The incendiary foall be overtaken by bis own fire,

Heavenly fire fball fall at Tartas and Cominge,

Foix, Auch, Mazetre, 2 tall old maw fhall efcape,

By the means of thofe of Heffia Saxony and Turinge.

| ANNOT. le
Tartas, Cominge, Foix, Auch, Maxtreare Towns in France,  Heffia, Saxony; tad

Toringe are Provinces of Germany, Que Re] oe


4


ee ee


CENTURY VI


eae
a ee


ne


Tu
I.
French.
— Utour des Monts Pyrences grand amas,


De gent eftrange fecourit Roy nouveau,
Prés de Garonne du grand Temple du Mas


Un Romain Chef le craindra dedans l'Eau.


* Le
Enghth.
About the Pyrenean. Mowntains there shall be a great gathering
we à + S
Of frange Nations to fuctour a new King;
Near Garonne and the vreat Temple of Mas,
A Roman Captain shall fear bin inthe Water.


ANNOT.


The Pyresean Mountains arethofethat part Spain from Frances Garonne is the
River that runneth at Bordeaux”) it feemeth'then, that upon that River a Rosa
Captain fhall ftand in much fear of the new King :before mentioned.


French,


NT M
Michael Noftradamus. |


À be true Propbecies
IT.
French.
En Ja cing cens oëtante plus & moins,
On attendra le fiecle bien eftrange,
En l'an fept cens & trois (cieux en tefmoins, )
Regnes plufieurs un a cinq feront change,


Englifh.
In the year five hundred fourfcore more or lefs,
There shall be a flrange Age,
In the year feven hundred and three (witnefs Heaven, )
Many Kingdoms,one to five shall be changed,
ANN OT.
VVhat ftrange age it was inthe year 1580, every one may fatisfie himfelf by Hi-


ftory. As for the year 1703. our Author faith there will be great wonders. ‘chiefly
there (hall many changesbe in Kingdoms, infomuch, that one fhall be divided into


five.
IIL


French,

Fleuve qu’efproune le nouveau hay Celtique,
Sera en grande de l’Empire difcorde :
Le jeune Prince par gent Ecclefiaftique,
Le Sceptre ofté Corone de concorde,

Englifh.
The River that makes tryal of the new born Celtick,
Shall be at great variance with the Empire,
The young Prince fhall be an Ecclefiaftical perfon,
And have bis Scepter taken off, and the Crown of concord.


ANN OT.


This River is the River of Rhyne , becaufe the ancient French when they hada
King newly born, they ufed to put him upon a Target,to make him {wim upon that
River, to try whether by his fwimming he was lawfully begotten or no; the meaning
therefore is, that this new born Celtique or French King fhall be at variance with che
Empire, and chatin his young years the Clergy fhall take his Scepter and Crown
from him.

LV.
French.
Fleuve Celtique changera de Rivage,
Plus ne tiendra la Cité d’Agripine,
Tout tranfmué hormis le viel Language,
Saturn, Leo, Mars, Cancer en rapine.


of Michael Noftradamus.
Enpglifh:


The River of the Low-Countreys (ball change ber Shoare,
It shall touch no more the City of Agrippina, |
All shall be transformed, except the old Langnage,
Saturn, Leo, Mars, Cancer ir Rapine.


ANN OT.

This isa ftrange prediétion, if it fhould prove true, that the Rhise fhould change
its courfe, and fhould touch no more the City of Colen, which is here called
Agrippina ; becaufe its name in Latine is Colonta Agrippina, being a Colony of the
Romans, built by M. Agrippa, fon in Law to Awgufluss others fay by Agrippina,
Mother to the Emperour Nero,

The laft Verfe fignifieth no more than aa unfortunate pofition and Afpeé of
the two Planets, Safwr# and cars, and of the two Signs, Leo and


iby Hi Cancer,
| city , V:
ed into French.


Si grand famine parune peftifere,
Par pluye longue Je long du Pole Artique.
Samarobryn cent lieux de l’Hemifphere,
Vivront fans loy exempt de politique.
Englifh.
So great a famine with a plague, af
Through a long Rain fhall come along the Aruick Pele,
Somarobryn a hundred Leagues from the Hemi
Shall live without Law, exempt from pollicy.
| ANNOT.
H The two laft Verfes foretel a great Plague and Famine that fhall come from the
North, by the means of thelong Rain,


Samarobrys he calls a people, that fhall be a hundred Leagues from our Hemif-
phere, and fhalllive without Law and Policy.


FDIDETE
Jf ?


y ha D

th | VE

neaning Frenth:

rite Apparoiltra vers [eféptentrion,

Gort | Non loing de Cancer l’eftoille chevelu,


Suxe Sienne, Boëce, Eretrion,
Mourra de Rome’ grand, la nu'& difperue.
Englifh.
Towards the North fuall appear,
Nor far from Caneer,ablaxing Star,
Suza, Sienna, Boece, Eretrion,
There fhall die at Rome a great man, the wight being paft.


Hh 2 ANNOT:


|
UN
wy


236 T be true Prophecies
ANNOT,

Here he foretelleth the apparition of a Commet that fhall be vertical to the Ci.
ties here named, and not far from the Sign of Cancer, at which time a great perfon
{hall die at Rome, about the dawning of the day,

VIE
French.


Norvege & Dace, & l'Ifle Britannique,
Par les unés freres feront vexées, .
Le chef Romain ilu du fang Gallique,


Et les copies aux forefts repoulées.


Englifh.
Norvegia, and Dacia, and the Brittifh Iflawd, wove
Shall be vexed by the Brothers united. LUS,


The Roman Captain iffued from French blood,
His Forces [ball be beaten back to the Forrest,


AN NOT.
The difficulty :lyes in che word Brethers, which I fuppofe to be the United Pro-
vinces.  Thereftis plain,
VIII.
French. |


Ceux qui eftoient en regne pour fcavoir,
Au Royal change deviendront à pauvris,
Uns exilez fans appuy, Or navoir,
Lettrez & lettres ne feront a grand pris.
Englifh.

Thofe that were in efleem for their learning, |
Upon the change of a King [hall become poor, En
Some banifbed, without help, having no Gold, ho
Learned and learning fhall not be much valued. ties


ANNOT.
This Prophecie is clear enough, and here the Author hath faid nothing, but whac


Ess à


doth commonly happen.


+"


IX,
French.


Aux Temples Saints feront faits grands fcandales,
Comptez feront peur honneurs & louanges,

D'un que lon grave d'Argent, d'Or les Medals,
La fin fera en tourmens bien eftranges.


pli


0 f Michael Noftradamus.


. Englith.
To the holy Temples fball be done great fcardals,
That fhall be accounted for honours and praifes,
By one, whofe medals are graven in Gold and Silver,
The end of it fball be in very flrange torments.
ANNOT.
Here the Reader muft underftapd that the Author was a Roman Catholick, and
therefore calleth Holy Temples, the Churches of the Romi/h Religion, which inthe
beginning of the Civil Wars in France, weremuch abafed.by thofe of the Proteftant
Religion, then called Hugsenots, whofe chief was Henry King of Navarre, who was
the only man amongit the Proteftant party, that could have Money and Medals
coined to his ftamp, as being King of Navarre, But the left Verfe of this Prophecie
proved too true, when upon St. Bartholomews day, the 24 of Auguff, inthe year
1572, the general Maffacre of che Proteftants was made through France.


X.
French.
Un peu du temps les Temples des Couleurs,
De blanc & noir des deux entremiflée,
Rouges & jaunes leur embleront Jes leurs,
Sang, terre, pefte, faim, feu, eau aitollée.
Engdifh.
Within a little while the Temples of the Colours,
White and Black fball be intermixt,
Red and Yellow shall take away their Colours,
Blood, earth, plague, famine, fire, water shall deStroy them.
: ANN OT.
By the Temples of the Colours VVhice and Black, I fuppofe he means that of
Peace, and of VVar; by the Red and Yellow, may be meant the Empire
of the Sweads,. who fhail be at variance togethers and by theirlong V Var thall


bring the Plagues hére mentioned, as itcame to pals in the V Vais of Germany, be-
tween che Empeérour and Gu/tavus Adolphus, King of the Sweads, .


XI.
Frei b.
Les fept rameaux a trois feront reduits,
Les plus ailgez feront. farprins par morts,
Fratricider les deux feront feduits,
Les Conjures en dormant feront morts.
Englih.
The fevem branches [ball be reduced to three,
The eldeft fhall be furprifed by death,
Two fball be faid to kill their Brothers,
The Confpirators fhall be killed, being afleep.


L'on


The true Prophecies


ANNOT.

It is apparent, that he fpeaks of feven Brethren, that fhall be reduced tothree,
whereof the eldeft fon fhall be furprifed by death, and two of the reft {hall be faid
to have murdéred their Brother, the Confpirators fhall afterwards be killed in their
fleep,

XII.
French.

Drefler Copie pour monter à l'Empire,

Du Vatican te lang R oyal tiendra,

Flamens, Anglois, Efpasne afpire,

fee:
Contre l'Italie & France contendra.
Enohfh.

) raife an Army, for to afcend unto the Empire,
the Vatican, the Kc;al blood fhall endeavour
‘lemings, Englith, Spain /ball afpire,


4 nd foall contend againft Italy and France.


A N N O Ts
This prediction fignifies po more, but chat there fhall be a great commotion

among the Nations, of Ewrope, concerning the election ofa Pope, which is called
here the Empire of the vatican; becaufe the Vatican is the Popes Palace in
Rove. :

EXIT,

French.
Un dubieux ne viendra loing du regne,
La plus grand part le voudra fouftenir,


Un Capitole ne voudra point quil regne,
Sa grande Chaire ne pourra maintenir.


Englifh.
A doubtful man fball not come far from the. Reign,
The greateft part will uphold bine,
A Capitol mill not confent that he foould Reign,
His great Chair be [ball not be able to maintain.
ANNOT.

What fhould that doubtful man be, whom our Author dath mention here. i not.
eafie to be underftood; but it feemeth that it thall be fome body pretending to
the Popedom, who fhall havea great party for himfelf, and yee for ail that fhall be
excluded, and not able to keep his Seats fo that this Prophecie is but the fecond parc
of the foregoing ; for they have botharelationtogether. The Capitol anciently


was the Citadel of Rome, and now is the place where the Courts of Judicature meer,
called Campidoglio,


French)


Otion
called
en


not: Bl
ding t0
all be
ud pat
centl)
mest,


Of Michael Noftradamus.


XIV.
French.
Loing de fa Terre Roy perdra la Bataille,
Prompt, elchapé pourfuivy, fuivant pris,
Ignare pris foubs la dorée maille,


Soubs feint habit, & l’Ennemy furpris,


| | Englith.
Far from bis Countrey the King fball loofe a Battle,
Nimble, efcaped, followed, following, taken,
Ignorantly taken under the gilded Coat of Mail,
Under a feigned habit the enemy taken,
ANN OT.

This Prophecy was fulfilled in-the year 1578. when Des Sebaftien King of Portu-
gal, went into Affrica, to help and fuccour Adwley Hamet 5 againft Maley Malic, that
had expelled him out of che Kingdom of Fez and Morecco, and there fought that fa-
mous Battle of 4/cafferquibir, wherein his whole Army was routed, and himfelfflain
by the Moores, and his body afterwards fold to the King of Spain for a 100000,
Crowns,


. X V.
French. |
Deflous la Tombe fera trouvé le Prince,
Qu'aura le pris par deflus Nuremberg :
L’Efpagnol Roy en Capricorne mince,
Feinct & trahy par le grand Cutitemberg.
Englifh,
Onder the Tomb shall be found the Prince,
That shall have 4 price above Nuremberg,
That Spanith King in Capricorn shall be thine,
Decéived and betrayed by the oreat Vutitemberg.


ANNOT.


VVe heat of no Prince that had that advantage upon Nuremberg, but only Ga/ta-
vus Adolphus King of Sweden, who tookic. The lat two Verfes fignifie no more,
then that the King of Spain fhall be wafted at the time when the Sun is in Capricorn.


XVI.
French.


Ce queravy fera du jeune Milve,

Par les Normans de France & Picardy,
Les noirs du Temple du lieu de Negrifilve:
Feront aux Berge & feu de Lombardie:


That which shall be taken from the young Kite,
By the Normans of France and Picardie,
The black ones of the Temple of the place, called black Forreft.


Shall make a Rendezveuw and a frre in Lombardie.


The meaning is, that what the Normsaus and thofe of Picardie thall fave from the
hand of a young conquering Prince , the fame fhall be imployed in building a Tem-
ple in the black Forreft, which is that part ofthe Forreft of Arden, that lies near Be-
. bensia, and anggher part of it to build a Houfe in Lombardie,


Apres les livres bruflezdes Atiniers,
Conttaints feront changer d’habits-divers :
urnins brüflez'par les meulfiéts,
part qui ne fera convers.


Pes Swit
Hors la
After tl


1


This feems to foretell a perfecution of ignorant men againft the learned ; after
which fhall happena confufion amongft the ignorant perfons, who fhall be forced to


j L f
)0 HR
JE DOCRS


plufy


difguife themfelves.


The laft two Verfes feem to be of the fame fenfe, for by the Saturnins I under-
ftand ftudious people, and by the 44i//ers rude and unlearned perfons,


Par les Phyfiques le grand Roy delaiflé,
Par fort non art de!’ Ebrieu eft en vie,
fon Genre au Regne hault poulé,
Gracedonnéé agent qui Chrift envie.


Q »


buy xX


>


The true Prophecies


Englith.


ANNOT.


XVII.


French:


Enpglifh:


(ball be burat, the Affes,
x 7 17 , . . :
Shall be compelled feveral times to change their Cloaths,
The Saturnins shall be burnt by the Millers,
Except the greater part,that shall not be difcovered.


ANNOT.


X VIII.
French.


Englith.


The great King being forfaken by Phyficians,
Shall be kept alive by the Magick and not by the art of a Few,
He, and bis kindred fhall be fet at the top of the Kingdom,
Grace fhall be given to a Nation that envieth Chrift.
ANNOT.
Thisin plain words fignifieth no more, but that a King fhall be defparately fick


and forfaken by his Phyficians, and fhall recover by the help ofa Jew, for which faa
thofe of that Nation fhall be reeftablifhed in his Countrey,


fhall have a new Pope , expreffed here
chat is, in his Pontifical Garments,


of Michael N oftradanus,
XIE
| eoisaf a à French.
Là vraye flamme éngloutira la Dame,
: One voudra mettre les Innocens a feu, ;
Pres de l’auflaut l’exercites’enflamme, :
Quand dans Seville mohftre en Bocuf fera veus
* Englifh, .
The true flame fhall fwallow up the Lady,
That went abont.to burn the guiltlefs,
Before the Affault the Army [ball be incouraged,
When in Seville,a Monfter like an Ox fhall be fen.
: ANNOT. _, Lui
seville is the chiefeft City of e4ndalufiaa Province in spain s the reftis plaim
NXXE
| | | French.
L'Union feinte fera peu de durée,
Les uns changes reformez la plus part :
Dans les Vailfeaux fera gent endurée, ™
Lors aura Rome un nouveau Leopart.
Bt ate. Englifh.
The feigned union foall not laft long, hoa ates
Some fhall be changed,others for. the moft part reformed,
In the Ships people fball be per d up, |
Then fball Rome have a new Leopard. ~
ANNOT. . )


«hen the things contained in the t
by the word Leopard from the varioufitels,


x XL

SUV RAGE.
Quand ceux du Pole Artique unis enfemble,
En Orient grand effrayeur & crainte,
F(leu nouveau fouftenu le grand tremble,
Rodes, Bifance de fang Barbare taince.

. Englifh. ous

When thofe of the Artick Pole fall be united together,
There fball be in the Eaft a great fear and trembling,
One hall be newly Elected, that [hall bear the brunt,
Rodes, Bilance, /ball be dy dwitb Barbarian blood,


ti MNNOT


hree firft Verfes thall come to pafs,then Rome


342 Theïrue Prophecies


ANNOT,
This foretelleth an union between the Ewrdpeens, or Nations of the North againft
the Eaftern people, or Turks, and that the Chriftians: fhall make choice of fuch a


General, that fhall make the Eaft quake , and get fuch Victories, whereby Rhodes
and Conftantinople fhall be dyed with Turkith blood,


XXII

French. à
Dedans la Terre du grand Temple Ceïique,
Neveu a Londres par paix femre meuttr
La Barque alorsdeviendra Schifmatique,
Liberte feinte {era au corne & cry.


Englth.
Within the ground of the great Creleftial Tenzple,
A Nephew atLondén by a fained peace fball be murdered.
The Boat at that tinre fhall become S chifmatical,
À fained liberiy fhall be with Aue and Cry.
AN NOT:
I think chat by the great Caleftial Temple , he meaneth that of St, Panl, in which,
or inthe ground abage it, thallbe murdered a Nephew by his Uncle, which (hall


caule great divifions and diffenfions in the City, compared here toa Boat, and chat
a diffembled or fained liberty thall be proclaimed.


XXITI,
© French.
Defpit de Roy, numifmes defcriez,
Peuples feront efmeus contre leur Roy,
Paix fait nouveau, Saintes Loix empiréés,
Rapis onc fut en fi piteux arroy.
Englifh.
The defpight of aK ing and Coin being brought lower
People fhall rife againft their King,
Peace newly made, Holy Laws being made wore,
Rapis was never in fuch a great diforder.
ANNOT,


The firft thing here to be obferved, is the word Rapis, which is the dnagramme of


Paris, which he faith was never in fuch a trouble before » asit thall be when the
people thal! rebet againft the King for hatred, and becanfe he (hall have put


low the
priceand jntrinfical value of Coin and Money ; he foretelleth alfo that therefhall be
anew Peacemade, and chat the Holy Laws hall be much impaired,
XXIV. ;
French.


Mars & le Sceptre {¢ trouvera conjoint,
Defloubs Cancer calamiteufe guerre,


Un peu apres fera nouveau Roy oingt.
Qui par long temps pacificra la Terre,


~ shea


+ @
:


= —
=> *


of Michaël Noftradamus.
: i} 4 Brig hits: 4 a3 seared ld?
Mais and the Scepter, being conjoyned together)"
Under Cancer fhall be à calamitows War, |
A little while after à new King fball be anointed,
Who for a long time fhall pacifie the Earth,
% ANNO T. |
The meaning of this is, that when che Planet of Mars thal! be in conjunction with
the conftellation he calleth here theSceprer,that then fhall be a very calamitous ¥ Var,
the ‘two aft Verfes are plain enough of themfelves. FR has
XXV,
| French.
Par Mars contraire fera la Monarchie,
Du grand Pefcheur en trouble ruineux,
Jeune, noir, rouge prendra la Hierarchie,
Les prodirèurs iront jout bruineux.
| Englifh.
By Mars contrary hall the Monarchy Me
Of the great Fifberman, be brought into ruinoïs trouble,
A young, black, red fhall poffe/s himftlf of the Hierarchy,
The Traitors foall undertake it on a mifty day.
3 a eae ENO T | |
This Prophecie is concerning a ceriin Pope, fignified here by the word of great
Fifhermas: becaufe in his Seal is gravena Fihgnane and therefore in all his Bulls
and Expeditions,it is always written, Datum Rom ub figillo pi(caterrs: this Pope then
it feemeth, fhall be brought to rüine,and another it feemeth fhall fucceed him,having
here three Epithetes, viz. Young, Black, and Red, which fignifieth, that againft the
common of the election of Popes, he thall be elected young, and thall be Black in
his complexion, and Red in Cloaths, vz, a Cardinal, Héerarchy isa Greek work,
- fignifying Dominion overtheChurch, Thelaft Verfe needeth no explication, being
plain enough of it felf. 3


XX VI.
French.
Quattre ans le fiege quelque peu bien tiendra,
Un furviendra libidineux de vie,
“Ravenna, & Pife, Verone fouftiendront,
Pour eflever la Croix de Pape envié.
| La 8 -Englifh, — |
Four years he fhall keep the Papal feat pretty well,
Then fhall fucceed one of a libidinous life,
| Ravenna, Pifa, fball take Verona’s part,
To raife up the Popes Crofs to Life.


1 2 ANNOT!


Thetrne Prophecies


RE A NNOT. AE Ne

fhis Predi&tion feemeth to have tot only arelation to the foregoing, but aïfo à

connexion; for the Author ftill handleth the matter ofthe Popedome, and faith,

thac after that Pope fhall have Reigried four years, there fhall fucceed one chat fhall

be notorious for debauéhednefs and lechery, and that chofe Towns he mentioneth
here ( which are allin Italy ) fhaïl take the Popes part.


XXVIL
French.
Dedans les [les de'cing fleuves’ a un,
Par lé croiflant du grand Chyren Sels,
Par les bruynes de l'air fureur de l'un,
Six elchapez, chachez fardeaux de lin.
Englifh:
In the Iflands from five Rivers to one,
By the increafe of great Chyren Selin,
By the Fro&t of the Air one fhall under furious,
Six shall efcape, hidden within bundles of Flax.
ANNOT.
Chyren by tranfpofition is taken for Henry, and Selin for a King called fos becaufe


it is the name of a Turkifh Emperobr: So that by this Stanza Î fuppofe he means
Henry I, his Mafter, King of France. The reft is plain, ter r


XX VIIL
French.
Le grand Celtique entrera d@dans Rome,
vi Menant amas d’exil@ & bannis,
fa | Le grand Pafteur mettra a mort tout homme,
Qu pour le Cog eftotent aux Alpes unis. D LEXCL
Englifh. |
The great Celtique /hall enter into Rome,
Leading with him a great number of banifbed men
The great Shepheard fball put to death every man
That was united forthe Cock near the Alpes.
AN NOT.
Becäufe this word Celriguwe is often repeated in this Book, it would not be amifé
lu to fatisfie the Reader of the meaning ofit ; it is properly the Nation of thé Flemsis $5


and fome others of the Low-Countreys as far as the Mafeandthe Rhyne, which
| añciently were called GalliCelte, by the great Shepheard, is meant the Pope, aad


244


9


?


by the Cock is meant the French Naion. ‘The reft'is eafie, |
X XIX,
French.
La Veufve Sainte entendant les nouvelles,
D: {es rameaux mis en perplex & trouble
fll Quifera duit appaifer les querelles,
| Par fon pourchas des Razes.fera comble.


?


cie
means


eas |


min
which
4, ul


_ Branches, are the Clergy men, and the fhaven heads the Priefts


of Michael Noftradarius,


| Englith.
The holy Widow hearing the News
Of her Branches put in perplexity or trouble,
That fhall be skilfull in appeajing of quarrels,
By bis purchafe fhall make a heap of fbaven beads.
ANNOT. |
By the holy Widow, is meantthe City of Rome, whichis called in /taHan, Roma ls
Santa, becaule of the blood of fo many Martyrs that hath been fhed there, forthe
maintenance of the Chriftian Religion, he callethit a Widow; becaufe at thattime
there will be no Popeelected, and there fhall’be a kind of interregnum, asit always
happens when a Pope is dead, until the new one he ele@ed, : What he callech here
XXX,
cask. French,
Par l'apparence de feinte Saingteté,
Sera trahy aux ennemis le fiége,
Nuit qu'on croiofd dormir en feureté,
Pres de Brabant marcheront ceux de Liège,
| | Englifh.
By the appearance of a feigned bolinefs,
The fiege fhall be betrayed to the enemies,
In a night that every one thought to be fecure,
Near Brabant fball march thofe of Liege.
DR RE CANNOT FR ï ur LS
Brabant is one of the feventeen Provinces, and Liege is agteat City upon the
River of Maze. Thereftisnocdifficulr: :
| XXXL
eel French.
Roy*trouvera ce quil defiroit tant,
Quand le Prelat fera repris a tort,
Relponfe au Duc le rendra mal content,
Qui dans Milan mettra plufieurs a mort.


je Englifh. |
À King shall find what be fo much longed for;
When a Prelate shall be cenfured wrongfully,
An anfwer tothe Duke will make bim difcontented,
Who in Milan fhall put many to death,
ANNOT, oh Ni
This Prophecie is too indefinite, to admit of a particular fenfe ; for there be {6
many Prelates, fo many Kings, fo many Dakes, thaticis not eafie to fix upon anÿ
particular one, andtherefore we inuft leave this Stanza in Democritws’s V Vell,


French; -


The irne Propbectes
XXXII
French. eee |
Par trahifon de verges a Mort bated, |
Puis furmonté*fera par fon defordre,
Confeil frivole au grand captif fentu,
Nez par fureur quand Berigh viendra mordre.
Si HR oh SR : |
By Treafon one fball be beaten with rods to death,
“Then'the Traitor fball be overcome by bis diforder,
The great one Prifoner foall try a frivilous Counfel,


When Berich foall bite anothers nofe through anger,


ANNOT. EME
The words are fo plain, that every one may make his own interpritation of
hy them. | The:
|  XXKXIIL telatio
| French. te
Sa main derniere par Alus fanguinaire
{| Ne le pourra par Ja Mer garentir, |
| Entre deux fleuves craindra main militaire,
i Le noir l’Ireux le fera repentir. \
| Englifh.
His laft band bloody through Alus,
| Shall not fave him by Sea,
it Between two Rivers be foall fear the military hand,
| The black and Collerick:one [ball make bint repent.


ANNOT,
This feemeth to be concerning a bloody man, that had killed one 4/55; and
fought to fave himfelf by Sea; but was taken between two Rivers, and put co death
by the command of one chat was a black and Cholerick man: Thr


Lint X XXIV.
French.
De feu volant la machination,
Viendra troubler le Chef des Affiegez,
Dedans fera telle fedition,
Qu’en defefpoir feront les profligez:
Englif_t.
The: dewifing of flying fire
Shall trouble fo much the Captagn of the Befieged,
And within fhall be fuch mutiny,
That the Befieged fhall be in defpair.
ANNOT:
pen . _ Itisa Fort or Town befieged byan Enemy, who fhall torment the befieged fo
a Bombs and Granadoes , and other flying fire , that they fhall defpair to


ae


SE RTD,


Frinchs


of Michael Noftradamus.


XX XY,
French.


| Pres de Rio & proche Blanchelaine,

Aries, Taurus, Cancer, Leo, La Vierge,

| Mars , Fupiter, le Sol ardra grand plaine,

Bois & Citez, Lettres cachez au Cierge.

ll Englifh.

Near Rion going to Blanchelaine,

Aries, Taurus, Cancer, Leo, Virgo,

Mars, Jupiter, Sol hall burn a great Plain,
de Woods and. Cities, Letters hidden in a wax Candle,
mi ANNOT.

A The meaning of it is, that whenby the virtues and meetings of the faid Con-


|| ftellations, a great plain {hall be burnt by Rios ( whichisa City in Anvérgne) that
}| then Letters fhall be found hidden ina wax Candle.


XXXVI.
French,
Ne bien ne mal par bataille terreftre,
Ne parviendra au.confins dé peroufe,
1 Rebeller pife, Florence voir mal eftre,
|| Roy nuitbleféfur mulet a noire houfe,
Englifh.
Neither good nor evil by a Land-fight,
Shall reach tothe Borders of Peruia,
SU à Pifa fall rebel, Florence fhall be in an ill cafe,
ven | A King being upon his Mule fhall be wounded in the night time,
ey ANNOT.
|. Perufe, Pifa, and Florence are Cities in Maly ; the ref is plain.
XXXIL
| French.
} L'œuvre anciennefe patachevera,
Du toit cherra fur le grand mal ruine,
| Innocgnt fait, mort on accuféra!
|| 6: Nocent caché taillis a bruine.
| Englifh.
The ancient work shall be finished,
From the tiling shall fall upon the great one an evil ruine...
The innocent declared to be fo, shall be aceufed after bis death,
The guilty shall be hidden in a wood in a mifty weather,


aged lo
dit 0 |)


ANNOT.


green ene


tad


MERS [am oS SRR EERE


248 2: Phe wne Prophecies


brought to perfection, Ï fuppofe it to be the Louvere,w
the Reign of fe


upon a great Mm


ANNOT, | a as, |
By the firft Verfe isunderftood an ancient building, which fhall be finifhed and
hich hath beena building in
ven Kings. But before ic be throughly finifhed, fome ruine fhiall fall
an and kill him: one declared innocent of the fact hall be accufed of
teath , and he that fhall be guilty of it fhall efcape by hiding himfelf ina


jt after his deat
V Vood ia mifty weather, :


XX VEER
French.
Aux profligez de Paix les ennemis,
Apres avoir l'Italie fuperée,
Noir fanguinäire, rouge fera commis,
Feu, fang verfer, eau de fang colorée.
Énglifh,
Tothe vanquifhed the enemies of peace,
Afier they.fball have overcome Italy,
A bloody black one fhall be committed,
Fire and blood fall be powerd,and water coloured with blood.
| ANNOT. . Ka
A bloody black man fhall be put into the hands of the vanquithed, by thofe that
(vere enemies to peace , after they have conquered Jtaly, whence thall proceed fire
and blood, and water coloured with blood:


XXKIX,
French.


L’ Enfant du Regne par Paternelle prinfé,
F xpolier fera pour delivrer,
Aupres du Lac Trafyw en la Tour prinfe,
La troupe hoftage-pour trop fort s ényvrer.
Englifh. |
The Child of the Kingdom, through bis Fathers imprifonement,
Shall be deprived of bis Kingdom for the delivering of his father,
Near the Lake Trafymene fball be taken in a Lower,
The troop that was in Hoftage, being drunk.
ANNOT. AE"
The Lake Trafymene in Italy , is that near which Æswibal got chat famous Battle
üpon the Remans, Thereftis as plain as che words can bear, Wace 2 7


XL.
L French.
Grand de Mogoncé pour grande foif efteindre,
Sera privé de fa grand dignité,
Ceux de Cologne fi fort le viendront plaindre,
Que le grand Groppe au Rhin fera jette.


Enelith;


CE |


mt


pee, |


fur,


of Michael Noftradamus.
Englifh. |
The great one of Ments.for to quench a great thirft,
Shall be deprived of his high dignity, 3 Vy
Thofe of Colen fhall bemoan him fo much. rr dl i
Thatethe great Groppe Jhall be thrown into the Rhine. Hy
: ANNOT. nee
This foretelleth the fall of an Archbithop of cHents, in Latine eMoguntia, who is
the firft Ecclefiaftical Elector , and fhall be deprived of his dignity: by a covetoùs


and powerful Prince to fatisfie his covetoufnefs, at which. thofe of Coles his neigh-
bours fhall be fo inceñfed, chat they fhall chrow thar covetous perfon into the Rhine,


XL,
French,
Les fecond Chef du Regne Dannemark ,
“Par ceux de Frize & l'[fle Britannique, |
Fera delpendre plus de cent mille mark, ie.
Vain.exploiter voiage en Italique. |
: wi Boat ee Englith. : | EN ae
The fecond head of the Kingdom of Dannemark, | ae
By thofe of Friezeland, and the Brittith [fland, i
Shail canfe to be [pent above 100006 Mark ; a
Vainly endeavouring a journey into Italy, Wee i


| von apap 3 A NN OT: ao snoM nl !
* This figntfieth onely a conjunétionofthe Dwrch, Danifh, and Englifh Forces; to pi)
gttempt fomething in Jtaly , which fhall prove frniclefs, and coft a greac deal of i
Money,
‘XLIT
AAA © French.
A lQgmioa {era laifle le Regne,  :
Du grand Selin, qui plus fera de-fair,
Par |’Italieeftendta fon enfeigne,
Regira par prudent contrefait. rn
< Englith. (a | 4
nto YOgmion fhall be left the Kingdom,
Of great Selyn, who fball do more then the reft,
Through Italy be fhall fpread his Enfigns,
He fball govern by a prudent diffemulation.
ss oa ANNOT. À wis
VVe have faid before, that when ever the Author {peaks of Ognion , he meañetf
the King of France, the meaning therefore ot this whole Stanzais, that Hesry the |
11. Sonto Francis the I, whom he calls here great Selina, {hall do more in Zsaly thea ey
his Predeceffors had done,which proved true , and he governed his Kingdom witha iil
prudent diffimulation, | |
Kk French. |


T be true Prophecies
ALIII:
French.
Long ‘temps fera fans eftre habitée,
Ou Siene & Marne autour vient arroufer,
De la Thamife & Martiaux tentée,
Deceus les gardes en evidant repouffer.
‘duo Englifh.
A great while [hall be unbabited,
Where Seine, and Marne comes to water about,
Being attempted by the Thames and Martial people,
The Guards deceived in thinking to refift.
| ANNOT. RAR RES
By the two firft Verfes , He meaneth without doubt the City of Paris 5. for it is


watered by thofe two Rivers the Seine and Marne, that joyn together at the head of
it, but how this City fhould become unhabited is the great queftion , and chiefly by


the means here alledged, viz. of the Englifh fignified by the Thames, and other Mar-


tial people, the Guards deceived in thinking to repulfe theenemy,
XLV.
French,
De nuict par Nantes V’Iris apparoiftra,
Des Arcs Marins fufciteront la pluye :
Arabique Goulfre grand claffe parfondra,
Un Monftre en Saxe naiftre d'Oùrs & Truye.
| … Englith.
By night in Nantes the Rain-bow [ball appear,
Sea Rain-bows [hall canfe Rain ;
The Arabian Gulf ball drownd a great Fleet,
A Monfter fhall be in Saxony from a Bear and a Sow.
ANNOT. ey
Wavtesisa Cityin France, Iris is the Rainbow, Saxony isa Province in Germany:
the ref is plain.
XLV
anes French.
Le Governeur du Regne bien fcavent,
Ne confentir voulant au fai Royal :
Medite claffe par le contraire vent,
Le remettra a fon plus defloyal.
ons Englith.
The, Governonr of the Kingdom being learned,
Shall not confent to the Kings will :
Fe fbiall intend to fer out a Fleet by a contrary Wind,


Which he [ball put into the hands of the moft difloyal,
ANNOT:


Jus
A LE


lores Bl
bed of

Diy by
be asf


This fignifies that th
fent tohis Kings Deeds


I cannot find
perour, and by t
the Frenc


e Governour or Vice-Roy ofa
; the reft needeth no interpretation.


of Michael Noftradamus. |


ANNOT.


XLVI.
Freach.


Unjufte fera en exil Anvoyé,


Par peftilance aux confins de non feggle,


Refponfe au rouge le fera defvoye,


Roy retirant a


A juft perfon
By plague to th


la Rane & a l'Aigle.


Englifh.


all be bauifbed,,
e Borders of Non fegale, .:.
The anfwer to the red one fball make bim deviate,
Retiring bimfelf to the Frog and the Eagle,


ANNOT.


XLVIL
French.


ast


Kingdom thal refufe to cons


what he meaneth by Won- feggles, by the Eagle he meaneth the Ems
he Frog the King of France, for before he took the. Flower de Luce,


4 bore three Frogs,


Entre deux Monts les deux grandsAffemblez,
De laifferont leur fimulte fecrete, ©


Bruxelle & Dolle par Langres accablez,


Pour a Maline executer leur: pefte.


Englifh:


Between two Mountains the two great ones shall meet,
They shall forfake their Jecret enmity.
Bruflelle and Dolle shall be crushed by Langres,
To put their plague in Execution at Maline.


ANNOT.


Brafelisa Town of Brabant, and {o is Maline, Dolle is one of Bwrgnd) ; Aid


Langres another of France,


La faindeté trop fainéte & fedudiive,


XLVIIL
French.


Accompagne d’une langue diferte,


La Cite vieille, & Parme trop naftive,
Florence & Sienne rendront plus defertes,


Wha trne Prophecies
; Englifh,
The fained and feducing holinefs,
Accompanied with a fluent tongue, |
Shall caufe the old City, and too hafty Parma,
Florence and Sienna to be more defert.
| its ANNKUT
I know not what heineins by theold City, dnlefs it be Rome, by reafon ofiis


antiquity, |
XLIX,


French.
De la partie de Mammer grand Pontife,
Subjuguera les confins du Danube,
Chañler les croix, par fer raffe ne riffe,
Captifs, Or, bagues, plus decent mille Rubles”
Englifh.
From the party of Mammer high Prie€,
They foal fubdue the borders of Danubius,
They fhall expel croffes, by Sword topfe-turey,
Slaves, Gold, Fewels, more than 100000: Rubles.
RE ae |
Some parties of the Popes fide} thall fubdaethofe bordering upon Dassbiér, and
drive away the Priefts, curn all things topfetturvy, make flaves, and take aboory
above the value of roocco, Rubles, “A Ruble isa piece of Gold of the great Mogul,
worth two or three pound fterling, SA En ae


French.
Dedans le puis feront trouvez les Os,
Se l’incefte commis par la Maraftre,
L'eftat changé, en fera bruit des os,
Et aura Mars afcendant pour fon aftre.
| Eoglifh,
In the Well fall be found the bones,
Inceft hall be committed by the Steputother.
The cafa being altered, there feall.be great ftir about the bones.
Aud fhe fhail bave Mars for her afcending Planet,
| ANNOT,
It is the ftrange wickednefs of a woman, that thall inceftuonfly be got with Child
by her Son in Laws and when the is delivered, fhall kill her Child, and throw him
into a VVell; awhileafter the water beginning to corrupt, a fearch thall be made of


the caufe, and then the Childs Bones thall befound, which (hall caufea great ftir,
and for to know this wicked woman, he faith, chat the Planet of ras fhall be the


afcendant in her Horofcope,


French,


Of Michael Noftrad amus.


LE

French:

Peuple aflemble voir nouveau {pe&acle,
Princes & Roys par plufieurs affiftans, |
Piliers faillir, murs, mais comme miracle,
Le Roy fauve &trente des inftans,


sae a :  Englifh;
People affembled to fee a new how, |
Princes and Kings, with many affiftants,
Pillars fhall fail, walls alfo, but as a miracle,
The King faved, and thirty of the flanders by.
HE | i ANNOT. |
., The words of this predi@tion are plain and eafie, and fi
often happeneth, and may happen yet, viz. that wh
be to to fee a new fhow, the Pillars and walls of the Building hall fall, and people


perith by theruine, ( asif ic were bya Miracle ) the King and thirty of the {peta-
tors fhall be preferved,


ann


gnifie no more than what
ere a concourfe of people hall


DA
| | French,
| En lieu du grand qui fera condamné,

“ai | : De prifon hors, fon amy en fa place

boy || L’efpoir Troyez en fix mois Joint, mort né,

Hg | Le Sola l’Uurae feront prins fleuves en glace,
ver an ari Englith.
Inftead of the great one shat foall be condemned
And put out of Prifon, his friend being in his place,
The Trojan hope in fix inonths joyn, fill born,
The Sun in Aquarius, then Rivers hall be frozen.


| j | Log WN OTe te. |
|, By the Trojan hope, is meant a King of France, who after Ke hath been marryed
| fix Months; fhall havea Child ftill born, Hh
| TIL
| ! Oo French:
| ~ Legrand Prelat Celtique a Roy fufpe&,
| De nui& par cours fortira horsdu Regne,
Par Duc fertile a fon grand Roy Bretagne,
x {| Bifance a Cypres, & Tunis infulped.
| | Ay Vial Bnet ET
tir, À The great Celtique Prelate fulpehed by his K ing,
the | Shall in haft by night £0 ont of the Kingdom
| By the means of à Dike the fruitful Britanie, . |
Bifance by Cyprus, aid Tünis ball be unfufpested,


ANNOT,


254


The true Propbectes
ANNOT-


The great Cehique Prelate, was the Cardinal of Lorrais, Brother to the Duke of
Guizfe,who being fufpected by the King, went away by night to Rome,

By fruitfull Brittain, is underftood the province of that name in France, which by
the means of the Duke of Mercure, her Governoùr fhall be unfufpeGed by the


King.


+
La


Liv.
French.
Au point du jours au fecond chant du Coq,
Ceux de Tunes, de Fez, & de Bugie,
Par les Arabes captif le Roy Marog,
L'an mil fix cens & fept, de Liturgie,
| Englifh.
At the break of day, at the fecond crowing of the Cock,
Thofe of Tunis, and Fez, and Bugia,


“By means of the Arabians, shall take Prifoner the King of Morocco


Inithe year 1607. by Liturgie.
ANN OT.


By Liturcie, L fuppofe he meaheth under pretext of Religion. The reft isealié
to be underftood,


LV
French.
Au Chelme Duc, en arrachant l’efponce,
Voile Arabesque voir, fubit defcouverte:
Tripolis, Chio, & ceux de Trapefonce,
Duc prins, Marnegro, & la Cite deferte:
Re Englifh.
The Chelme Duke, in pulling à fpunge,
Shall fee Arabian Sails fuddenly difcovered:
Tripolis, Chios, azdthofe of Trapefan, RE
The Duke fball be taken, Marnegro and the City foall be defert.
AN NOT.


Chelme is à German word, that fignifies a Rogue. By Marnegro, is meant thé
Black Sea, or Wigropont. By pulling a Spunge, I fappofe the great quantity of
Spunges that flick tothe Rocks in that Sea, _ a ait

Tripolis, Chios, and Trapezen; are places in thé Turkifh Dominions;


LVI.
French:


La crainte Armée de l’ennemy Narbon,
E flroyera fi fort les Hefperiques,
Parpignan vuide par l’aveugle d’ Arbon,
Lors Barcelon par Mer donra les piques,


of Michael Noftradamus,
| Englifh.
The feared Army of the enenty Narbon, |
Shall fo much terrifie the Spaniards, | ner
That Parpignan fhall be left empty by the blind d’Arbon,
Then Barcelon by Sea fhall give the Chafe.
HET) ... ANNOT, |
_ Agreat Army gathered about WarZon ; fhall fo much terrifie the Spaniards | that
Parpigsan a Town of theirs fhall be defolate, and left empty by the Governour,here Hit ;
called the blind d’ Arbon ; then Barcelen, which is a Sea-Townin Catalonio,belonging Wg
to the Spaniards hall come to its fuccours, and.chafe the cnemy by Sea. |A
LVI: | ih
French. |
Celuÿ qu’eftoit bien avant dans le Regne,
Ayant Chef rouge proche a la Hierarchie,
Afpre & cruel, & fe fera tant craindre,
Succedera a facrée Monarchie.


| } Englith.
seat He that was a great way inthe Kingdow,
a Having a red head and near the Hier arch op
Harfh and cruel, fall make himfelf fo dreadful,
That he foall fucceed to the Sacred Monarchy,
Oo ANNOT. . |
This isa perfonof great quality and near of blood toa King, who being a Care
dinal, crnel and dreadful, thall be Ele@ted Pope, I fuppofe Clemsent the VII, /
ee DVI.
| French.» _
Entre les deux Monarques efloignez;! *
Lors que le Sol par Selin clair perdue: 1
Simulté grande entre deux indignez, — a |
un | Qu’aux Ifles & Sienne la liberté renduë. til
der, |


| ment Englih;,. | ie
arti Between the two Monarchs that live far one from the other,
iy When the Sun fhall be Ecclipfed by Selene,
ME Great enmity [ball be between them two, |
So that liberty fall be reftered to the Ifles and Sienne.
# D RO NON ES
| Here is nothing difficult but the word Selewe, which is the Moon from the Greek
CET EL


| The meaning is,thar ar fuch a time whenthe Sun is Ecclipfed by the Moon, stenza
and the Iflands about it fhall bear liberty,


rocco


Frenchi


Tbe true Propbectes
LIX.
French.
Dame en fureur:par rage d’adultere,
Viendraa fon Prince conjurer non diré,
‘Mats bref cogneu fera le vitupere,
Que feront mis dixfept a Martyre.
| ae Englifh. |
A Lady in fury by rage of an Adultery,
Shall. come to ber Prince and conjure bim'to fay nothing,
But foortly fall the foameful thing be known,
So that feventeen fhall be put to death.
ANN OT:
The fenfe of this Stanza and the words are plain.
L X.
| French, —
Le Prince hors de fon Terroir Celtique,
Sera trahy, deceu par interprete,
Rouen, Rochelle, par ceux de |’ Armorique,
Au Port de Blavet deceux par Moin & Preftre:
Englifh.
That Prince being ont of his Celtick Countrey, —
Shall be betrayed and deceived by an Interpreter,
Rouen, Rochel, by thofe of Gafcony,


At the Port of Blavet fhall be deceived by Monk and Pris;


ANNOT.
We have faid any times before, whatis meant by the word Celsique, The Port
of Blavet is that of the River of Berdeasx,


LOS
à French.


Le grand Tapis plié ne monftrera,
Fors qu’a demy la plufpart de l’Hiftoire,
Chaffé du Regne afpre loin paroiftra,
Au fait Bellique chacun le viendra croire,
 Englifh.
The great Carpet folded fhall not fbew,
But by half the greatest part. of the Hiftory,
The driven out of the Kingdom fball appear fbarp afar off,
In Warlike matters every one fhall believe bim: ÿ
ANNOT.:


This needeth no interpretation. |
Eoglfh}


of Michael. Noftradamus,


LXII.
French.
Trop tard tous deux les fleurs feront perdües,
Contre lay loy Serpent ne voudra faire,

Des ligueurs forces par gallops confondü:s,
Savone, Albingue, par Monech grand martyre.


Englifb.
Both the flowers fball be loft too late,
Against the Law the Serpent will do nothing,


The forces of the Leaguers by gallops foall be confounded,
Savone, Albingue, by Monech fall fuffer great pain.
ANNOT.
The two firft verfes are too miftical for me; che third fignifieth,
that is, by Troops of Horfes, che Leaguers, viz, chofe chat held
League ; fhall be routed bÿ the Kings Cavalry. The fourth, chat Savene and


Albingue,two Towns of the Genoefes thail be put to much trouble by thofe of Moxeck


cé
and Monaco, another Town neat them; belonging to the Prince of Monaco, a Genoefe
of the houfe of Grimald.


that by gallops.
the party of the


LXILI.
French.
La Dame feule au Regne demurée,
> ° . Â 4 3
L'unique efteint premier au lic d'honneur,
Sept ans fera de douleur eplevrée,
Puis longue vie au regne par bonheur.


Englifh.
The Lady Joall be left to reign alone,


The only one being extinguifbed, firft inthe Bed of Honour,

Seven years fhe [ball weep for grief,

After that fee fball live long in the Reign by good lace.
ANN OT.

The fecond and fourthVerfes per{wade me,that this Stanza came to pafs in the time
of Catharine of Medicus, wife to Henry iI, becaufe the lived Jong, andthe King
died in the bed of Honour, and thus he faich, that fhe was lft to Reign alone s becaule
her four Sons wereall little ones, fo that fhealone was Regent in France.

The fecond Verfe faith, The only one being éxtinguilhed, firff, in che Bed of Honour,
By this word the only oe, the Author meaneth not the only Son, bur the only one


living, fuch as Heary IT was to her, who was extinfinilhed inthe Bed of Hoxosr, and
died of the wound he received at Tilting,


The third Verfe {aith, that after his death, her mouraing lafted {even years,
that is, from the fiift of Asguf 1559. to the firft of Aagufl 1566, becaufe that all
thofe 16 Months that Franezs PI, the had nothing but continual forrow, ley the con-
{piracy of eAmboife, the fecret practifes of the King of Navarre, and Princeof Cond;
his Brother; by the infarre@ion of the Proteftants, when Gharles IX, vifited his
| Kingdom, Aamo 1556: after which the put off her mourning.

The fonrth Verfe fignifieth, that the fhould be long lived s fOr the lived above


LE} 69.


2580 The true Prophecies
60 years, He faithalfo, that fhe was Regent by great luck, that is,great luck for her
felf, but not for the Kingdom , for it was moft unhappy in her time.


LXV,
French.


On ne tiendra pache aucun arrefté,

Tous recevants iront par tromperie,

De trefue & paix, Terre & Mer protefie,
Par Barcelone claffe prins d'induftrie.


Englifh.
No agreement shall be kept,
All thofe that shall admit of it deal falfly ,


There shall be proteftations made by Land and Sea,
Barcelone shall take a Fleer by‘ craft, .


ANNOT, !

This is a defcription of the fad and calamitous eftate of France, in the time of the
Civil wars, when no agreement could be kept on the Remy Carholicks fide, witnefs
the feveral Peaces that were madeand broken, theMaflacre of Faffa, and that in:
famous perfidy’committed by them on St, Bartholomews day, being the 24 of Anguft,
Anno 1572, |

LXV.

French,
Gris & bureau demy ouverte guerre,
De nuit feront aflaillis & pillez,
Le bureau prins paflera par la ferre,
Son Temple ouvert, deux au plaftre grillez.

Englifh,
Between the Gray and fad Gray shall be half open War,
By night they shall be affaulted and plundered,
The fad Gray being taken, shall be put in Cuftody,
His Temple shall be open, two shall be put in the Grate.

ANNOT.

This Stanza affordeth us a commical Hiftory, which is, that aboutthe year 1601,
when there {prang up in France a Kind of Friers, who bofted themfelves to be
the true obfervers of the Rule of St, Francs and that the Cordeliers and Capufhines
did not keep it fo exa@tly,but they had need of a great reformation; theKing Henry IV:
granted them a Convent at Beaw/ort,and upon his example many other places defired
them, they went to poffefs themfelves of thehoufe of /4 Blamet, neat Angierss but
theCordeliers being loath to be difpoffeffed by thefe new comers,called Recollets,did
befiege them by main force, broke open the Gates, fcaled the VValls, the befieged
did not defend themfelves by words or exorcifmes,but with good Stones and Flints;
fo that ifthe people had not come, the fray would not have ended without murder,
fome of them were put in Prifon, others kept inCuftody: thisis the meaning of
the Author, when he faith, There will be half an open war between the Gray and the [44

@r2y; for the Cordeliers have a Gray habit, and the Recolletsa fad Gray.


French


te ofthe Wet


iinet
dot .
ACG ine


ee
lt Atout
AWA,


|


er 1601, MN
rn |


pins
Henry IV:


es deftrel M
rss Dot DR
les dit
beieged A
né Flint A)


emarde


eaning ti


This needeth no Interpretation,


of Michael Noftradamus.
LX VI.
French.
Au fondement de nouvelle fee,
Seront les os du grand Romain trouvez,
Sepulchre en Marbre, apparoiftra converte,
Terre trembler en Auril mal enfetivez.
Englith.
At the foundation of ancw feck,
The Bones of the great Roman shall he found,
The Sepulchre shall appear covered with Marble,
The Earth shall quake in April, they shall be ill buried.
ANNOT.


The meaning is, that when they fhall go about to make a foundation of a houfe,
for a new Sect of Friers; they {hall find the bones of a famous Roman ina Marble
Sepulchre, and that in Apré/the Earth fhall quake, whereby many fhall be {wallow-


LIVRE
French.


Au grand Empire par viendra toutun autres,
Bonte diftant plees de felicité, |
Rege par un iffu non loing du peautre.

ST RON PAS
Corruer Regnes grande intelicité

LS KE
Englifh.

To the great Empire quite another fall Conte)
Being farther from goodiefs and happinefs,
Goverued by onc'of bafe parentage,
The Kingdom fhall fall, a great unbappinels.
ANNOT,


ATS


French.


. Lors que Soldats fureur fediticufe,


Contre leur Chef feront denuit fer livre.
Enemy d’ Albe doibt par main furieule,
Lors vexer Kome & principaux feduire.
Englifh.
When the feduions fury of the Souldiers.
Againft their Chief [ball ake the Iron foine by night,
The enemy d’Albe fall by a furious band


Ther vex Rome, dud fedute the principal one:


LI 2


~ ANNOT.


a


in
if


The true Prophecies


ANN OT,


The Lord de Thou doth judicioufly obferve, that the Pope being unacquainted
with things belonging to War, as to Money, Viduals, and At DR » Was eafily
perfuaded by Car dinal Caraffa to make war againft Spain, for without being provided
ot all chefe chings, he put his Armies into the Field , mec fatis perpendens quam ape.
cunt , milite ac ceteris rebus ad be ue nece[lariis imparatus intempeflive armia[umeret.

{nthe 15, Book of his Hiftory: the Duke SE Urbis had commiffion to raife 6000
Foot and 4,00. Horfésin the Dukedori of eee and in Mark of Ancona. ohn
Caraffe the Popes Nephew was made General of the Army , and being but Earl of
Mortor , was Created Duke of TA by the confifcation of the goods of Mark
An‘ ony REE Camillo dr fini was made General of the Forces ih Rome, and in the


ae rritc " thereof; Béafius of Menluc,the Mars of his time, and by birth a Ga/con,was
pe che King to help(with his: idvice and courage)the Romans, who are alw ays  fic-
ter for che Breviary, then for the Sword,


Befides thefe Forces Filed within the Church Dominions,Charles Caraffa gather-
éd all che Bandittes of Naples and Florence and raitéd fome Regiments of Switz
that came to fuccour the Pope.

With thefe ‘Troops the Pope feized upon the moft important places and perfons
ane to the Spamifh party, as the Colonefesand the yitel/y.
asked fuccours of the Emo: -rour Gharles the V. who prefently commanded
Ferdinand of Toledo Duke of Alba to fuccourthem. He was then tasked in the Pie-
mont and Milanes, torelift the French that were then under the condué of the Mar
fhal of Brifac

Toconclude his defign the better, he wrote many Letters tothe Pope and ae
Colledge of Cardina ls, full of refpect and (ubmiffion , defiring them to moderat
their paf ffion a gainft the = Spanifh } party, but th : Pope being anery by feveral eked
anfwered bin » complaining of many things , which made the Duke refolve to the
war, and tobe there tn Recon:

He took his occafion as a prudent Captain, when thenews. was brought to him
that the Popes Forces were in mutiny againft their General for want of pay , and


nade a great cumult in chenighe, hearing that he was approaching witha great train


of Artillery... Bsovius faith, that the Earl of Montor regar ded more his profit then
the Popes Intereft, and kept back a great part ofthe money that was co pay a
lt


uldiers, whence proceeded this tumule, whi Ni Beteed much-the Duke of 4/x


bufinefs
This is th anation of the two firft Verfes of this Stanza, concerning the mu-
tiny of the Souldie Bae were in the Popes fervice, during which mutiny the enemy


12 +f)
4) sabe


4 did not fail to vex Rome; this word the enemy d’ A lba doth not { rgnifie the ene-
ihe Du ke of Alba; as ifone fhould fay in Latine Hoffis Albazus, He did then
vex Rowe. tor rin afhort time he took Ponte Corvine Frufino Anagnia »Marino,Lavati,
re ref t li, Oftia, Neptuno, Alba Vico-Varro, Monte Fertino, and almoft all che
es of the Roman Territory,
Chis did Dress Rome {fo much, that the General Camillo Urfini made feveral
enches within the V Val! s of Rome, inftead of preferving the outworks; as Mogrluc
wo uld have perfuaded him to do; the alarums were fo great at Rome , that Mortinc
was fain to encourage the Romans, , And tomake à V Varlike Speech to them, which is
inferted in his VVorks.
Moreover; the fame Duke began to feduce the Principals of Réme by his friends
that he had in it, but particularly by the cheat that he put upon the Pope; for his de-
fign being to prevent the French Forces, and to furprize the Pope, he refolved to go
ftreighe to Reme and to bring his defign che better to pafs, he feat “Pyrrbus Coffrede to


the


mu
#15)


inp i
Late]
\ &lly
vides
Bye
er
66000

Tom


Eat of


nd the


| Fe,
OŒAE D


eeneny


\
J


=


of Michael Noftradamus. 261


the Pope, to fee if there was any wayof agreement, to the end chat upon this porpo-
fition the Pope fhould miftruft nothing. In the mean time the Duke of 4//4 was
coming near Rome, at which the Pope was fo angry, that he put this Embafladour in
Prifon, where he was kept till the conclufion of the Peace; in chis fort were the
principal men of Rowse feduced, having no thought of the Spaniards approaches, this
is che relation of the Lord de Thow, Lib. 16.


EG.
French.
La grand pitie {era fans long tarder,
Ceux qui donnoient feront contraints <
Nuds affamez, de froid, foif, foy bander,
Pafier les Monts en {atfant grand elclandie
What a great pitty will it be c’re-long,
Thofe that did give fball be conftrained to receive:
Naked, fantifbed with cold, thirft, to wutiny,
Fe j a : Pus 3 5
To go over the Mountains waking great diforders.
ANNOT,


The’ great. pitty was, when he had no more to give, he was compelled by tl
a) 4


1€
ne
C ie


“o


The Marthal of Rriffac being thus abafed”, fome of his treops forfook him to fol.
low the Duke of Gwife, being for che moft parenaked and ftarved with cold, hunger
and thirft, which makesthe Author to fpecifie hunger ; cold andihirffs want having
compelled chem to disband, they went over the Mountains, novof Present, but the
Apennines ot Moatferrat, and what{o.ver thing they foand was a Fith for their Net.


Ye


TE 7 NE


ts aA re
French.
ays 1 cs +! 1 ni à A ia
Un Ghef du Monde le grand Chezre icra,


Plus outre, aprés aime, craint, redoute,


Sonbruit & los les Cicux furpañlera,
Et du feul titre Victeur fort contente


PEL saree sen SILT IRE


betrue P ropbectes


Englith.
LA Chief of the World the great Cheiren fhall be,
iMorcover, beloved afterwards, feared, dreaded,
His fame and praife [ball go beyond the Heavens.
Aid [hall be contented with the only title of Victor.
ANNOT.

VVe have faid already before,that the Author by the word Cheyres meaneth Hewry
the II, his Mafter, by tranfpofition of Letters, who as he faith was contented with
the bare title of Vittorieux, when he had undertaken the protection of the German
Princes againft che Emperour Char/es the V.

EX: XE
French.
Quand on viendra Île grand Roy parenter,
Avant quil ait du tout PAme trendue,
On le'verra bien toft apparenter,
D'Aigles, Lions, Croix, Courone de Rue.
Englith.
When they fball come to celebrate the obfequies of the great King,
A day before be be quite dead,
He fhall be [een prefently to be allyed
With Eagles, Lions, Croffes, Crowns of Rite.
ANNOT.

In the general Peace made Auno 1559.two Marriages were concluded, one of El:-
zabeth of France, daughter to Henry Il. King of France, with Philip 1, King of Spain,
which was Celebrated at Parés withan extraordinary magnificence , in the prefence
of the Duke of Alba, the Prince of Orenge,and the Earl of Egmont,who came to fetch
the Princefs.

In the Celebrating of thefe Nuptials happened the unfortunate death of Henry IT;
This brought fuch a fadaefs to the Court, that che fecond match which was between


Margaret of France , Daughter to Francis I. andthe Duke of Savoy was Celebrated
without{olemnity,

V Ve mutt add to this, that the Duke weareth in his Coat of Arms fome Eagles,
fome Lions, fome Croffes, and a Crown of Rue ; by this we underftand this Stanza,
which faith, that che King being mortally wounded,every one was preparing himfelf
co render him the laft duties , whichthe Author calleth to Parante, from the Latine
word Parentare, which fignifieth to Celebrate the Funeral duties of a man, ‘Thus the
fecond Verfe faith, before the day that he yieldeth up his Soul, in haft was the Marriage
Celebrated, between the Lady cMargaret of France, andthe Duke of Savoy, who
beareth for his Arms fome Eagles, fome Lions, fome Croffes, anda Crown of Rue.


LXXIf,

French.
Par fureur feinte devotion Divine’,
Sera la femme du grand fort violée,
Judges voulants damner telle DoGrine
Victume au peuple ignorant immolée. |


>


Enelith,


thas +


ed th
 Cérmen


King | |


»)


v


Lemlly | |


betmeen


febrated 8


eEiles, |


 StAN24,
ohilel


Thus the


Marriage |
wy, wh |


of Rute


Ne |
Latine


of Michaels Noftradamus.


Englith.
By a faigned fury of Divine infpiration,
Thewife of the great one fball be ravifbed,
. Fudges willing to condemn fuch a Dofirine,
À Vittimo fhall be facrififed to the ignorant people.


ANNOT.

Of this fac and others as bad, have been feen ftrange examples, formerly done by
thofe called Enthoufiaftes, who have committed horrible villanies, under pretence of
divine infpiration, fomecommiting Incefts, ‘others rapes, others murders; as may be
feen at large in the Hiftory of fobs de Leiden, and other defperate Anabaprtifts, too
tedious to be inferted here: (hall only relate here a little remarkable Hiftory,in con-
firmation of this, so difcover the Wiles of the fpirits of error, transformed into an
Angel of Light.

The 7 day of February 1526. two Brothers, Thomas and Leonard Schyker, living
near the Town of St, Gal in Switzerland, did affemble together with fome other
Anabaptifts, in their fathers houfe, where they paffed the moft part of the night in
difcourfes, making of faces, and relating of Vifions, which every one faid he had
feen. The next day, upon break of day 5, 7#omas did lay hold on his Brother Leonard,
and dragged him in the middle ofthe company, bid him kneel in the préfence of
his Father and Mother, and of all the reft there prefent, and as all the reft of the
Company bid him take heed to doany thing amifs, he anfivered, that there was no
need to fear, and that in this bufinefs, nothing could be done againft che Will of che
Father; thereupon he drew his Sword,and cut off the head of his Brother, whowason
his knees, all befotted before this murderer. All the rett being aftonifhed; and be-
fides their wits for this farious blow, and lamenting the dead, Thomas ran towards
the Town with a fearful Countinance,as a Phanatick belides himfelf, withoutShooes,
and having no Cloaths bur his Shirt and Breeches. At chat time the Burg- matter
of St Gal was Foachim Vadian,a wile and featned perfon,before whom the {aid 7 homas
ftood, crying aloud with a tearful Countenance, that'the day of Judgment was near;
faying befides, that ftrange things had come to pafs, (wichout telling what)
that the will of his Father was done for his part. The Burg- mafter after he had
reprehended him very much for his madnels, andinfolent carriage, commanded a
Cloak to be put upon him, and to lead-him home foftly back again.. Buc inthe
mean time, news was brought of his deteftable murder, whereupon he was appre-
hended, examined, conviéted, and executed.. ‘The like hath been done many times
for Rapes and Incefts: What is particular here, is, that our Author faith, thac the
Judges being willing to punithfuch Villanies, yet that unhappy accident thal! fall,
that an innocent perfon fhall be put to death ( belike ) inftead of the guilty, to pleafe
the people. |

BX XITETS
French.


En Cité grande en moyne. & artifan,
Pres de la porte logez & aux murailles,
Contre modene fecret, Cave difant,
Trahis pour faire fous couleur d’efpoufailles,


ee ee ee eae ae or Le in eee


ae NE pene mm hs


ee Em


The true Prophecies


Englifh.
In a great City a Monk and an Artificer,
Dwelling near the Gate, and the Walls,
Near an old woman, tis a fecret faying Cave,
A Treafin foall be pletted under pretence of a Marriage.


ANN OT. |

Paradin maketh mention, that in che year 1552. 2 Monk deceived the Marthal of
Briffac, making him believe that he would put him in poffeffion of the Town of
Quizres, if he would give him fo much for reward. The Marthal ufed all the
Caution poffible, not to be deceived by that Impofter, who took Money on both
fides, viz, the French and the Spaniards; neverthelefs the Monk plaid the Knave
with him, and the undertakings proved prejudicial to the French, though not con-
fiderably by reafon of the precaution of che faid Marfhal.

The fame Author writes, thatin the year 1555. the 17 of Augu/t, the Spaniard
had defigned toretake Cazal, the fame way that the French had furprifedir, Firft
they had got a Widow in the Town, who received the undertakers in her houfe,
which was near the Gate, and the Wall. Secondly there was a Marriage to be made
between two perfons of quality;where great Cheer and rejoycings were to be, Third-
Jy they got a woman that carryed Herbs to fell in che Town, and under the Herbs
the Letters were hidden, The Author fayslikewife, that there was a Monk anda
Tradefman, that lodged ac this VVidows houfe, thofe tivo aétots in this bufinefs
viz, the Monk and Tradfeman, faid fecretly tothe woman that fold Herbs, Cave.
which fignifies take heed, they faid chefe words fecretly near Matrone, thatis, they
whifperd in her eat Cave, Their defign was to betray the Town, under pretence of
a Marriage, but it did not fucceed; becaufe the Letters in the womans Basket were
intercepted, the Vulgar impreffion hath a fault in the third Verfe, where there
is Modene inftead of Matrone, and another in thefourth Verfe, when inftead of
Treafon, they have put for betrayed. The Hiftory obligeth us to correc it, as we
have done,

LX XIV.
French.
Le dechaffé au regne tournera,
Ses ennemis trouvez des conjurez,
Plus que jamais fon temps triomphera,


Trois & feptante a mort trop afleurez.
Englifh.
The expelled fhall come again to the Kingdow,
Her enemies (ball be found to be the Confpirators,
More than ever his time fball triumph,
Three and feventy appointed for death,
ANNOT.

This is a clear and exprefs prediétion of the happy reftauration of his facred Ma-
jefty, and our dread Sovereign Charles II, now Reigning, whoafter a long exile is
come again to enjoy his own Kingdom, and to flourifh more thanever he did before,
by thefe feventy appointed to death, are meant the Judges and murderers of his


Father, who with fome few others of the fame gang made about that number, and
fome


Pop re pee à


ethete
ead of


LL


of Michael’ Noftradamus. 268


fome of which have payed their fhot by the hand of publick Juftice, others have pre-
vented their fhame by dying before hand, others have been their own Executioners,
and thole that remain, lead a life worfe then death it felf ; fotrue it is chat vengeance


dances the round.
LXXY.
French,
Le grand Pilot fera par Roy mande,
 Laitler la claffe pour plus haut lieu atteindre,
Sept ans apres fera contrebarde,
Barbare Armée viendra Verife craindre,
fh Englifh.
The great Pilot fhall be [ent for by the King, :
To leave the Fleet, and be preferred to a higher place,
Seven years after he fball be couniermanded,
A Barbarian Army fhall put Venice to à fright. .
© ANNOÏT.
This needeth no further explanation.
LXXVI.
: French.
La Cité antique d’Antenorèe forge,
Plus ne pouvant le Tyran fupporter,
‘Le Manche feint au Temple couper gorge;
Les fiens le peuple a mort viendra bouter:
| | Englith.
The ancient City founded by Antenor,
Being not able to bear the Tyrant any longer,
With a fained haft, in the Church cut a throat, |
The people will come to put his fervants to death,
| ANNOT. |
The City founded by Aster (who was Companion and came into Italy wich
Æneas)is Padua a Univerfity of the Venetians, of which itis.faid here,that being no


longer able ¢o beara Tyrant, the faid Tyrant fhall be murdered in the Church witha
knife hidden in a haft, and all his Men and Servants killed by the people of the


Town,
LXXVIT
| _.. French.
Par la victoire du deceu fraudulente,
Deux claffes une, la revolte Germaine,
La Chef meurtry & fon fils dans là Tente,
Florence, Imole pourchaflez dans Romaine.


M m


The true Prophecies


Englifh.
By the deceitful viktory of the deceived,
One of the two Fleets fhall revolt to the Germans,
The Chief and bis Son murdered in their Tent,
Florence, Imole perfecuted in Romania.
| ANNOT. PR
The three firft Verfes are plain, Florence and Imole are two Cities of italy ; feated | 4
in the Province of Rotsania, .
LXXVIIL k
French. |
Crier victoire du grand Seliz croiffant,
Par les Romains {era l’Aigle clame’,
Ticin, Milan, & Gennefny confent, This!
Puis par eux mefmes Bafil grand reclame. Lal
Fa | Englith. bo
They fhall cry up the vittory of the great Selins half Moor,
By the Romans the Eagle fball bz claimed,
Ticin, Milan avd Genoa, confent not, |
Then by themfelves the great Bafil fball be claiméd, (
| ANNOT. . Mia a 6
| | The firft Verfe foretelleth fome conquefts of the Turks; whofe Arms is the half \
Lit Al Moon. The fecond Verfe fignifies, the Romans fhall move the Emperour to fuc-


ihe cour them, which is the Eagle. icin, «Milan and Genes fhall refufe to.give help:


dit: and afterwards they {hall call the great 84// (whichin Greek fignifies the great King;
from 4asfaeus) to their help, ;


a CU


LX XIX,
| _. French. |
| Pres de Tefn les habitants de Logre,
‘at Garonne & Saone, Stine, Tar, & Gironde: . Thi
LA Outre les Monts drefferont promonitoire,
| "Conflit donné Pax franchi, fübmerge onde.
Englifh. 2
ji Near the Tefin the Inhabitants of Logre, 2
ae Garonne and Soane, Seine, Tar and Gironde, | |
Shall ere&t a promontory beyond the Mountains, aes
A Battle fhall be fought the Po fball be. paffed over, fome fball be
ae drowned in it.
ut | | . » ANNOT. qj
| Tefin is the River that paffeth by Milde, Garonhe, Sèahe, Seine, Tar, and Gironde |
jo ate Rivers of France, Po is the greateft Riverof Its. )


Frenchy


LA


of Michael Noftradainus.


EX XN:
French. |
De Fez le Regne parviendra a ceux d’Euro
Feu leur Cité, & Lame tranchera, a
Le grand d'Afre Terre & Mera grand troupe,
Que bleux, pars, Croix a mort dechaflera,
la Englifh. |
The Kingdom of Fez fhall come to thofe of Europe,
Fire and Sword {hall deftroy their Cit :
The great one of Afia by Land and Sea with à great troop,
So that blews, greens, Croffes to death be fhall drive.
: A NNOT.
This is a ftrange Prophecy ifit prove true, v#z, that the Kingdom of Fez (which
is in frica) fhall be caken by thofe of Ewrope, and the Town put to Fire and Sword,


after which the great one of Afia(meaning che great Turk) fhall come by Land and
by Sea with an innumerable Army, and fhall drive and deftroy all before him.


| LX X XI,
French.

Pleurs, cris & plaincts, heurlemens, effrayeur,
Cœur inhumain, cruel, noir & tranfy : |
Leman, les Ifles de Gennes les majeurs,

Geh |) Sang efpancher, tochlain, abnul mercy.

| Englith,

cing, |) Tears, cryes and complaints, bowlings, fear,
An inbumane heart, cruel, black aftonifbed,
Leman, the Iflands the great ones of Genoa
Shall {pill blood, the Bell fhall ring out, no mercy fhall be given.


| AN NOT,
This foretels bloody Wars only, and needs no interpretation,


LX XXTI,

French.

Par les Deferts dé lieu libre & farouche,

Viendra errer Neveu du grand Pontife,

| Affomme à lept avec loutde fouche,

| Par ceux qu'apres occuperont le Seyphe.
other she oO UE à .

fl Through the Deferts of a free and ragged place,
5.0 The, Nephew ofthe Pope fballocome to wander,

ini À Knockt in the bead by feven with a heavy Club,

in | By thofe who after fhall obtain the Scyphe.


/
| #


ey


Mm 2 ANNOT.
fr


ee re


The true Prophecies


ANN OT,

This fignifies that the Nephew of a Pope fhall be driven away, and (hall wander
in a defert place, where he fhall be knockt in the head by fevenmen, one of which
(hall afterwards enjoy the Papacy; for Scyphe isa Latine word, fignifying a Cup
or Chalue, fuch as the Romi{h Priefts fay Mafs with, and take the Sacrament,


LX XXITI.
French.
Celuy qu’aura tant d’honneurs & carelles,
A fon entrée en la Gaule Belgique,
Un temps apres fera tant de rudefies,
Et fera contre a la fleur tant bellique.
Englifh.

He that fall bave bad [o many honours and welcoms,
At bis going into Flanders,
Awhile after hall commit fo many rudeneffes,
And fhall be againfithe warlike flower.

ANNOT.

This is pofitively concerning the Duke of Alencon, Brother to Henry III, King of
France, who having been fent for by the States of the Low-Countreys, and received
with much honour to be their General and Governour againft the Spantard,did moft
unworthily break his truft, and being come to Antwerp, he was fo ravifhed with the
beauty and riches of the Town, that he feized upon it for himfelf, but was beaten out


by the Citizens, and moft of his men killed,
The fourth Verfe faith, He fhall be againft the warlike flower ; that is, hisaction
hall be againft Military Honour, and common practice of Honourable Souldiers.


LXX XI V.
French.
Celuy qu’en Sparte Claude ne veut regner,
Il fera tant par voye fedudtive,
Que du court, long, lé fera“arfaigner,
Que contre Roy fera fa perfpective.
Englifh.
He that Claudius will not have to reign in Sparta,
The fame {ball do fo much by a deceitful way,
That be hall caufe him to be arraigned fbort and long,
As if be bad made his profpeët upon the King.
ANNOT.
I believe the words of Clasdins and Sparta here are Metaphorical, and the Author


was unwilling they fhould be known,
The fenfe is, one thall be hindred from Reigning byanother, whom he fhall ac-


cufe of Treafon againft the King,


French,


a ee DT ess


King of |
received bi
Ad mot |
with the D


ten QUE


hisadion |


des,


Of Michael Noftradamus,


LXXXV.
French.

La grand Cite de Tharfe par Gaulois.
Sera d’eftriute captifs tous a Turban,
Secours par Mer du grand Portugalois,
Premier d’efté le jour du facre Urban.


| Englith.
The great City of Tharfis hall be taken by the French,
All thofe that were at Turban fball be made flaves, ;


Succours by Sea from the great Portugals,
The firft day of the Summer, and of the inftallation of Urban.


ANNOT,.

Here are two difficulties in thisSeanza; the firft is, what the Author means by
the great City Tharfiss che {econd is in the laft Verfe, what he meaneth by the In-
ftallacion of Urban, I believe he meaneth no more then the eleGtion ofa Pope, whofe
name fhall be Urban.


LXXX VI.
French.
Le grand Prelat un jour apres fon fonge,
Interprete au rebours de fon fens,
De la Gafcogne luy furviendra un Monge,
Qui'fera eflite le grand Prelat de Sens.
Englith.
The great Prelate the next day after his dream,
Interpreted contrary to bis fenfe,
From Gafcony fhall come to bim a Monge,
That fall caufe the great Prelate of Sens to be elected.
ANNOT.


Monge is a Barbarous word, that hach no relation to any Lagiguage in the world,
(that I know ) unlefs ic fignifies a Monk. Sens is a fine CN about threefcore


Miles beyond Paris, towards the South, and the Seat of an Arch-Bifhop, who it
feeméth {hall be elected into {ome eminent place, the next day after he chat was in ic
fhall dream a dream, that. fhall be interpreted contrary to the fenfe and meaning of
it. |


LXXXVII,
French.


L’eleCtion faicté dans Francfort,

N’aura nul lieu, Milaz s'oppofera,
Le .fien plus-proche femblera:fi grand fort,
Qu'’oute le: Rhir Marais les ‘chaffera.


Thetrne Propbecies


Englifh.
The ele&ion made at Francford,
Shall be void, Milan fhalloppofe it,
He of the Milan party fball be fo ftrong,
As to drive the other beyond the Marfbes of the Rhine.
ANNOT,


The Ele@tion of Francford is concerning an Emperour ; for there they are ele&ted,
Crowned. Thereft is plain,


LXXXVIII
French.
Un Regne grand demourra defole,
Aupres de l'Hebro {fe feront aflembléss,
Monts Pyrenees le rendront conlole,
Lors que dans May feront Terréstremblees.
Englith

A great Kingdom fhall be left defolate,
Near the River Hebrus an affembly hall be made,
The Pyrenean Mountains [ball comfort him,
When in May fhall be an Earth-quake.

ANNOT.


This needeth no interpretation, but what any one may give that knoweth where
the River Hebrusis,


LXXXIX.
French.
Entre deux cymbes pieds & mains attachez,
De miel face oingt & de lai& fubftante,
Cuelpes & mouches feront amour fachez,
Poccilateurs faucer, Scyphe tente.
Englith.
Between two Eoats one [hall be tyed band and foot,
His face axnointed with Honey, and he nonrifbed with Milk.
W'afps and Bees foall make much of bim in anger, |
For being treacherous Cup-bearers, and poifoning the Cup.
| ANNOT.

This is a defcription of che punifhment which the Perfians ule toafi@ upon poi-
foners ; for they were put between two Troughs, which are here called Boats. from
their likenefs to them, with their face only uncovered, which was déubed with
Honey, that the Watps, and, Bees might bedrawn to it and torment them they
were fed with Milk, which if they refufed to do, and had rather dye than be fo tor-
mented, then did the Tormenter prick their Eyes with Needles to force them to


their diet, and fo were they left, cillthe Vermin eat them up. VVehave an ex-
ample of this in the Life of Artaxerxes King of Perfid,


French’


dll


here


[po por
es {01


edit D


an, they


(ote
themto fl
ean es ||


Fr |


A Princeft of an exquifite beauty, | | |
Shallbe brought to theGeneral, the fecond time tbe fad foall be betrayed,

City fhall be given to the Sword:and fre, A ee
By two great a murder the chief Perfon about the King fall be bated,


of Michael Noftradamus:


XC,

a French.
L’honneflement puant abominable
Apres la faict fera felicité,
Grand excufé, pour n’eftre favorable,
Qu’a paix Neptune ne fera incité,

Englifh.
The ftinking and abominable defiling
After the fecret ball fucceed well, | :
The great one fhall be excufed for not being favourable,
That Neptune might be perfwaded to peace.


ANNOT,


2


By the two firft Verfes it feemeth that fome abominable a@ion, after its effet


fhall fucceed well; the twolaft fignifie, thaca great perfon {hall be excufed for nos
permitting the Fleet tobe at peace,


XCI.
a nié, al ranean’
Le conducteur de la guerre Navale,
Rouge effrent, fevere horrible grippe,
Captif efchapé de l’aifné dans la baîte, —
Quand il naiftra du grand un Fils Agrippe,
ny _ Englifh.
The leader of the xawal forces,
Red, rafb, fevere, horrible extortioner, =
Being flave, fball efcape, hidden among ft the Harneffes,
When a Son named Agrippa, hall be born to the great one.
ANNOT.


This needeth no Jaterpretation, the words being fo plain,


XCII.
. French,
Princeffe de beauté tant venufte,
Au chef merée, le fecond fai trahy,
La Cité au Glaive poudre face adufte,
Par trop grand meurtre le chef du Roy hay,
_ Englifh;


ANNOT.


The only difficulcy lyes in what City he doth meat.


French,


The true Prophecies


XCIIL
French.


Prelat avare, d’ambition trompé,

Rien ne fera que trop cuider viendra,

Ses Meflagers, & luy bien attrape,

Tout au rebours voir qui les bois fendra.
Englifh.

À covetous Prelate, deceived by ambition,

Shall do nothing but covet too much, |

His weffengers and be fhall be trapt, |

When they fall fee one cleave the Wood the contrary way.


ANNOT.
This needeth no Annotation, | “
French. ri
Un Roy ire fera aux fedifragues, te


Quand interdiés feront harnois de guerre,

La poifon tainête au fuccre par les fragues,

Par eaux meurtris, morts, difant, ferre, ferre. ge

/ Englifh, Pay ot

| A King fhall be angry againft the Covenant-breakers, i

| ci When the Warlike Armour fhall be forbidden, Res

a | The Poifon with Sugar fball be putin the Strawberries, He a

| They shall be murdered and die, faying, clofe, clofe. fide

ANN OT, UT

Thewords are plain. |

X CY. “fea

ui | | French; 3 1!

M Par detracteur calomnié puis nay, Lite

Quand iftront faiéts enormés & martiaux, D, EU

La moindre part dubieufe a l’aifné, )
a Et toft au Regne feront faicts partiaux.

| Englifh,

The youngeft Son shall be calumniated by a flanderer,

When enormous and Martial deeds shall be done,

The leaft part shall be left doubtfullto the

Eldeft,and foon after they shall be both equal in the Kingdom.


i ANN OT:
This Jacketh no interpetation,


din,


of Michael Noftradamus,


'XCVE
French.


Grand Cité a Soldats abandonncé;
Onc ny,edtmortel tumult fi proche;
O quelle hideufe calamites approche,
Fors une offence n’y {era pardonnée.
| Enieliffy, ©
A great Cityshall be givenup to the Souldiers,
There was never a mortal tumult fo near,
Ob ! what’ a hideous calamity draws near,


Except one offence nothing shall be foared.


ANNOT.


_ This is concerning the taking of the Town df Sr; Quentin in't5$7. becaufe the

Author faith, no tumult was like this, fo near the year 1555,when our Authot
Writ. |
_ He calleth it great City, becaufe it is one of the moft confiderable in France,
therefore it was beliegediby che King of Spain with 370c6. men,and 12000, Horfes
a eg Englifh. The plunder was given to the Souldiers; for ic was taken by
affaule.

There was never a wsortal tumalt fo neir s for the Souldiers taking revenge üpon the
Inhabitants, and Garrifon, putallto che Swords the Admiral having much adoto
fave him({elf | | |

In, Confequence of this our Prophet cryeth, . © what 4 fearfull calamity; becaufe
the taking of this Town joyned with the lofs of St. Laurence did almoft ruine France,
He addeth, except one offence nothing (ball beforgiven ; thatis, tae Town fhould be
affited imall refpeds, except that icfhould not be burnt, The taking of this Town
was upon the 2.7: of Augaft,17 days after. the Battle of st. Lawrence.

The. lafs was fo great ‘to France, that the King was fainéd to tall the Dukeof
Guife back from Italy, and Charles V. hearing this news, asked prefently if his Son
Philip was notin Paris, as much as to fay, it was a thing he ought to have done.

_ But God permitred that the King of Spain went another way, and inthe mean
time, the King of France ftrengthned himfelf, and the Duke of Gaife took from the
Englifb, Calais, Gaines, and the County of d’ oye, The Spaxifh Hiftory faith, thae


Philip had forbidden to touch any old people; Childéen atid Ecclefiattical perfons «
butabove all St. Quentins reliques. j


XC VII,
sn TRC A
Cinq. & quarante degrez ciel bruflera,
Feu approcher de la grand Cité neuve;
Inftant grand flamme efparfe fautera;
Quand on voudra desNormans faire preuve:


N à Enolith,


The true Prophecies


3 Englifh.
The Heaven fhall burn at five and forty degrees,
The fire fball come near. the great new City!


Te an inftant à great flame difperfed: fball burft outs
When they fball make a trial of the Normans:


ANNOT.
This fignifies fome extraordinary lightning under five and forty degrees, whichis M
about the Southern part of France. |
Ic is not eafie to guefs what he meaneth by the great new C ity, ünléfsitbeonein | |
the Authors Countrey, called ils Nova.


The laft Verfe feemeth to intimate , that this fhall happen.when an Army of M
Normandie fhall be raifed, |


XCVITI.

French. This
Ruyne aux Volfques de peur fi fort terribles. brits 4
Leur grand Cité taindte, fai& peftilent : pk
Piller Sol, Lune, & violer leur Temples; rast
Et les deux Fleuves rougir de fang coulant. thet

Englifh. ti


A ruine fhall happen.to the Vollques that are.fo terrible
Their great City [ball be dyedya peftilent deed :
They fhall plunder Sun and Moon, and violate their Temples,
And the two Rivers [ball be red with running blood.
| ANNOT.
The Volf werea warlike people of italy joyning to Rome, which makes me believe


that by the great. City he meaneth Rome, which was plandered and: fackt-by the
Duke of Burgandy and the Prince of orange, Generals ofthe Emperour Charles V,


X CIX,

French.
É’Ennemy docte fe tourner confus,
Grand Camp malade, 8e de fai par embufches,
Monts Pyrenees luy feront faicts refus.
Roche du Fleuve defcouvrant antique ruches.

Englifh.

The learned enemy [hall go back confounded, |
A great Camp fhall be fick , andin effect through ambufb,
The Pyrenean Mountains fhall refufe bins,
Near the River difcovering the anciént Hives,


ANN OT;


The words ate plain, though the fenfe be too obfeure ; atid J thall not endeavour
fo give an interpretation, when every one may make one himfelf,


French:


Of Michael Noftradamus,


C
French.
Fill de Laure, afyle du mal fain,
Où jufqu’au Ciel fe void Amphitheatre :
Prodige veu, ton mal eft fort prochain,
Seras captive, & des fois plus de quatre.


LIT À Englith
b oni Daughter of Laura, Sanctuary of the fick,
| Where to the Heavens is [een the Amphitheatre,
Army of A Prodigy being feen, the danger is near,
Thon fhalt be taken captive above four times.
| ANNOT.

This is an ingenious Stanza, concerning the City of Nifmes in Languedoc , famous
for its Amsphitheatre built by the Remans, and remaining to this day, which Town he
calleth Daughter of Zawre 5 becaufe the Lady Laura, Miftrefs to the famous Poet
Petrache was born thereabout 3. he alfo calleth it Sanétuary of the fick , for the falu-
brity of the air.

_ The meaning of the twolaft Verfes is, that when a prodigy fhall be feen, viz. Ci-
| vil War in France, it {hall be taken above four times, as it hath happened. by one
| Party or other,

4 Legis cautio contra ineptos Criticos.
May | |


Our legent bos verfus, maturè cenfunto:

| Prophanum vulgus do infcinm ne attreéfato :

bals We i ‘ ,

lire M “Omuefque Aftrologi, Blenni, Barbari procul funto ,
te Qui aliter faxit, is rite [acer efto.


"© D Sr
Kirn ny
it LP MP END


exe


MARION TH


à ne ee


eS 2 PR AHR ARTES rr


T= 3 ANS] Nan IN NG = A


ia SEN \ AUS
MS (CR do

1
CSC SS V AT


SRY SALSA


PROPHECIFS


OF


Michael Noftradamus.


tr


CENTURY VII.


tenes


I.
French.
)’Arc du Threforpar Achilles deceu,
* Aux procrees fceu le Quadrangalaire,
Au fait Roïal le comment fera {ceu,


Corps veu pendu au Sceu du populaire.


Ra
The bow of the Treafure by Achilles deceived,
Shall shew to pofterity the Ouadr, RE},
In the Royal deed the Comment shall be known,
Fhe body shall be feen hanged in the knowledge o of the people.


By che bow of the Treaft mb eh

ay the bow of the Treafure, is underftood che Marthal d’ Ancre, F

Queen Regent of France Mary of Medicis, who was firtt complained of ys: Fe coi
verfacions by Achillesde Harlay Prefident of Paris, whence followed his death being
Piftolled in the Quadrangle of the Louvre » by the command of Lewis XIII; and his


body afterwards dragged through the ftreets , and han
upon the new Bridge, Sed publickly by the people


French.


CPS” |


ne,


of Michael Noftradamus,


IT.
French.


Par Mars ouvert Arles ne donra guerre,
De nuit feront les Soldats eftonnez,
Noir blanca l'Inde diflimulez en terre.
Soubs la feinte ombre traiftre verrez fonnez.
Englifh.
Arles shall not proceed by open War,
By night the Souldiers shall be aftonished,
Black, white. and blew, diflembled upon the ground.
Under the fained shadow you shall fee them proclaimed Traitors.


ANNOT.


‘Arles isa confiderable City in France; che reft is plain,


LIT,

French.
Apres de France la victoire Navale,
Les Barchinons, Salinons, les Phocens,
Lierre d’or, l'Enclume ferré dans balle,
Ceux de Toulon au fraud feront confents.

Englifh.

After the Naval vittory of the French,
Upon thofe of Tunis, Sally, and the Phocens,
A golden Tuy the Anvil shut upin a pack,
Thofe of Toulon to the frand shall confent.

ANNOT.


This foretellech a Naval vi@ory to the French againft the Turks , by the means
ofa Granado, called Anvil, chat fhall be fhut up in a Barrel by a plot, to which thofe
of Towlos fhall be privy.


TV.
French.
Le Duc de Langres affiegé dedans Dole,
Accompagne d’ Authun & Lionnoits,
Geneve, Aunfpourg, ceux dela Mirandble,
Pafler les Monts contre les Auconois.
| Englifh.
The Duke of Langres shall be befteged in Dole,
Beingin company with thofe of Autun and Lion,
Geneva, Aufpourg, thofe of Mirandola,
Shall go over thé Mountains againft thofe of Ancona.


ANNOT.


Se Es
4 AT. TORT $3 a4
eae pas! : GRR +


EE ES a
es A ee ane
oor a


The true Fropbecies


ANNOT.
Langres is a City in France, whofe Bifhopis a Duke and a Peer of the Kingdom,
Dole is a City in Burgundy,{o is Autun and Lion, Genevais a City by Savoy, Anfponre,
another inGermany, Mirandolais a Countrey in /taly, fois Ancona.


V.
French.


Vin fur la Table en fera refpandu,
Le tiers naura celle quil pretendoit,
Deux fois du noir de Parme delcendu,
Peroufe & Pife fera ce quil cuidoit.
Englifh.
Wine [hall befpilt upon the Table,
By reafenthat à third man [ball not bave her whom he intended
‘Twice the blackôhe defcended from Parma,
Shall do to Perula and Pifa what bé intended.
ANN OT,
Perufa, Pifa,and Parma, are three Cities in Italy. J
VI.
French.
Naples, Palerme, &-toute la Sicile, fil
Par main Barbare fera inhabitée,
Corfique, Salerne & de Sardaigne l'Ile,
| Faim, pefte, guerre, fin de maux intemptée.
| Englifh.
Naples, Palermo, and all Sicily, |
By barbarous bands [hall be depopulated, .
Corfica, Salegno, and the Ifland of Sardania,
In them [hall be famine, plague war,and endlefs evils,
ANNOT.
Naples is a City in Italy, Palermo isa City in the Ifland of Sicily. Corfica,an Ifland
in the Mediterranean Sea, belonging tothe Genoefe; Salerne isa Townin Italy; Sar-


Hh sn an a inthe Mediterranean. TheReader may eafily make an interprétation
ee of the reft,


VII
French. ad
Sur Je combat des grands chevaux legers, ie
On criera le grand croiflant confond,
De nuit tuer Moutons, Brebis, Bergers,
Abyfmes rouges dans le foflé profond.


=
=


à


Englifh;


of Michaël Noftradamus:


oo |) Ænglifh.
in M At the fight of theygreat light Horfmen,
y D They fall cry outs, confound, the.great half Moon,


By night they fhall kill Sheep,Ewes,and, Shepherds,
Red pits fhall bé imthe deep ditch. Aus.


i


| ANNOT.
-: à By the greap half Moonsisainderftood the Zirh.

| VIII.

| French.


Flora fuis, fuis le plus proche Romarr,

| Au Fefulan {era conflid donné,

| Sang efpandu les plus grands-pris en fhatn,

LAN | Temple ne Sexeine fea pardon.
POEnglfh:

Flora fi}, fly from the next Roman,

In the Felulan fhell bé the fights 4

Blood fball be {pilt, the gredteftshall.be taken,

Temple nor Sex shall be fpared.\ |


- Fe(slan is aCountrey in italy, Florais the Goddels of Flowers; the reft is eafie,
Be cc X ind cody Pt à
a. rernol ic French: j


Sera priée d'amour du Viceroy, ©)
Feinte promelle, 8 malheureule eftreine,
Entre dés mains dinigrand: Prince Barroyi

jus Englifh,
A Lady in the abfence of her-great Captain,
Shall be intreated of love by the Viceroy, |
nllnd M Aifained promife,and unhappy new.years gift,
y; Sr H In the band of the great Prince of Bar.
ato | an AN ROR

' Bar is a principality joyning to Lorrain, which Heary TY. King of France gave for

2 Portion to his Sifter Catharine, when fhe married the Duke of Lorrains Son, The
| reft is plain, |
| LAS de
| À Oe my i rench. PAU

Par. legrand Prince limitrophe du Mars,
Preux & vaillant chef de grand exercite,
Par Mer & Terre de Galois & Normans,
Cap paller Barcelonue pille Pifle.


Dartie énl'abfenéede fon grandCapitaine,


urns Ebb true Prophecies
‘ | _ “ÆEnglifh.
The great Prince dwelling near the Mans,
Stout and valiant, General ofa great Army

Of Welchiner ad Normans by Sea and Land,
Shall pafs theCapeBarceloné,and plunder thelfland


AOR,
Mans is a Gity in France, -chief°of the Provinte:called/e Main, The reft is :
plain. |
xf
‘French,


L’Enfant Roial contemnerd la Mere,
Oeil, pieds. bleflez; rude: mobeiflant ;
Notivelle a Dame éftrange &c:biènameré, i
Seront tuez des fiens plus'de einq cens. | paul
Englifh.
The Royal Child fhall defpife his Mother, y
Eye, fect wounded, rude difobedient,\ \\\ |
Ri News to a Lady very ftraugeand bitter;
| Hh | There fhall be killed of bers abote five bundred.
i | ne OF OUEN NOT.
. This wes fulfilled about the year 1645, when Lewis XIII. King of Fraxce, being ‘i
| then about 15 years of age, by che perfwäfion of fome Grandees about him, made r
eae V Var againft his own Mother Afany ot Medici then Regent of the Kingdom,where- I
upon was fought between them the Battle dupont de fay, where above five hundred
on the Queens fide were flain, whereupon it was a good Jeft of che Prince of Gui.


mtna, who being required by the Queen Anna Of Aujria, tolay his hand apon her
fide; and to feel her Child ( now Dews' XIV.) fitting, after he had fele; now]
know, faid he, he is a true Son of Bourbew ; for he beginneth to kick his Mother,


WATT abl
| French.

Le grand puifnäy fera fin de la guerre,

En deux liéux affémble lés excufez,
Cahors, Moiffac, iront loing dé la ferre, $
a Rufec, Leétoure, les Agenois rafez, Le
le | Englifh. . . Ut

) The gréat younger Brother foall make an end of the War, |

I1 two plates be shall gather the excufed, Be
Cahors, Moiflac, shall go out of bis clutches, LE Gs
Ruftec, Lectoure, aid thofe of Agen shall be cut off. | Th
ANNOT. I


Hey Cahors, Moiffac, Ruffet, Leétonre, Agen, are all Cities of tlie Province of Guyenné
| in France, yy:


French


Of Michael Noftradainus;
XID °
| French}
De la Cité Marine & tributaire:
La tefte rafe prendra la Satrapie,
Chañer fordide qui puis fera*contrairé;
Par quatorze and tiendra-la Tyrannie:? :
Englifh.
hr Of the City Maritine and tributary,
| The fhaven bead fall take the Government, )
He fhal! turn out abafe max who fall be againft bin,
During fourteen years be will keep the tyranny.
ANNOT: | he na
_ Thisis pofitive concerning the Cardinalof Richelies, who made himfelf Governot


of Havre de Grace, called herethe Maritine City, and there kept his'Treafure, and
tyrannifed for the {pace of about fourteen yearss i) 2:14 #1! |


XLV.
French,
Faux expoler viendra Topographie,
Seront les Urnes des Monumeñts-ouvertes
Pulluler Sectes, fainte Philofophie, ,
Pour blanches noires, &. pour antiques verte’:
5 00 ib | Englifh:4 -
fae | They [ball expound Topography falfly;
set. The Urnes of the Monuments foall be open,
handed Sects fall multiply, and holy Philofophy,
0! Ge Shall give black for white, and green forold.
| | _.| ANNO. |
Thisis aperfet defcription ofour late miferable eftate-in England when there was
fuëh multiplicity of Sects, and fuch a Prophanation of facred things.
French.
Devant Cité de l’Infubre Cotintrée,
Sept ans fera le Siege devant mis,
Le tres-grand Roy: fera fonentrée:
Cite puis libre hors de fes‘ennetnis.
| © Bnotlith:
Before a City of Piemont, ee
Seven years the Siege foall-be laid.
The moft great King foall niakehis entr} into it,
| Then the City fhall: be free being out of the enemies hand,


?


Myf This needeth ho interpretation,


Oo French)


The. trne Prophecies
KVL

| | French.

Entré profonde par la grande Roïne faite,

Rendra le lieu puiffant inacceffible,

L’ Armée de trois Lions fera défaite,

Failant dedans cas hideux & terrible.

4 ace ._.. Englifh.

The deep entry made by the Queen, |

Shall make the place powerful, and inacceffible,

The Army of the three Lions foall be routed,

Doing within an hideous and terrible thing.

.ANNOT,.


À Queen thall caufe fuch a deep Trench to be made beforea Town; that it thall be
impregnable, and the Army of Lions,‘ that js either Generals, or ofa Prince that
bear three Lionsin his Arms:thall beroutèd, a


X VIL

French,
Le Prince rare en pitié 8 clemence:
Apres avoir la paix aux fiens baille, ‘
Viendra changer par mort grand cognoiffance;
Apres grand repos le regne travaille
The Prince rare in pity and Clemency,
After be fhall bave given peace to his Subjects,
Shall by death change bis great knowledge,
Aficr great reft- the Kingdom fball be troubled,

ANNOT,


This pofitively concerheth Henry the IV. King of France, who after he had by
many Battles and dangers given peace to his Kingdom > Was by a Murderer fnatched


away,and the Kingdom put into new troubles;by the war that the Princes had among
themfelves,


“XVLTE
French.

Les Affiegez couloureront, leurs paches,
Sept jours apres feront cruelle iffue,
Dans repoulfez, feu, fang, (ept mis a l'hache,
Dame captive qu'avoit la paix iffiie.
AE | .Englifh.
The Befieged fhall daivb.their Articles,
Seven days after they foall make a cruel ément,
They fball be beaten back, fire, blood, Seven put to death,
The Lady foall be Prifoner who endeavoured to make peace.


A NNOT:


of Michael Noftradamus.


ANNOT.
This needeth no interpretatton,


XL OS
French.


Le Fort Nicene ne fera combatu,
Vaincu fera par rutilant metal,

Son fait {era un long temps debatu, .
Aux Cnadins eftrange efpouvental.


Englifh.


| The Fort Nicene fhall not be fought againff,
By fhining metal it fball be overcome,


lbs 4 The doing of it fball be long and debating,
eth || It fhall be a flrange fearful thing to the Citizens.
| AN NOT.


| impregnable, wherein might enter an Afs loaded with gold,
| XX.

| French.

| Ambaffadeurs de la Tofcane langue,

È Avril & May Alpes & Mer patter,

Celuy de Veau expofera I’harangue,
Vie Gauloife en voulant effacer.


Englifh.
| The Embaffadors. of the Tulcan tongue,


One like a Caf [hall make a fpeech:

Attempting to defame the French cuftomes.
ANNOT.

| The fenfeand the words are plain,

| XX I.

| | French.

| Par peftilente inimitie Volfieque,

Diffimulée chaffera le Tyran;

Au Pont de Sorgues {e fera la trafique,

De mettre a mort luy & fon adherent,


| Nice isa Townin Piémont, fituated by the Sea fide, now whether this Prophecy
i à

|, cameto pafs in the time of the Wars between Frasce and Savoy, or fhall come to
||  pafshereafter, itis morethen Ican tell. As for winning of it by gliftering Metal,
1: itisnonew thing or practice, witnels Philippus of eMacedon, who {aid no City was


bad bp 1 In April and May, fhall go over the Alpes and the Sea,


T be true Propbecies


Englith,
By a peftilent Italian enmity,
The diffembler fball expel the Tyrant,
The bargaïx fhall be made at Sorgues Bridge,
To put bim and higadherent to death.


ANN OT.


There is no difficulty in this,


XXII
French.
Les Citoiens de Mefopotamie,
Irez encontre amis de Tarragone,
Jeux, Ris, Banquets toute gent endormie,
Vicaire au Prone, pris Cité, ceux d’Aufone. ths
Englith. il be


til


ut Ven <<


The Citizens of Mefopotamia, É
Being angry nith the friends of Tarragone, Mile
Playes, laughter, feafts, everysbody being afleep, rh
The Vicar being in the Pulpit, City taken by thofe of Aufone. nt
ANNOT.


By the Citizens of Mefopotamis , is underftooda people that livé between two P

Rivers, from the the Greek words uécosand orauès, the reft is eafie, Wehave faid (

| before, that by Aufowe the Author underftands the City of Besrdeaux, which he cal-
ls led Aufone , fromthe Poet and Conful of Rome Aufonies who was born there. |


pins XXII,
| French.
Le Roial Sceptre fera contraint de prendre,
Ce que fes Predecefleurs voient engagé,
a Puis a Laigneau on fera mal entendre,
null Lors qu'on viendra le Palais faccager.
i Englifh.
| The Royal Scepter fall be conftrained to take Pua
What bis Predeceffors had morgaged ;
After that, they fhall mis-inform the Lamb,
When they fhall.come to plunder the Palace.


ANNOT.
This is obvious to every body’s capacity:


Lin Fran


CSD, so


French:


ne.


en tho
ave (id
rhe cale


French


of Michael Noftradamus.


XXIV.

French.
L’Enfévely fortira du tombeau,
Fera de chaifnes lier le fort du pont,
Empoifone avec œufs de Batbeau,
Grand de Lorrain par le Marquis du pont.


Englifh.
The buried fhall come out of bis Grave,
He fhall caufe the fort of the Bridge to be titd wiih Chains,
Poifoned with Barbels bard Rom, :
Shall a great one.of Lorrain be by the Marques du pont.


ANNOT.

This Prophecie is divided in two parts, The firft two Verles talk of a man that
fhall be taken out of his Grave alive. The two taft fpeak, chat a great man of
Lorrain {hall be poifoned by the Marques de pont, inthe Row of a Barbel, which ac-
cording to Phyfitians, is a dangerous meat of it felf, and chiefly if it be Stewed, the
Poifoner himfelf feemeth to be no other than a Duke of Lorrain, or one of his Sons;


for he ftileth himfelf N. Duke of Lorrain, Prince of Bar, and Marques as
Pont,


9.07
French.
Par guerre longue tout l’exercite efpuifer,
Que pour Soldats ne trouveront pecune,
Lieu d'Or, d'Argent cair on viendra cufer,
Gaulois rain, figne croiffant de Lune.
Englifh.
By 4 long War, all the Army drained dry,
So that to raife Souldiers-they fhall find no Money,
Inftead of Gold and Silver, they ball ftamp Leather,
The French Copper, the mark of the ftamp the new Moon;
ANNOT,
This maketh me remember the miferable condition of many Kingdoms, before
the weft-Indies were difcoyereds for in Spain Lead was ftamped for Money, and fo


in France in the time of King Dagobert, and it feemeth by this Stanza, that the like
is to come again, by reafon of a long and tedious War,


XX VI.
French.
Fuftes Galees autour de fepr Navires,
Sera livrée une mortelle guerre,
Chef de Madrid recevra coups de vires,
Deux efchapées & cing menez a Terre.


{
|
|
t
:
k
?
'
&
4
:
È
!
\
à
i
i
}


Spreng mem


\


The true Prophecies


Englith.
Fly-boats and Galleys round about feven Ships,
A mortal War there foall be
The chief of Madrid ball receive blows of Oars,
Two ball efcape, and five carried to Land.


ANNOT.

Paradin faith in his Hiftory, that in the year 1555. towards the end of Aueuft,
thofe of Diepe had permiffion from che King to fighta Fleet of the Spaniards, which
was coming into Flanders, and brought Men, Money, and feveral Merchandifes,
They went to Sea, and after much fearching, they difcovered the Fleet, wherein
were 22 great Ships.

The Diepois had but 19 men of War, and five or fix Pinnaces, with which they
fet upon them between Calais and Dover, The fight was very bloody, almoft all
the Ships grapled one with another, and being fo clofe together, reprefented a Land
fiche.

~The French at laft did their utmoft endeavour againft the Admiral, which was
fuccoured by fix other Ships, of which two were taken withthe Admural, and catry~
ed to Diepe ; thisis the Authors meaning, when he faith, Fly-beats and Galleys about
feven Ships, He nameth the Admiral Chief of Madrid: that is, chief Spaniard,


The
the
Fire, |


hp [niet
Dy Ipiu


2


which received blows ofOars,whofe Ship was taken,and four more of hisCompany;
which werebroughtto Diepe, In this agree che Hiftorians on both fides,


XX VIT.
French.
Au coin de Vaft Ja grand Ca valerie,
Proche a Ferrare empelchée au Bagage,
Pompe a Turia front telle volerie,
Que dansle fort raviront leur hoftage.
Englifh.
Inthe corner of Valt the great Troop of Horfe,
Near Ferrara, fhall be bufied about the baggage,
Pompe at Turin,th2y fhall make fuch a robber ly
That in the Fort they fball ravifb their hoftage.
ANN OT,


I could not find what he meaneth by this place Ya/t, which being the Key ofall
the reft, I could proceed no further, but am conftrained to go to bed, and leave this


fof tonight,among Infalubiliade Alliaco, Author
XXVIIL Re
French.
Le Capitaine conduira grande proye,
Sur la Montagne des ennemis plus proche, Du
Environne par feu fera telle voye, | D 15 Con
Tous elchapez,ortrente mis en broche. "


\Vere ++


|
|
dy }
he |
andes, |
Wherein L!


dy |
mofta] |


Lan |


|
|


|


ichyas À
Meaty. À
Mt db |
Dur, |
npany, |


of Michael Noftradamus:


| Englifh.
The Captain foall lead a great Prey noe ais
Upon the Mountain, that foall be neareft to the Enemies,
Being encompaffed with fire, he fhall make fuch a way,
That all foall efcape,but thirty that foall be fpitted.
©  ANNOT.
The two firft Verfesare plain ©, ; Tr ROE SR ke Eee
.,. The meaning of the laft two is, that the faid Captain being encompañfed with
Fire, {hall make himfelf fuch à way, chat all his men fall efcape;but thirty chat fliall
be {pitted by the enemies, get
XX 1X.
eae NG French.
Le grand Duc d’Albe fe viendra rebeller,
A fes grands peres fera le tradiment,
Le grand de Guife le viendra debeller,
Captif men€ & drefle monument,
halles Eng
The great Duke of Alba foall rebel,
To bis Grandfathers he hat make the Plot;
The grea: Guile fhall vanquifb him,
Led-Prifoner, and a Morument eretted.


| ei hb et OUT ol eer
. Perdihand of Toledo, Duke of .Albo in Spain, a Faithfull fervant of Charles V. and
Philip IL, his Son, after he bad made feveral proofs of his Valour, and prudence im
the affurs of Piemont and Milanefe, was commanded to goto Naples and Rome, to
fuccour the Colontffe, and others of the Spanifb party ; to obey this command, the
Auchôr faith, He wes? aboat to rebel, not againft his Prince, but his Grandfathers, viz,
the Pope and the Cardinals, upon which the Senate of Venice wrote to him, defi-
ring thar he would not trouble che Pope, {eeing that all hisPredececeffors had foughe
for him, as the Lord of Thon faithit his fixceenth Book ; but heanfwered, thatit
was the Pope himfelf that was the caufe of it, and that he was bound to oppofe him, -
_ During that, rebéllion to his great fachers, 28 the Author callethir, the great dé
Guife, came with his Troops, and compelled him: to adiverfion, and to lec alone
Marfhal Strozzy, the Cardinal Caraffa, Captain Montisc, Camillo Urfini, Captain
Charry, and others; fo chat all che Countrey about Rome was freed, and thusthe
Author faith, the great de Guife fhall cometo quell bim. |
The fourth Verfe adderh two things, that a Prifoner was carryed away, and that
a Monument was ereéted.. Hiftory makes no mention of the Prifoner, unlefs ic
were that Captain Montlac, having taken by affault the Town of Pianea or Cor{mians
by a fink which he broke ; the Captain Goignes a Gafcon being a Prifoner of V Var
in the Town, with many others, and hearing the cries of France, France, perfwaded
his Comrades to fall upon their Keepers, and to kill chem with their own weapons
and this Prifoner that was taken at Montifel, was brought back again into France,
as well for his known Valour, as for his V Varlike deliverance, and fince that made
himfelf famous in Florida;


As for the Monument erected, makes mé think he meaneth the Conftable of france:


Who sas, taken Prifoner at the Battle of St. Qeentin, and by the Monüment, he


meaneth


ot) mn eS


288 _ The true Fropbeciés


meaneth the Efcarial, which Philip the II, caufed to be built in memory of that
Victory , which obliged Henry the II. to call back again in all haft che Dukeof
Guife with all his Forces, or elfe Frause had been in danger to be loft,
XXX.
French,

Le fac fapproche, feu, grand fang efpandu,

Pau grand Fleuve,aux Bouviers J’entreprife,

De Genes, Nice apres long temps attendu,

Foffany Thurin,a Savillan la prife.


Englifh.
The plundering draws near, firé, abundance of blood fpilt,
Pau 4 great River, an enterprife by Herd{men,
Of Genes, Nice after they fball have flaid long,’
Foflan, Thurin, the prixe fhall be at Savillan.
ANN OT:


The plundering draweth near, Here the Author fpeaketh of things that fhould
happenin his days. He wric this the firft of March 1555, and Hiftory mentioneth
that from the firft of March 1555, till the beginning of 1559, the plundering of Pie-
mont in Italy was very great, fince the taking of Cazal by the Fresch, for there was
nothing but continual fightings, taking and retaking Towns, Skirmifhes and Battles,
and moft of them bythe River Paw, the greateft of italy. The reft of the fecond
Verfe, and the beginning of the third faith, that the undertaking of Genes fhall be by
the Herdsmen , by whom he meaneththe Turks , who being called by the Frexchto
help them in the taking of Nése,made an action fit for Herdimen and villanous Trai-
tors, doing nothing, becaufe they had been bribed by the Genoefes. |

This was done after the Freuch had ftay’d long for this infidel , who endeavoured
to delude the Fresch,and take all for himfelf ; and this is the meaning of, After Nice
had fayed long , In the mean time the Spaniards increafed their Victories , as the
fourth Verfe witnefleth to the taking of Foffa8, Thuris, and Savillan,

Fofsan isa Town of Piemont,. which that it might be diftinguifhed from Marfeilles;
which the Author often calleth Fofen or Phocen,heputteth in the Epithete of Thwrin,
to fignifie he meaneth Foffan in Piermont,

He faith that Folfan of Piemsont fhall have the taking towards Savillas, thatis, this
Fof4n which belongeth to the Spaniards, will take fome Towns near Sivillan,


XXX TI
French,


De Languedoc, & Guienna plus de dix
Mille, voudront les Alpes répafler.
Grans Allobroges marcher contre Brundis,
Aquin & Breffe les viendront recafler.
Englifh.

From Languedoc and Guienna more then 10000.
Would be glad to come back over the Alpes.
Great Allobroges fhall march againft Brundis;
Aquin and Brefle fball beat them back.

ANNOT!


Ey


| 4 Kl id


fag
fi fl
PL


| Thine


Stes ec =


joue,
ne El
sthe à
ll, A
Wr |


|
ts |
|


 Aquin and Brefes, Cities belonging to the Venerians,


of Michael. Noftradamus. 289
| ANNOT. d

Languedoc and Guienneare two Provincesin France, from whence many Souldiers
fhall be raifed to go into Ztaly , but being diftreffed , fhall with to, come back again


: ,


over the Alpes, By the great Allobroges , I underftand thofe of Savoy and Péemont,
who fhall go againft Brandis, in Latine 8rundufium ; but fhall bé beaten back by


“XXX LE
apsid édité HRREMG Eten st |
Du Mont Royal naïftra d’une Cafane,
Qui Duc, & Compte viendra tyrannifer,
Drefler Copie de la marche Millane,
Favence, Florence dot & gens efpuifer.
oS he Sages? 2:11: 7
Out of the Royal Mount fball be born in a Cottage,
One that fhall tyranife over Duke and Earl,
He fhall raife an Army in the Land of Millan,
He fhall exhauft Favence and Florence of their gold.
à | mae ANNOT. |
This needeth no Interpretation,
| XXXIIL
French:
i>.) Parfraude Reghe, forces expolier, 1 ::
La clafle obfeile, pañfages a l'efpie, __
Deux fainéts amis fe viendront r’allier,
Efuciller haine de long temps afloupie.
_. -Englifh, .. »,.:;
By fraud a K ing dom and an Army) fall be fpoilt,
The Fleet fhall be put to a ftrait, paffages fall be made to the fpies,
Two feigned friends fball agree together,
They fall raifé up a batred that bad been long dormant.
3 : | ANNOT.
Thewordsare plain.
| XXXIV:
| French.
En grand regret fera la gent Gauloife,
Cœur vain, Jeger croira temerité,
Pain, fel, ne vin'eau venin ne cervoile,
Plus grand captif, faim, froïd, neceflite. 2


Pp


290 “Tha true Prophecies
Englifh,
Yn creat recreet [ball the Frénch Nation be,
Their vain and. light heart ball believe rafbly.
They fhall:have niether Bread, Salt, Wine, nor Beer, rh
Moreover they fball be Prifoners and fhall fuffer bunger, cold; and need.
ANNOT. ,


The words are plain, and the onely queftion'is whither this diftrefs chreattied heré
to France is paft or to come:


KX XV:
French.


La grand poche viendra plaindre pleurer; if
D'avoir efleu, trompez feront en l’Aage,
Guiere avec eux ne voudra demeurer,
Deceu fera par ceux de fon langage, dihe4
Englifh: | | |
The great Pocket fhall bewaile and bemoan, Ai R” |
For having Elected one, they foall be deceived in bis Age; Me
He fhall not ftay long with them. ge.
He fhall be deceived by thofesof his own language.


ANNOT.


Thegreat Pocket which is thé Key of this Stanza being obfcüre 5 forceth me te
leave the reft unperfe&. |


| XXXVI
ge, French. | | ay
| Ie Dieu, le Ciel tout le Divin Verbe a l'Onde, |
Porte par rouges fept razes a Bixance . Lol
Contre les oingts trois cens ‘de Trebifonde,
Deux Loix mettront, & horreur, puis crédence, |
Englih. f Corral
God, Heaven, all the Divine Word in water FE
Carryed by red ones, feven foaved heads at Bifantium, a ioe
14 Againft the anointed three hundred of Trebifond,
iil They fball put two Laws, and horror, and afterwards beliewe:
ANNOT.


Sacrament according tothe Reman Church, fhalf M nut
tielts to Conftantineple, againft which three hun | thang
fhall compare the two Laws with horror >and af. and


This feemeth to foretel that the

| be carried by Cardinals and fevén P

an dred of Trebifon {hall difpute, who
fhe terwards believe,


Englifh}


of Michael Noftradamus.


XXXVII.

French,
Dix envoyez, chef de nef mettre a mort,
D'un adverty, en claffe guerre ouverte,


te À Confution chef, l’un fe picque & mord,
Leryn, Stecades nets, cap dedans la nerte.
(a Englifh.


Ten fball be fent to put the Captain of the Ship to death,
He fball have notice by one, the Fleet [ball be in open War.
A confufion fball be amonoft the Chief, one pricks and bites,
Leryn, Stecades nefs, caps dedans la nerte.
ANNOT.
The three firft Verfesare plain, as for the fourth I believeit to bethe Language
of the Antipodes, for I chink no man can underftand it.
XX XVITI.
| French.
| L’Aifne Roial fur courfier voltigeant,
Picquer viendra fi rudement courir,
Gueule lipée,pied dans l’Eftrein pleignant,
Traine, tiré, horriblement mourir.
bof Englifh.
a The eldeft Royal prancing upon 4 Horfe,
| Shall fpar, ‘aud run very fiercely
Open mouth,the foot in the Stirrup, couplaining,
Drawn, pulled, die horribly.


| ANNOT,


| This foretelleth of the eldeft Son ofa King, who prancing upon his Horfe, fhall
) Spurand run fo fiercely that his foot being intangled in:the Stirrup he hall be drag-
ged and pulled, and die a fearful death.

( In the year 1555. upon the 25. of May, this came to pafs inthe perfon of Henry
| of Albret, the fecond of that name, King of Navarre,

4 This Prince Heary II. che eldeft Royal riding upon ahorfe did fpur him fo hard,thae
it, |) heran away with him, fo that he perceiving the danger he was in, polled the Bridle fo
|  hardchat the horfe's mouth was broken; the pain did not ftop the horfe ; but con-
| trariwife, he grew the more untoward, that Hesry fell downyand in falling one of bis
ttl M feec hung in the ftirrup , fo thar he was drawn.;! and died-a horrid death; « This I
eli, M  foundin the Hiftory of Naples.


T he true Prophecies


XX XIX.
French.
Le conduéteur le |’Armée Francoife,
Cuidant perdrele principal Phalange,
Par fus pavé de l’Avaigne & Ardoile,
Soy parfondra par Gennes gent eftrange.
Englith.
The leader of the French Army,
Thinking to rout the chiefeft Phalange,
Upon the Pavement of Avaigne, and Slate,


Shall fink in the ground by Gennes, 4 ftrange Nation.


ANNOT,

Ic feemethuthat a French General, thinking to routand overcome the chiéfeft
ftrength of his enemy, and going upon a brittle Pavement, made of Slate, (hall fink
in the ground not far from Genes, which he calleth a ftrange Nation to the French,

XL
French.
Dedans tonneaux hors oingts d'huile & graiffe,
Seront vingt un devant Je port fermez,
Au fecond guet feront par mort prouefles,
Gaigner les portes & du quet afiommez.


Englifh,
With Pipes annointed without with Oyl and Greafe,
Before the harbour, one aud twenty fball be fhut,
At the fecond Watch, by death they fhall do great feats of Arms
To win the Gates, and be killed by the Watch. '


ANNOT.
The words and fenfe of this Stanza are plain,
XLI.
French.
Les os des pieds, & des mains enferrez,
Par bruit maifon long temps inhabitée,


Seront par fonges concavant deterrez,
Maifon falubre & fans bruit habitée.


chi
ball ik
ren, |


|


of Michaël, Noftradamus.


Englith.

The bones of the feet and of the hands in hackles,

By a noife a bonfe fhall be a long time deferted,

By a dream the buried shall betaken out of the ground,
The bonfe shall be healthful,and imbabited without noie.


ANNOTF,


I have found the truth of this Stanza upon the place, in my going to Lion, it was
my fortune to lye ata Town four Leagues on this fide of ic, called Lapacodier, where
this Story was told me to have happened few days before,

It chanced that a Company of Foot was to liein the Town, and diftreffed for
quarter, they enquired why fuch a houfe was empty, and were told ic was not inha-
bited by reafon of a noife heard there every night, The Captain of the Troop re-
folved, fince he feared not the living, not to fear che dead, and thereupon lay in the
houfe that night, where Beds were provided for him, and about half a Dozen of his
ftouteft Souldiers ; fo they laid down their weapons on the Table, and began to be
merry at Cards and Dice; expeCting the event. . The door being faft locked, about
twelve and one they heard as though fome body knockt at the door, one of the Soul-
diers by the Captains command, witha Piftolin his hand, and a Candle, opened the
door, then appeared to them a Phantafm, inthe fhape of an old man, loaded with
Chains, thatmade a great noife, chis Phantafm beckened to the Captainat the Table
to come to him, the Captain alfo rifing beckened to the Phantafm to come to him,
this lafted for a while, till che Caprain refolved to go to him, and fo taking a Can-
dle inone hand, anda Piftol in the other, bid his Souldiers follow him hand in hand
with their Arms, then taking the Phantafm by the hand, which was exceeding cold,
he led them into the Cellar, and through many turnings, till ac laft the Phantafm
vanifhed, and the Candles went out, then were they conftrained to remain there till
day light, when perceiving where they were, and having taken notice of the Place
where the Phantafm left them, they went out, and related che ftory to che Townf-
men; fo afterwards they digged in that place, where they found a kind ofa Trunk,
and the bones ofa man init fhackled, they buryed the body.ina Church-yard,and no
noile was heard afterwards in that houfe, this came to päfs about 1624,


X EI I.
French.
Quand Innocent tiendra te lieu de Pierre,
Le Nizaram Sicilian {e verra,
En grands honneurs, mais apres il cherra,
Dans le bourbier d'une Civile guerre,
Englifh.


W ben Innocent shall hold the place of Peter,
The Sicilian Nizaram shall fee him/elf

In great honours, but after that be shall fall
Into the dict of à Civil war.


294 The true Prophecies


ANNOT,


Nothing can be more plain and true than this Prophecie, and thofe thatdeny its
may alfo deny the light ot the Sun, but to make it more evident, we will examine if
Verfe by Verfe.


When Innocent fhall hold the place of Peter; that is, when one named Insocent (hall
be Pope, as he was that preceded the laft.

The Sicilian Nizaram hall fee bimfelf in great honours; that is,the Sicilian Nizarim,
tor Nizaram,is the Annagramme of cM azarin letter for letter,who was born inSicily,
fhall fee himfelf in great honours, as he did; for he was'then in his greateft fplendor.

But alter that be fhall fallinto the dirt of a Civil wars Asevery one knows he did
having put in Prifon the Prince of Cond’, the Prince of Conty, and the Duke of Con-


gweiulle, can any thing be more plains and yet whenl read this forty yearsago, I
cook it to be ridiculous,


XLIIL.
French.
Lutece en Mars, Senateurs en credit,
Par une nuict Gaule fera troublée,
Du grand Crafus l’Horolcope predic,
Par Staturnus, {a puillance exillee:


Englih.
Lutetia 72 Mars, Senators shall be in credit.
In a night France shall be troubled,
The Horofcope of the great Cræfus foretelleth,
That by Saturn bis power shall be put down.


ANNOT.


Lutetis in Latine is the City of Paris, after che death of Hepry IV, the Parliament
of Parts began to prick up their ears, and to go about to call the great ones to
account, amongft whom wasthe Marquels D'astde, favourite of the Queen Regenr
chat had gathered great riches, and therefore is called here Cre{us,our Author faich,
that his power fhall be put down by Satwraus, which mutt here be underftood mifti-


cally, which proved true, for by the Kings command, then Lewis XIII. he was thor
with three Piftols inthe Losvre,


LXIV.

French,
Deux. de poiton faifis nouveaux Venus
Dans la cuifine du grand Prince verfer,
Par le fouillard tous deux au fait copneus,
Prins qui cuidoit de mort l’aifné vexer.


&


y b D
ne! De


a


latin
INStcih
ert
endoy,

(A a |
] uy uy,


‘Of ( bis


i


Of Michael Noftradaniue,
Two newly come being provided with poifon,, .
To pour in the Kitchin of the great Prince,
By the Cooks Boy the fat shall be known’
And he taken that thought by death to vex the elder.
| RUN à à Detar 282
This came to pafs in the time of Henry IV. who was
unknown men, who were difcovered by the Cooks Boy


poifoned at Melan, by two
in the doing of it, and were
both taken, the Hiftoryis at large in Peter Matthew his Hiftoriographer, which I
could not infert here for the farisfaétion of the Reader 5 becaufe 1 could not get the

ook, the Reader may facisfic himéelf upon the place,


296 The true Prophecies


Other Stanzas , taken out of twelve, under the feventh
Century, out of which eight have been rejeéted,becaufe
they were found inthe foregoing Centuries,


LXXII

a French:
LOANS Enfort de Sieges manubis 8 maniples,,
Tey PER Changez le facre & pafle fur le pronfne,
RC Prins & captifs n’arrefte les prez triplés,


NS Plus par fonds miselevé, mis au Trofne:


Englifh.
Recruit of Sieges, [poils and prizes, FE
Corpus Chrifti day shall be changed, and the pronfne flighted,
They shall be taken and made Prifoners, do not ffay in the threes


fold Field.
Moreover, one put in the bottom shall be raifed to the Throne.
LXXX,
French,


L’Occident libre les Ifles Britanniques,
Le recogneu pafler le bas, puis haut,

Ne content trifte Rebel corff. Efcotiques,
Puis rebeller par plui & par nui& chaut.


Englifh.
The WeSt shall'be free, and the Brittifh Iflands,
The difcovered shall pafs low, then high,
Scottifh Pzrates shall be, who shall rebel,
Iu a rainy and hot night.
LX X XIE | 4
French,
La ftratageme fimulte fera rare,
La Mort en voye rebelle par contrée,
Par le retour du voyage Barbare,
Exalteront la poteftante entrée.
Englifh.
The firatagem and grudge shall be fcarce,
Death shall be in a rebellions way through the Countrey,


By the return from a Barbarian travel,
They shall exalt the Proteftant entrance.


French


aulé


of Michael Noftradamus,


| LXXXIII
tnt | Frene me
Cul Vent chaut, confeil, pleurs, timidité,


De nuit au h@ affailly fans les Armes :
D'oppreffion grand calamité, |
1 | L'Epithalame converty pleurs & larmes.


Englifh.
Hot wind, councel, tears, fearfulnefs,
| He shall be affaulted in his bed by night without Arms,
| From that oppreffion shall be raifed a great-calamity,
The Epithalamium shall be converted into tears.


ANNOT. | DUR
f The reafon why I have-put no Annotatiors to thefe, as I have done to the ref, is,
|


becaufe according co my judgement, and that of the moft Learned, they are {purions.


|
f
}


EF OH E


READER.


Friendly Reader,
A D Efore you Read the folleving, Epifile,. L wanld:have yout be
warned of.a few. things: One is; that according tomy “opi.
uion, it is wery obfcure and intelligibl: in moft places, being

77 Ce > Va J / ] ‘ad . Fa =
without any juft connettion | and befides the obfcurity of the
fenfe., the crabbednefs of the expreffion is fuch , that had not the im-
portunity of the Bookseller prevailed, I would have left it out, but
confidering the refpeét due to Antiquity, the fatisfattion we owe to
curious perfons, who would perhaps have thought the Book imperfect
without it, we let it go, trufting to your Candor and Ingenuity.


Farewell.


ro


(uy


Ze, é AT EM Ve
CS) He CN Qui
= /; SE = i NN


OF


Michael Noftradamus.


GENTURY VIIL IX. & X.


That bad not been Printed before > and are in the fame
Edition of 1563.


TO THE


Moft Invincible , moft High. and mot Chriflian King of
France HENRY he Secon Michael Noftrada


mus bi woff chedient Servant and Subjett, wifhetb Piéton
and Happinefs,


 Y reafon of that fingular obfervation, L had O moft


Chriftian-and-Vidtorious oh j ou my Face, who
had been ‘cloudy a:great while-, did prefent it felf
before your immeafurable Majetty. I have been
QRS RSS. ever fince per petually dazled,continually honouri ing
and enfin 2 that day, in which J prefented my felf before it,
as before a fingular humane Majefty.; now feeking after fome res
cafion, whereby. I might make ap pear the coodnefs and finceritÿ of
my heart , and extend, my na de towaids your moft Ex-
cellent Majefty.. ; and leeing that 1€..was impoffible for me to de-
clare it by effects , as well becaufe of the darknels and ob{curity of


Qg 2 my


F Rae gat ead 254 EN
iy ee BS En) à


| rs


300 The Epiftle Dedicatory.


my mind, as for the enlightning it did receive from the face of
the greateft Monarch in the World ; I was a great while belore I
could refolve to whom I fhould Dedicate thefe three laft Centuries
of my Prophecies , which make the compleat thoufand, and after
Thad along time confidered , Ihave with a great remerity made
my addrefs to your dad : being no ways dainted by it , as the
grave Author Plutarch related in the Life of Lycurgus, that feeing
the offerings and gifts that were Sacrificed in the Temples of their
Heathen Gods , durft not come thither-no more, leaft the people
fhould wonder at the cofts and charges. Notwithftanding, feeing
your Royal Splendour joyned with an incomparable Humanity , I
have made my addrefs to it , not as to the Kings of Perfia , of
whom to come near, it was ferbiddes , but toa moft Prudent aia
Wife Prince I have Dedic ated my Noéturnal and Prophetical Sup-
putations, written rather by a natural inftinét, and Poetical furour,
then by any rules of Poetry ; and moft part SU written and agree-
ing with the Years, Months and Weeks, of the Regions,Countreys
and moft part of chet Téwnd and Cities in Europe ; touching allo
fome thing of Africa, and of a partof Afia , by the change of Re-
gions that come near to thofe Climats,and compounded of natural
faction. But [ome body may anfwer @who hath need to blow his
Nole) the Rime to be as eafie to be under ftood, as the intelligence
of the fence is hard and difficult, and therefore O moft humane
King, moft of the Prophetical Stanza’s are fo difficule , that ae
is no way to be found for the Interpretation of them ; ieverrtel el
being in hope of fetting down the Towns), Cities, aiid Réctobs,
wherein moft of thofe fhall happen , efpecially i in “es year 4 585.
and in the year 1606. beginning Fous this prefent time, which is
the 14. of March 5 557. and going further to the fulfilling of thofe
things, which fhall be in the beginning of the feventh Millenary,,
according g as my Aftronomical Calculation , and other Learning
could reach. at which time the adverfaries “of Chrift and of ‘his
Church fhall begin to multiply ; all hath been compofed and caleu-
lated in days and hours of Election, and well difpofed,andall as ac2
curately as was pofñible for me to do. And the whole Minerwa
libera @ non invita, Calculating almoft as much of the time that is
come.as of that which is paft,comprehending it in the prefent time,
and what by the courfe of the faid time fhall be known to happen
in all Regions punctually as it is here written, adding nothing {u-
perfluous to it, although it be faid ; Quod de futuris contingenti-
bus, non eft deter mitate omnino veritas, It is very true Sir, that by


my


letnp
Fther
Op e
et


Nt and
| Sup-
Lou
agree
ntteys
gallo
i Re
tural
ow his
igence
umane
r there
helels
Dons,
1585,
hich L


Fthole


eDaty,
a
of is
calcu.
as ac:
fier D


The Epiftle Dedicatory, ger
my natural inftinct given me by my Progenitors,I did think I could
foretel any thing ; but having made an agreement between this
faid inftin& of mine, anda long Calculation of Art, and by a great
tranquility and repofe of mind, emptied my Soul of all care and
carefulnefs , I have foretold moft part of thele ex tripode æneo,
though there be many who attribute to me fome things that are no
more mine, then what is nothing at all. The only Eternal God,
who is the fearcher of men’s hearts, being pious, juft, and merciful,
is the true Judge of it, whom I beleech to defend me from the
calumny of the wicked men , who would as willing calumnioufly
inquire for what reafonall your ancient Progenitors Kings of France
hive healed the difeafe called the Kings-evil, and fome other Na.
tions have cured the biting of venemous Beafts ; others have had a
certain inftinG to foretell things that are to come , and of feveral
others, too tedious to be here inferted ; notwithftanding thofe in
whom the malignancy of the wicked {pirit fhall not be fupprefled by
length of time; after my deceafe my work fhall be in more efteem,
then when J was alive; neverthelefs if I fhould fail in the fupputa-
tion of times,or could not pleafe fome,may it pleafe your moft Im-
perial Majefty to forgive me, protefting before God and his Saints,
that I do not intend to infert any thing by writing in this prefent E-
piftle,that may be contrary to the true CatholickFaith,in conferring
the Aftronomical Calculation, according to my learning ; for the
{pace of rimes of our Fathers that have been before us, are fuch,
fubmitting my felf to the correction of the moft Learned, that the
firft man Adam was before Noah, about one thoufand two hundred
forty two years, not computing the time according to the fuppu-
tation of the Gentiles, as Varro did, but onely according to the Sa-
cred Scriptures; and the weaknels of my witin my Aftronomical
Calculations. After Noah and the univerfal Flood about a thou-
fand and four{core years came Abraham, who was a fupreme Aftro-
loger, according to moft mens opinion , and did firft invent the
Chaldean Letters ; after that came Mofes, viz. fome five hundred
and fifteen or fixteen years after , and between the time of David
and Mofes have pafled about 570.years. After which between the
time of David and that of our Saviour and Redeemer Jefus Chriff,
born of the Virgin Mary,have pafled (according to fome Chronogra-
phers. à, thoufand three hundred and fifty years. Some body
may object, thaë this fupputation is not true ; becaufe it differetls
from that of Evfebivs. And from the time of humane redemption,
to that of the execrable feduétion of the Saracens, have patted fix
hundred


Tbe Epiftle Dedicatory.


hundred and, four and twenty years, or thereabouts. : From that
time hitherto, it 1s eafie to colle& what times are paft, if my fup-
putation be not good among all Nations ; becau e all hath been
calculated by the .courfe of the Ceeleftial bodies, joyned with
motion, inf fed in me at certain loofe hours, by the motion of my
om tent Progenitors ; but the injury of the time..( moft excellent
King } re quireth, chat fuch.fecret events fhould not be manifefte ed,
but by an enigmatical Sentence, having the only fenfe, and one
only intelligence, without having mixed with i i any ambiguous
or amphi ibolog ts FA NAR ds rather under a Cloudy obfcuri-
ty, through a ocre: infufion, coming near to the Sentence of one
of the Thou fand and two Prophets, that have been fince the Crea-
tion of the World, according to the fu upputation and punical Chro-
nick of Foel. Effundam pyriun meum fuper omnen, € carnem
c prophe stabunt fii veftri & filie veftre: But fueha Prophecy did
proceed fi from the mouth of the Hol y Ghoft, who was the Supreme
and eternal Power, which being come with that of the Ceeleftial
bodies, hath caufed.fome of them to foretel great and wonderful
s; asfor my part I challenge no fuch thing in this place, God
forbid, Lconfefs truly, chat all cometh from God, for which I give
him thanks, honour, and praife, without having mixed any thing
of that divination, which proceedeth a Fato,but only of that which
proceedeth d REX & Natura,and moft of it joyned with thé motion
and courfe of the Coeleftial Bodies; infomuch that feeing asina
burning Glafs, and through a Cloudy Vifion, the great and fad
events, the prodigious and calamitous accidents, that fhall befall
Gite W orfhippers, firft of God, and fecondly, thole that are Earth-
ly propped up, with a thouland other calamitous accidents, which
hall! be known } in courfe of time ; for God will take ONCE of the
long barrennefs of the great Dame, who afterwards fhall conceive
two princip: al Children : But being in danger, fhe that fhall be ad-
ded to her by the temerity of age, running a danger in the 18,
and not able to go beyond the 36, fhall leave behind her three
females,and he fhall have two that never had any of the fame father,
the The Les between the three Brothers fhall be fuch, and hen
fhall. they be united and agreed, infomuch that the tee and four
parts of Europe fhall quake : “by the leffer in years fhall the
Chriftian Monarchy be upheld and augmented, Seéts fhall rife, and
prefently be put down again, the Arabians {hall be put back , King-
doms fhall be united,and new Laws made. Conéerning ir other


Children ; the firft (hall poflefs the furious Crowned Lions, hold-
> ing


The Epifile Deaicatory. 303
ing their Paws upon the Efcutcheons. The fecond, well attended,
will go fo deep among the Lions, that the fecond way fhall be open,
all trembling and furious going down, to get upon the Pyrenean
Mountains. The ancient Monarchy fhall not be transferred the third
innundation of humane blood fhall happen, and for a good while
Mars fhall not be in Lent. And the Daughter fhall be given for
the prefervation of the Church, the Dominator ofit falling into
the Pagar Forces ofthe new utibelievers, fhe fhall have two ‘Chil.
dren, one from faithfulnefs, and the other from unfaithfulnefs,
for the confirmation of the Catholick Church; and the other, whe
to his confufion and late repentance, fhall go about to ruine her.
There fhall be three Regions by the extreme differences of the
leagues, viz. the Roman, the German, and the Spaiifb, who by a
Military hand thall RARE divers Sects, “forfaking the soand 52 de-
grees of altitude,and all thofe of remote Regions fhall do homage
to the Fe OF Europe, and of the North of 40 DER Alti-
tude. who ob) a vain HE fhall quake,after that thofe of Fthe Welk,
uth ft fhall JRARe becaufe of their pow rer, infomuch that
s done, cannot be undone | sone Warlike power. They


fhall be eq a in Nature, but much different in Faith. | After this,
the barrenDame # a greater power then the cle cond, fhall be adinit=
ted by. two peopl le, by the firft obftinate that had p awer over the
others ; by. the fecond: and by the third, that fhall extend his


Circuit of che Eaft of Europe, as far as the Hungarians, vanquifhed
and overcome, and by a Maritine Sail, fhall make his excurfions
into the Trinarrian and Adriatick Sea, by his Mirmidons.and Ger
many fhall fall, and the Barbarian Se@ fhall be wholl Hy driven from
among the (came Then the great Empire of Antichrift thal!
begin 1 in the Attila,and Xerxes to come down with an innumerable
multitude of people, infomuch that the coming of the Holy
Ghoft, proceeding from the48 Degree, fhalltran{migrate, dui-
ving away the abomination of the Antichrift, ‘who made W
gainft the Royal, who fhall be the great Vicar of LC. and againft
hig Church, and his Kingdom, per tempus, Cv in Bh ibe i femporis.
and before this fhall precede a Solat Fclipfe,the moft and obs
{cure that was fince the Creation of the World, till the death and
iffion of I. C: and from him till then and it fhall bein the Month
of O&ober, When fuch a great TÉLÉ ON fhall be made that every
body will eink that the ‘weight of the Earth, fhall have lo sft its na-
tural motion, and be fwallowed up in perpetual darkñefs In the
Spring before and after this, fhall happen extraordinary changes,
mutations of Kingdoms, and great Earth-quakes, with pullulation


y} À


nf 9.
cia ct


304 T be Epiftle Dedicatory.


of the new Babylons milerable daughter,increafed by the abomina-
tion of the, firft Holocauft, and fhall Jaft only 73 years and 7
Months, then from that Stock fhe that had been long time barren,
proceeding from the fifth Degree, who fhall renew all the Chrifti-
an Church, and then fhall be a great Peace, Union and Concord,
between one of the Children of the wandring and feperated fore-
heads by divers Kingdoms, and fuch Peace fhall be made, that rhe
Inftigator and Promoter of Military function, by diverfity of Re-
ligions,» fhall be tied to the bottom of the deep, and the Kingdom
of the Rabrous, who fhall counterfeit the wife, fhall be united.
. And the Countreys, Towns, Cities and Provinces, that had de-
ferted their firft ways to free themlelves, captivating themlel ves
more deeply,» fhall be fecretly angry at their liberty and Religion
loft, and fhall begin to ftrike from the left, toturn to the right,
reftoring the holinefs beaten down long before with their former
writing 5 fo that after the great Dog, fhall come forth the biggeft
Mafiit, who fhall deftroy all that was done formerly , then
Churches fhall be built up againas before, the Clergy fhall be
reftored to its former ftate, and fhall begin to Whore, and Luxu-
riate, and tocommit a Thouland Crimes. And being near unto
another defolation, when fhe fhall be in her higher and more fib-
lime dignity, there fhall rife powers and Militaty hands, who
{hall take away from her the two Swords, and leave her only the
Enfigns, from which by themeans of the crookednefs that draweth
them, the people caufing it to go ftraight; and not willing to
fubmic unto them by the end oppotite to the fharp hand that
toucheth the Ground, they fhall provoke till that a branch fhall
proceed from the barren, which fhall deliver the people of the
World from that meek and voluntary flavery, putting themfelves
under the protection of Mars, depriving Fupiter of all his honours
and dignities, for the free City eftablifhed and feated in another
little Mefopotamia, And the chief Governour fhall be thruft


ine
out of the middle, and fer inthe high place of the Air, being


4.


ignorant of the confpiracy of the Confpirators, with the fecond
Thrafibulus, who long before did manage this thing, then fhall


from the true Sects, the middlemoft of which by her worfhippers,
e


wer


HU,


le ve
ion
ht
Ormner
gpel
then
all be
Luxus
Lr Unto
e{ub-
Wh


{ Î
nother M


thrult
being


econd |


a fal
han,
lat,
dom,


ye où |


The Epistle Dedicarory} 305
be alittle put into ruine ; the firft, whollÿ in all Eabope: and moft
part of Africa undone by thethird, by: the means ôf'the poor in


Spirit, who by madnefs elevated, {hall through libidinous luxury,


commit adultery. - The people will rife and maintain it, and fhall
drive away thofe that did adhere to the Legiflators, and fhall feem
by the Kingdoms fpoiled by the Eaftern men;that God the Creator
hath loofed Satan from his Infernal Prifon , to caufeto be born
the great Dog and Dobam, who fhall make fo great and abomis
nable a fraction in the Churches, that the Red nor the: White
without Eyes and without Hands, fhall not judge ofit, and their
power fhall be taken away from them. : Then fhall’be a greater
perfecution againft the Church than ever was, ‘and in the mean
time fhall be fo great a Plague, that two: parts of three m the world
fhall fail, infomuch that no body {hall be able to know the true
owners of fields and houfes, and, there fhall happen a total defola-
tion unto the Clergy, and the Martial men fhall ufurpe what thall
come back, from the City ofthe Sun, :andifrom Molita, and the
Stachades \flands, and the great Chain of that Port fhall be open,
which. taketh its denomination from a Sea’ Oxe, and a new incur-
fion fhall be made through the Sea Cvafts, willing to deliver the
Caftulan. Leap. from the firft Mahometan taking, and the afiaule-
ing fhail not altogether be in vain, and that place where the habiz
tation of Abraham was, {hall be affaulted by. thofe, who fhall
have arefpect for the Jovials. , And that City of Achem, fhalbbe
encompafled and affaulted onall fides,by a great power of Armed
men; their Sea Forces fhall be weakened by the Weftern men;
and to that Kingdom fhall happen great defolation, and the great
Cities fhall be depopulated, and thofethat {hall come in) fhallibe
comprehended within the vengeance of the wrath of God, and the
Sepulchre held in fo great veneration, fhall remain a great whi
open to the univerfal Afpeét of the Heavens; Sun and Mooi, and
the facred place fhall be converted intoa Stable for fmall and great
Cattle, and put to prophane.ufes.. : © what acalamitous afiliction
{hall be then for women with Child, and chiefly by the.principal
Eafterly head, being for the moft partimoved by the Northern
and Wefterly men, vanquifhed.and puttôideath, beaten, and all
the reft put to flight, and the Children he had by many women,
put in Prifon, then fhall be fulfilled the:Prophecy ofthe Kingly
Prophet. ‘UF audiret gemitus coutpeditorum, ut {olveret filios inte-
remptorun., what great oppreflion fhall be made then upon the
Princes and Governours of Kingdoms, andelpecially of thole that
Rr {hall


306 Tbe Epiftle Dedicatory,

fhall live -Eaftward and hear the Sea, and their'La nguages inter-
mixed very fociably. |The Language of the Arabians and Latines
by the African commünication, and'all the Eaftern Kings {hall be
driven away, beatén and brought to nothing, not altogether b
the means of the ftrength of the Kings ofthe North, and by the
drawing near of our age, by thé means of three fecretly united,
feeking for death by ambuthes one againft another. And the rec
newing of the Triumiviraté fhall laft feven years, while the f-
of fuch a fect fhall be fpread all the world over, and the Sacrifice
of the Holy and immaculate Hoft {hall be upheld : And then (hall
the Lords be two in number Viétorious in the North againft the
Eaftern ones, and there fhall be fuch à great nove and Warlike
tumult, that all the Eaft fhall quake for fear of thofe two Brothers,
not Northetn Brothers. And becaufe, Sir, by this difcourfe, I
put all things confufedly in thefe predictions, a5 well concerning
the event of them, as for the account of the time which followeth,
which is not at all, or very little conformable to that F have doné
before, as well by Aftronomical way, as other of the facred Scrip=
tures which cannot erre, I could have fet down to every quatrain
the time in which they fhal] happen, but it would not pleat
body, much lefs the interpretation of them, till, Sir. your Majefty
hath granted me full power {o to do, that my Calamniators may
have nothing to fay againft me. | Neverthele(s reckoning the years
fince the Creation of the World to the Birth of Noah have pafled


1506. years, and from the Birth of Noah to the perfed buil
the Ark near the univerfal Flood have D


folary , or lunary , or mixed , form
ptures , L hold that they were folary. And at the end ‘of thofe
600. years Noah entered into the Ark , to fave himfelf from the
Flood , which Flood was univerfal upon the Earth | and Jafted a
year and two months ; and from the end of the Flood, to the birth
of Abraham did pafs the number of 295. years ; and from thebirth
of Abraham to that of Ifaae did pafs 100. years, and from [faacto
Facob 60. years ; and fromthe time that he went into Æsypt till
he came out of it, did pafs 1 30- years; and from the time that a=
cob went into Ag ypt till his pofterity came out of it did pals 430.
years ; and from the coming out of Ægypt to the building of Salo-
mon's Temple in the fourth year of his Reign did pafs 480. years ;
and from the building ofthe Temple till Jefus Chrift, according to
the {upputation of the Chronographers, ‘did pafs 490. years; and
fo by this fupputation , which I have gathered out of the Holy


Scriptures


€ every


ding of
afled 600. years, whither
Y part according to the Scri-


?


ame


tle


{
}


at aunt
at Wii


with
fome'y
the A
tovethe
dilcord
before.
| ding the


Maly


thal] ri


to hig]
Cute th
| Tao
| by Ton


The Epiftle Dedicatory. 307
Scriptures, the whole cometh to about 4173. years, eight Months
more or lefs But fince the time of [. C. hitherto, À leave it be-
caufe of the diverfity of Opinions... And having calculated thefe
pre(ent Prophecies according to the order of the Chain, which con-
taineth the revolution, and all by Aftronomical Doétrine, and ac-
cording to my natural inftinét, and after fome time, and init com.
prehending fince the time that Saturz hall turn to coniein on the
7 of the Month of April, till the 25 of Augnft ; Jupiter from the
14 of June to the 7 of O&ober ; Mars from the 27 of April till
22 0f Funes Venus from the 9 of April to the 22 of May, Mercury
from the 3 of February till the 24 of the fame ; afterwards from
the 1 of Fane till the 24 of the fame; and from the 26 of September
till the 16 of Oéfober, Saturn in Capricorn, Fupiter in Aquarins,Mars
in Scorpio, Venus in Pifees, Mercury within a Month in Capricorn,
Aquarius ini Pifces, Luna in Aquarius, the Dragons head in Libra,
the Tail oppofite to her fign according toa ConjunGion of Fupiter
and Mercury, with a quadrin Afpect of Mars to Mercury, and the
head of the Dragon fhallbe with à Conjunction of Sol and Fupiter:
the ‘year thall be peacefull without Eclipfe, and in the beginning
of that year fhall be a greater perfecution againft the Chriftian
Church than ever was in Africa, and it {hall Jaft till the year 17.92.
at which time every body will think it a renovation of Age.
After: that ithe Roman people fhall'begin to ftand upright again,
and to put away fomie ob{cure darkneffes, receiving fome of its far-
mer light, but not without great divilions, and continual changes.
Venice after that with great firength and power fhall ‘lift up her
Wings fo high, chat fhe will not-be much inferiour to the ftrength
of the old) Rome, and in that time great Bixantine Sails, joyned
with the Liguftiques, by the Northern help and power ‘hall give
fame hinderance, whereby thole of Crete fhall not keep their faith,
the Arches built by theantient Martialmen, will keep company
together with Neptunis Waves. Inthe Adriatick fhall bea great
difcord, what was united {hall be parted alunder, and what was
before, and isa great City, will go nearto becom a houle, inclu-
ding the Pes:potan, and the Mefopotamia of Europe to 45 and others
to 4 1,42,and37.And in that¢ime,andCountrey,the Infernal power
fhall rife againft the Church of IC. with the power of the Enemies
to his Law, which«hall be thefecond Antechrift, who fhall perfe-
-cuite the faid (Church and its Vicar by the ‘means of the power of
Temporal Kings,; who through their Ignorance fhall be-feduced
by Tongues more fharp than any ja inthe hands of a mad pe
4 The


%


x


308 Tbe Epiftle Dedicatory.


The ‘aid Reign: of Antichrift fhall notlatt but till the eridins of
him, born by Age, and of che other in the City of Plancur accom
panied by-the Ele& of Modone, Fuléy by Ferrara, maintained’ by
Adriatick; Liguriens; and the proximity of the great Trinzacria, and
after that fhall paf over the Mount ‘fovis. The Gallique Ogmyon
followed with fuch a number,that even from afar off the Empireof
the great Law, fhallbe prefented to him) and then;tand after thal
be profufedly fpilled the: blood of the Innocentiby ‘the Nocent,
railed onchigh ; then by great Floods the memory‘of thofe things
contained by fuch Inftruments, :fhall receive anininumerable lots,
as alfo fhall learning towards the North by ‘the Divine Will,
Satan bound once: more, and an univerfal’ Peace thall:be athong
men, and: the Church of EC. fhall be free from all tribulation,
although theAxefrains would fain mix among it the Honey of their
peftilent feduétion, and this thall happemabout the feventh'Milli-
nary; fothar the Sanctuary of I.-C fhall be no more trodden down
by the unbelievers that fhall come from the North, .the world-be-
ing near to fome: conflagration, although by my fipputations in
my Prophecies, the courfe of the time goeth much furthers Tathe
Epiftle that withinithe lace years have dedicated tomy Son Cefar
Nostradamus, 1 have openly enough declared fome things; «without
prognofticating. : But here ( Sir ) are comprehended many great
and wonderful events, which thofe thatcome after us {hall feesAvid
during thefaid Aftrological fupputation, conferred withthe facred
Scripture, the» petfecution of the Clergy fhall have its beginning
from the power of Northern Kings, joyned with the Eaftern ones ;
that perlecution fhall laft Eleven years and a little lefss ‘at which
time the chief Northern King fhall fail, which years Being-ended,
fhall come in his united Southern one, who fhall yet more violently
perfecuté the Clergy by the Apoftatical {eduction of one that:hal]
have the abfolute power over the Milirant Churchof God’: And
the Holy people of God and keeper of his Law, andall order of
Religion fhall be grievoufly perfecuted and:affliGed,:infomuch tliat
tHe blood of the ; true Eccletiaftical men thall float all over; and
unto one of chole horrid Kings this praife fhall be given by his-fdl-
lowers to have fpilt more humane bloodof the Innocent Clergy-
men, than any body can do Wine, and theifaid King fhall commit
incredible crimes againft the Ohurch; humane blood: fhall run
chrough publick ftreets and Churches,as water coming from an‘im-


petuous Rain, and the next Rivers fhallbered with blood, and By :


another Seaifight the Sea hall be red, infomuch thafione King thall
fay


i p paf |
on. |


ed Wf


1 à | |


|
ré it
tal |
Cent,
Cons


elok 4


‘Wil,
non
ton |
Ï dé |
Milk.
doin
(de.


Gin


lutte À


1Cefir


nthout |


Yi |


vid |
ered


nine |


ones; A


which
nded, |


tently
at hall |
: And
rderof |


chthat |
land


5 y


hisidl- |)


ein |


fay» to, another, ‘Bellis rubuit navalibus equor. ..iAfterthat inthe ..
fameryear;& thofe’that follaw,fhall happen. the moft horrid Plague,f 4


caufed by the precedent ni ben and fo, great tribulations'as ever:


did» happen: fince ‘the. firft Cendant an of the, Chtiftian Church


through all thé Latine Regionssiome marks ofit; remaining, in fome


Coumntreys: of Spain. At that time the Northern King hearing the,
complaint of the people of his principal ticle, fhall raife up fo great
an Army, and fhall go thro ugh the ftraights of his laft Anceftors
and Progenitors, that he will fee up all again in their firft ftate, and
the great Vicar of the C ope, fhall be reftared i in his former eftate,
but iy ee and altogether forfakeh,and then (hall thé S ré 2 fan
Corum be deftroyed by Pagani{m,and the old and New Teftament
be thruft ‘out and burtit, after that fhall Antechrift be the inferna!
Prince, and oncé more for the laft all the Kingdoms of Chriften-
dom and alfo of the unbelievers fhall quake for the {pace of 25
years, and there fhall be more grievous Wars and Battles, and
Towns, Cities, Gaftles and other buildings fhall be burnt,, dete:
late; ease deftroyed with à great effufion of Veftal blood, Married
Women and Widows ravifhed, fucking Children dathed againft t the
Walls of the Towns, and fo many evils thall be committed | by the
means of the A at prince Satan, that almoft che univerfal wer!d
fhall be undone and delolate and Lu thele events many unufual
Birds fhall cry through the Air, Huy, Huy, and à little while
after {hall vanifh away? : And after het ame fhall have Jafted a good
while, there fhall be renewed a Kingdom of Satura and Golden
Age. Godthe Creator fhall fay, hearing the afiliction of his peo-
le, Satan fhall be put,and tied in ge bouomit f the deep,and there
fhall begin an univerfal ‘peace. between God and men, and the
Ecclefiafttcal power thali-be-+m tts greater force; and Satan fhall b
left bound for the { pace of athoufand. years, and then hall be
loofed again. All thele guys are july fitted by the facres
Scripture, to the vilible Coeleftial things, vx. Saturn y fupier, à , vd
Mats and others joyned with them, as more at large may be fe
in (toe of my Stanza’s.. 1 would have calculated it more d< -eply,
and compared one with the other, but feeing Gmoft exc cellent


King ) that fome ftand ready to dein ite me, I {all withdraw my


Pen to its Nocturnal repole. Multa etiam 0 Rex potentiffime pre.
clara, & fane inbrevi ventura, fed omnia in bac tua Epiftola inneële.
re non polfumus, nec volumus fed ad intelligenda quedam fata, aride
fata panca libanda, funt, quamvis tanta fit in ouines tua amplitudo x
bumanitas bomines, deofqué pietas, ut folus ampliffimo & Chriffia,


Nii Mi 72


074 Le


4]


TibevE pile Deaicatory. 399:


310 The Epiftle Dedicatory.


niffemo regis nomine, O ad quem fumma totins Religions authoritas
deferatur, dignus effé videare. But only I fhall befeech you O moft
Merciful King, through your fingular and prudent goodnefs, to
underftand rather the defire of my Heart, and the earneft defire I
have to obey your moft excellent Majefty, fince my Eyes were fo
near yout Royal {plendor, than the greatnefs of my work can de-
ferve of require.


From Selin this 27 June, 1558.


Faciebat Michael Noftradamus,
Salonæ Petre, Provincie.


}
{


SP LL)
4 = AS J
a


PE ur
ER


if
TEA
4


A \ / £ Z \
Wf LA = 2)
<< ER The
< Qu Migr


PE CA >
(À OF AE


THE


PROPHECIES M


Michael .Noftradamus.


GENTURY VIIL.


enc alana ag


L
French.


LE Sp P ampon, Durance;ilés tiendront énferrez.


di à | | Englith.
| Pau; N ay, Loron; #rore in ifire then blood fhall bé,
| Lauda to fwim, Great onèSrhhto the Surtez,
| a Fhe Agatias fball refuse the entry, ys
ris D - Pampon, Durance /ball keep them enclofed,
i  ANNOT,
T he Prophecies of this, and of the remaining Centuries being for the moft part fo
obfcure, as no man is able to make any fenfe of them, the judicious Réadér mutt not
_ |) expec from me, what no man élfe caa dos Jer him {office if I Live himas much lighe


as can, and leave the ref to his own judgement and induftry,
Pan is the chief Town of the Province of Beara, in the Kin


3 | Bdom of Navarre where
| Henrgche IV, King of Frapceand Navarre was born, Nay and Loros are barbarous
| words, fo are Surrez, Agaffas and Pampon, Durance is a River of France,


French,


Ai


A un GER nr


The true Prophecies
TT
French: |
Condon & Aux, & autour de Mirande,
Je voy du Ciel feu qui les environne,
Sol, Mars, conjoint au Lion, puis Marmande,
Foudre,grand guerre,mur tomber dans Garonne.


-Englith,
Condon and Aux, and about Mirande,
I fee a fire from Heaven that encompaffeth them, —
Sol, Mars, i# conjunétion with the Lion,’ and then Marmande,
Lightning, great War, Wall falls into the Gatonne.
ANNOT, :


Condon, Aux, Mirande, and Marmande are Towns inthe Province of Geyenie aud
Languedoc, Garonne is the River of Besrdeawx,


LIL
Freach.

Au fort Chafteau de Vigilanne & Refviers,
Sera ferré les puifnay de Nancy,
Dedans Turin feront ards les premiers;
Lors que de dueil Lyoz fera tranfy.

Englifh.
In the firong Caftle of Vigilanne and Refviers,
Shall be kept clofe the yonngeft fon of Nancy,
Within Turin the firft foall be burnt up,
When Lyon fball be overwhelmed with forrow:

ANNOT.

yigilanne and Refuiere being falfly writen here , it muft be fet down Plane and
Riniere , which are two ftrong Caftles , the firft being feated in Psemont , and the
laft in Burgundy,

Nancyis the chief Town of Eorrain, and 7wrin of Piemoxt | Lyon is a famous City
in France , fo that che fenfe of this Prophecy feemeth to be , thatthe youngeft Son
of Nancy, (that is of Lorrais) thall be kept clofe Prifoner in thofe two Caftles of
Veillane and Riniera, and that the chief men of T#ris fhall be burnt, when the City
of Zyes fhall be oppreffed with forrow. € RIT

LV.
| French:
Dedans Monech le Coq fera receu,
Le Cardinal de France apparoiftra,
Par Logarion Romain {era deceu,


Foibleffe a l’Aigle,& force au Coq croiftra:


Cock,
wth
py tiie &
CAR
UOCK i$


whith d


Borne an
he k iar
VU AMY bs

|

| Britany,

|
Lu


mack
Medat by
f


teh ace
I, abc


oo oe ae


>


end |
andthe À


us City
peltSon |
so à
Cy à


of Michael Noftradamus.


Englifh. *
Within Monech the Cock fhall be admitted,
The Cardinal of France fhall appear, |
By.Logation, Roman fhall be deceived, |
Weaknefs tothe Eacle, and firergth to the Cock fall grow,
ANN OT. .

Moucech is falfe written here, it muft be Monaco, which isa Principality and Town
in Italy by Genoa , belonging to the Houfe of the Grimaldi, wherein the'French were
admitted by the policy of Cardinal Récheliew, during the Wars between France and
Spain,
tel is a Barbarous name, by which he meaneth fome body unknown to us!

By the Eagle is meant the Emperour , who was very Jowat that time, and by the
Cock, the King of France, who was very powerful, where it is to be obferved, thar
by the Eagle the Emperour is always underftood, becaufe it is his Arms, and by the
Cotk is meant the King of France , becaufe a Frenchmanis called in Latine Gallus,
which alfo fignifieth a Cock. | |

Y.

French,
Apparoiftra Temple luifant orné,
La Lampe & Cierge a Borne & Bretueil,
Pour la Lucerne le Canton deftourné,  _
Quand on verra le grand Cog au Cercueil.

Englsth.
A fhining adorned Temple fball appear,
The Lamp and wax Candle at Borne and Bretueil,
For Lucerne the Canton turned of, |
When the great Cock fball be {cen in bis Coffin.

ANNOT.

Borne and Bretueil are two particular places, the firft is one of the fourBaronies of
theRiver Mafe, viz. Peterfem, Steen, Horne, Borne, the other is a little Town ia
Britany. '

Lucerne is one of the Cantons of Switzerland. VVe have faid before what is
meant by the greatrCock, viz, the King of Frawce, Let the Reader make up the
reft, according to his fancy,


VE
French.
Charté fulgure a Lyon apparente,
Luyfant, print Malte fubit fera eftainte,
Sardon, Mauris traitera decevante, |.
Geneve a Londres,a Cog trahifon feinte.


Sf


T he true Prophecies


Englifh.
A thundering light at,Lyons appearing,
Bright, took Maltha’ infantly fhall be put ont,
Sardon fhall treat Mauris deceit? ully,
To Geneva, London,and the Cock a fained trea on,
ANNOT.


cMaltha isan Iflandin the Mediterranean Sea,famous for the Knights that inhabit
it, and take theirname from thence. . Sardonand Mawrés are barbarous Words,,


VIL

French.
Verceil, Milan donra intelligence,
LE [ycin fera faite la Bayes
Courir par S'ez/1e EAU, fang feu par Florence,
Unique choir done en bas faifant maye;

Englith.
Verceil, Milan (balbgive intelligence,
Iathe Tycin fb. be Peace be made,
Ruz through Seine water, blood, fire through Florence,
Fhe only one [ball fall from top to bottom making maye.
| verceil and Milan are two Cities in taly, the Zycin , or rather Thefinisa River of
| the fame Countrey ; Seine is the River that runneth at-Paris. Florence is a famous
City in italy, and maye a barbarous word, foifted up to patch up his Rime,


VIII.
French.

Pres de Linterne dans dés tonnes fermez,
Chie as fera pour I Aigle,Ja menee,
L’Efleu cafle, luÿ ne ges enfermer,
Dedans Tibe rapt elpoue emmence.


Englith.
i Near Linterné, enclofed within Turs,
Hi Chivas /hall drive the plot for. the Eagle,
ai The Elect cafbiered, he and bis men fb ut up,
Within Turin,arape, and Bride carried away.
ANNOT.
Linterne is a {mall Town in italy; by Twys are meant woodden Veflels, fuch as


chey put Rhenifh wines and others in,
Chivas isa Town in Piemons,and Twrin the chief Town of the faid Countrey.


D,
Vé
}‘


“the
‘acts
eatié
ft 1S GAIN


Lavlane


of Michael Noftradamus.


IX.
| | French.
Pendant quel’Aigle & le Coq a Savone,
Seront unis, Mer, Levant & Hongrie,
L'Armée a Naples, Palerme, Marque d'Añcone,
| Route, Venife, par barbe horrible crie.

bb | Englifh.

hy W Whilft the Eagle and the Cock at Savona,
Shall be united, Sea, Levant, and Hungary,
Army at Naples,Palermo, Markof Ancona,
Rome, Venice, cry becaufe of aborrid beard.


ANNOT.


By the Eagle is meant the Emperour , and by the Cock the King of France ; the
reftis eafie,


X.
| French.
Puanteur grande fortira de Lanfane,
Qu'on ne fcaura l’origine du fait,
L'on mettra hors toute la gent loingtaine,
| Feu veu au Ciel peuple eftranger deffait.
Riverot Englifh.
fimo A great flink fhall come forth ont of Laufane,
| So that no body fhall know the offpring of it;
They fall put out all the Forreiners, |
Fire feen in Heaven, a firange people defeated,


ANNOT.


Lanfane is a City fituated in Savoy, by the Lake of Geneva, but nowas] take it in
the pofleffion of the Switzers.


XL
French.
Peuple infiny paroiftre a Vicence,
Sans force feu brufler la Bafilique,
Pres de Lunage des fait grand de Valence,
Lors que Venife par morte préndre pique.
| | Englifh. |
¢ (has Infinite deal of people fhall appear at Vicence,
Without force, fire fball burn in the Bafilick,


Near Lunage the great one of Valence fhall be defeated,
When Venice by death fball take the pique.


fresh


Sf à | ANNOT.


216 The true Tropbecies


A NNOT.


picenzaisa Town in Italy , under thedominion of the Venetians.  Bafilick is the
name of the biggeft fort of Ganons or pieces of Ordinance, As for Valence there is
three Cities of thatname, one in Spain, thefecond in Fraxce , and the third in Jtaly ;
inftead of Lunage, it muft be Lignage which isa Town in Italy.


XT
French.


Apparoïltra aupres du Bufalore,
L’haut & procere entre dedans Milan,
L’ Abbé de Foix avec.ceux de Saint Maure,
Feront la fourbe habillez ea vilain.
Englifh.
Near, the Bufalore fhall appear,
The high and tall, come into Milan,
The Abbot of Foix with thofe of Saint Maure,
Shall make the trumpery being cloathed like rogues.
AN NOT.
Bufalore is a barbarous words Fodx isa Countrey in France, and St, Aaure a lit-
tle Town inthe faid Countrey,


i| | XIIL
1) RAI French.
ie Le croifé Frere par amour effrenee,


the Fera par Praytus Bellerophon mourir,
i Clafie a mil ans, la femme forcenée,
Beu le breueage, tous deux apres perir.
Englith:
The croffed Brother through unbridled love,
i Shall caufe Bellerophon to be killed by Praytus,
Doi | F leet to thonfand years, the woman out of ber wit,
The drink being drunk, both after that perift.
ANNOT.
ff Bellerophon and Praytus are two {uppofed and fiitious names,
XIV.
French.
Le grand credit,d’or,d’argent l’abundance,
Aveuglera par Libide l'honneur,
| Cogneu fera d’adultere l’offence,
aa | Qui parviendra à fon grand defhonneur.


Of Michael Noftradamus:
Englith.


th | The great credit, the abundance of Gold and Silver,
a | Shall blind honour by luff, el |
The offence of the Adulterer fhall be known, a
Which fball come to bis great difbonour.
AN NOT. ae
This is eafie to beunderftood; for itis frequently feen, that Honour is made blind |
by .luft, and chiefly if that luft be propped up with credit, and abundance of Gold Wee
and Silver, | Hh
XV :. mi
French. i
Vers Aquilon grands efforts par hommafle, i
Prefque l’Europe, l'Univers vexer, fol
Les deux Eclipfes mettra en telle chafle, a
Et aux Pannons vie & mort renforcer.
Englifh.
Towards the North great endeavours by a manly wontan,
To trouble Europe, and almoft all the world,
She Shall put to flight the two Eclipfes, a |
And fball re-inforce life and death to the Pannons. a
ANNOT, : ei
By the Paswons is meant the Huxgarians, The reft is eafie, 44!
XVI hl
French. ti
Au lieu que Hiefor fit {a nef fabriquer, | all
Si grand Deluge fera & fi fubite, ay
| Qu'on n'aura lieu ne Terre fattaquer,
|... L'onde monter Fefulan Olympique. Ji
| Englith. a
| Inthe place where Jafon caufed his Ship to be built, eal
i So great a Flood fhall be; and fo fudden, i
That there fball be neither place nor Land to fave thei
The Waves fhall climb upon the Olympick Fefulan.


: AN NOT.
Fafon was Son to King -Z/on, who built a Ship called Argos, in wbich he went co
Colchos, to Conquer the Golden Fleece,
Fefulan here is to be underftood offome high andeminent place, which there- i
fore he calleth Olympick, from Olympus a high Mountain in Grecian The place ||
where #4/0n builded his Ship. i :


Ny


F hoger 24 À a
Jr 455 gees EE


nfelves
# 3


French


pal |


The true Prophecies


XVII.
French.
Les bien aïfez fubit feront defmis,
Le monde mis par les trois freres en trouble,
Cité Marine faifiront ennemis,
Faim, feu, fang,pefte,& de tous maux le double.
Englith.
Thofe that were at eafe fball be put down,
The world fball be put in trouble by three Brothers,
The Maritine City fhall be feixed by its enemies,
Hunger, fire blood, plague, and the double of. all evils,
ANNOT,
It is not eafie to tell what them three Brothers have been, or fhall be, nor that


Maritine or Sea City, therefore weleave it to the liberty of every ones judgement,
che words being plain enough.


XVIII
French.
De Flore iffue de fa mort fera caufe,
Un temps devant par jeufne & Victlie bueyte,
Car les trois lis lay feront telle paule,
Par fon fruit fauve comme chair crtie mueyre.


Englith.
Ifjued from Flora fhall be the caufe of her own death,
One time before, through fafting and old dr ‘ink,
For the three Lilies foall make her fuch a paufe,
Saved by ber fruit, as raw flefh dead.

AN NOT.


This is one of thofe, wherein the Author would notbe underftood , and may be
did not underftand himfelf,


X VIX,
French,
A fouftenir la grand cappe troublée,
Pour l’efclaireir les rouges marcheront,
De mort famille’{era pre(qu’ accablée,
Les rouges rouges, le rouge aflommeront.
Englifh.
To maintain up the great troubled Cloak.
The ved ones fhall march for to clear it,
A family fhall be alwoft crufhed to death,
The red, the red, [ball knock down the red ane.


ot that
een,


This feemeth to carry no other fenfe chan a confpiracy ofthe Cardinals, called here


of Michael’ Noftradamus.


ANNOT.


by the name of the Red, the Red againft the Pope, who is called che Red ose,
y ; 5 P
XX
French.
Le faux meflage par eleétion feinte,
Courir par Urbem rompue pache arrefte,
Voix acheptees de fang chappelle teinte,
Et aun autre qui l'Empire contefte.
Englifh.


The contraët broken, Soppeth the mef]


tia
aly {
ap | )


_ From going about the Town, by a fained eleEion,


Voices {ball be bought and aChappel dicd with biood
By. another, who challengeth the Empire.


ado to pick out this little fenfe of it, which amountethtono more, than that by
reafon of an agreement broken, the Meffenger, thac went to publifh afaigned


2


ANNOT.
This was fo falfely printed, and fo prepofteroufly fet in order, that I had muc!


eleGtion (it feemeth.of, the Empire ) fhall-be hindred; and that ene of the Com


petitors co the faid Empire, fhall be killedin orneara Chappel, that fhal!


ed by his Blood,


Carrying with then infection and Peffilence,


L
De ile
AA L/% L'J21


XXI.
French.
Au port de Agde trois fuftes entreront.
Portant infection-avec foy, peftilence,
Paflanc le pont mil milles embleront.
Et le pontrompre a tierce refiftance:
-Epplith.


Three. Galleys (ball come-intothe harbour of Asde


ia


Gorig'beyond the Bridge, they ball carry away thousand:


A t the third refifignce the Lridee {ball De broker.


Agde is 2 Sea Town in France upon the Atediterranean Sea, which is threat


ANNOT.


neat
al ied


here of three Galleys, that fhall come into the Harbour of it, and fhall b Ing with
them infection and Plague;and befides carry away thoufands of Captives,by whichit


feemeth, that thefe fhould be T#rki/b Gall


À


the Townfmen the Bridge fhall be broken. :


eys, till-at-laft upon thethird refi tance ot


— reine ONE E "S,
ré,
; *


EE GER


T he true Prophecies


XXII.

; French.
Gorfan, Narbonne, par le Sel adveriir,
Tucham, la Grace Perpignan trahie,
La ville rouge ny voudra confentir,
Par haute Voldrap, Gris vie faïllie.

Englifh.

Gorfan, Narbonne, by the Salt fball give notice,
To Tucham, the Grace Perpignan betrayed,
The rek Town will not give confent to it, s
By bigh Woldrap, Gray, life ended.


ANNOT.

This is another, wherein my beft skill faileth me; for take away Narbonne,
which is a City of France, in the Province of Languedoc, and Perpignan, which is
another inthe Couaty of Roufsilos near Spats, Thereftare either barbarous words
or nonfenfical to me,


XXIII.
French.


Lettres trouvées de la Reyne les Coffres,
Point de fubfcrit , fans aucun nom d’Autheur,
Par Ja police feront cachez les offres, |
Qu'on ne fcaura qui fera lamateur.


Englifh.


Letters found in the Queens Coffers,

No fuperfcription, xo name of the Author,

By policy fball be concealed the offers,

So that no body fhall know who fhall be the lover.


ANNOT.
This needeth nogreat explication, being pretty plain, and foretelleth only char
a Queens Trunks fhall be opened, wherein many love Letters fhall be found with-
out fubfcription, with many great offers, whichby policy being {uppreffed, or no
noticetakenof. Thelover was never known,
XXIV.
French.


Le Lieutenant a l’entrée huis,


Affommera le grand de Perpignan, | EE”
En fe cuidant fauver a Mont pertnis thet To
Sera deceu Baftard de Lufignan. | Caen


LA 4


chi D
 rords


if


f

| |
ly tht
i |
; 010

|

|


1
}
|
|


of Michael Noftradamus:
APR Englith,

The Lieutenant [hall at the doors eniry,
Knock down the great one of Perpignan: ~
And the Baftard of Lufignan fball be deceived,
Thinking to fave himfelf at Montpertuis.
ANNOT.


The words and the fenfeare clear, though the meaning is hard ro be und erftood:


XX V.
| | French.
Cœur de l’Amant ouvert d'amour furtive,
Dans le ruifleau fera ravir la Dame,
Le demy mal contrefaira lafcive, À
Le Perea deux privera corps de l’Amé.
1.  Enghth?,,
The Lovers heart being by a ftolr love, |.
Shall caufe the Dame to be ravifbed in the Brook,
The lafcivions fhall counterfeit half a difcontent,
The Father foall deprive the bodies of both of their fouls.


ANNOT. . |


. This fignifieth nothing buea Lovet ; who meeting in or by a Brook, his Miftrefs
fhall enjoy her , for which fhe {hall fain a little difcontent , as if fhe had been ravithed
againft her will, but her jealous Father not contented therewith, (hall kill them both,
which is an ordinary Jsaésan trick, r


XXVL.
French,
De Carones trouvez en Barcelone, :
Mys defcouvers, lieu tetrouers & ruine,
Legrand qui tient ne voudra Pampelone,
Par l'Abbaye de Montferrat bruine.
| | Englifh.
The Carones fond in Barcelona,
Put difcovered, place foil and ruine,
The great that hold will not Pampelona,
By the Abbaye of Montferrat; #iff.
ANNOT.'


Barcelona is a Town of a Province in Spx», called Catalonia, Pampelina is the


chief Town of theKingdom of Navarre, | Moniferrat is an Abbaye in the Mountains
of Catalonia, the reftis infignificant,


French,


Thetrne Prophecies


XX VII
French.


La voye Auxelle l'un fur l’autre fornix, an
Du muy de fer hors mis:brave & geneft, hes 0
L’Eferit d'Empereur la Phoenix,


Veu en celuy ce qu'a nul autre nef.


Englith,
The way Auxelle, one Arch upon another,
Being brave and gallant put out of the Iron velfel,
The writing of the Emperour the Phenix,
In it hall be fen, what no where elfe is.


ANNOT.


I can find nothing in this worth interpretation,


XXVILTI,
French,


Les Simulachres d’or & d’argent enflez,
Qu'apres le rapt, Lac au feu furent jettez, chy
Au defcouvert eftaints tous & troublez, cn Se
Au Marbre efcripts, prefcripts interjettez.
Englifh.
The Images [weld with Gold and Silver,
Wbich after therape were thrown into the Lake and fire;
Being difcovered after the putting ont of the fire,
Shall. be written in Marble, prefcripts being intermixed.


ANNOT.


Icfeemeth that this gold and filver Idols having been ftola, were afterwards thrown
into a Lake and a fire, which fire being put out, thofe Idols were found, and the me-
morial engraven in Marble.


X XTX.
French.


Au quart pilier ou l'on facresa: Saturne,
Par tremblant Terre & Deluge fendu, |
Soubs l’edifice Saturnin trouvee Urné, | ET
D'or Capion, ravy puis, tof rendu. By
Engh. Time
At.the fourth Pillay wherethey Jarnifaet ta Saturn, * 2x0 “A
Cloven by an Exrth-quake and'a Flood! ‘:
An Urne [ball be found under that Saturnian building, }
Full of Capion gold fioln, and then reftored. |


_ Of Michael Noftradamus;


| ANNOT.
This foretelleth, that at the fourth Pillar of a Temple that was dedicated to 54-


ture, which Pillar fhall be fplit by an Earth- quake and a Flood, there fhall be found
an Urne, (which isan Earthen Veffel , wherein the ancient Romans uled to keep the
athes of their dead friends ) full of gold, that fhall be carried away,and then reftored.
AUX Co's
French.
Dedans Tholofe non loin de Beluzer,
Faifant un puis loing Palais d'efpettacle.
Threlor trouvé un chacun ira vexer,
Et en deux locs tout aupres des Vefacle.
Englifh.
Within Tholofe not far from Bel uzer,
Digging a Well, for the Pallace of [pectacle,
A treafure found that fhall vex every one,
In two parcels,in, and near the Bafacle.
ANN OT,
7 holofe is the chief City of Languedoc, Beluzer is a private place w


cin&, Speacle is infignificant, and is onely foifted in,to Rime wil


place in Tholofe, wherethere is aboundance of ‘Water.
and fearful noife.


*
4


+ 29
SALE)


ithin its pre:
À Bafacle, which is a
mills , that make a hideous


X XX

French.
Premier grand fruit le Prince de Pefquiere.
Mais puis viendra bien & cruel malin,
Dedans Venife perdra fa gloire fiere,
Ft misa mal par plus joyve Celi,


Englith.

The firft great fruit the Prince of Péfquiere.
But be fhall become veryernel and nl;

He fball loofe bis frerce pride in Venice

And fhall be put to evil by the young

ANNOT,

Pefcaire isa Town in the Kingdom of Naples , belonging to the noble Spani/h Fa-
mily of Avales,of which it feemeth one (hall Prove cruel and malicious; but he fhall


be killed in Venice by one young Celia, by which formerly, and in other places the
Author underftandeth the Turk. |


CIONS,
5
er. Celin


Garde toy Roy Gailois de ton Nepveu,
Qui fera tant que ton unique filz,

Sera meurtry a Venus faifant vœu,
Accompagné de nuit que trois & fix.
UE


cnn OR or RS eh AS


The true Prophecies


Englifh.
Take heed 0 French King of thÿ Nephew,
Who fhall caufe that thine only Son:
Shall be ninrdered making a vow to Venus,
Accompanied with three and fix.
ANN OT,
This is a plain warning to a French King to beware of his Nephew, whoaccom=


panied with nine others, (hall caufe his Son to be murdered when he went about fome
venereal employment.


XXXIIL
French.

Le grand naiftra de Verone & Vicence,

Qui portera un furnom bien indigne,

Qui a Venife voudra faire vengeance,

Luy meime prins homme du guet & figne.

~ Le Le,
Englifh.
Le


The great one of Verona and Vicenza fhall be born,
Vho fall bear a very unworthy furname,
Who fhall cndeavourvat Veniceto avenge bimfelf,
But be [ball be taken by a Watch-man.
ANNOT.
Veronaand picenza aretwo famous Cities in Italy , under the dominion of the pe.
attians ; the reft is eafie, ;
XXXIV;
French.
Apres victoire du Lion au Lion,
Sur la Montagne de Fura Secatombe,
Delues, & Brodes feptiefme milion,
Lyon Ulme a Maufol mort & tombe.


English.
After the Victory of the Lion againft the Lion,
Upon the Moxatain Jura Secatomb, ore
Delues, and Brodes the feventh Million,
Lyons, Ulme fall dead at Maufol.
ANNOT,


The Mount Æura is in Switzerland s Lyon is a great City in Frances and Ulme ano-
ther in Germany 5 the reft is either barbarous or infignificant. | |


French,


ACCOM


net
Ubon


Garouneis the River that runneth at Bowrdeaux , and Blaye is the Port Town that


lieth a


frozen.


t the mouth of it: I fhould think that inftead of Derdeneis., it fhould be
Printed, Derdone , which isanother River thereabouts , and is here threatned to be
XXXVI.
French.


| undertake this,


of Michael Noftradamus.


XX XV
French.


Dedans l’entree de Garonne & Blaye,
Et la Forelt non loing de Damazan,
De Marfaves gelées, puis grefle & Bine:
Dordonois gelé par erreur dé Mezan.


 Englifh.
Within the entrance of Garonne: and Blaye,
And the Forreft not far from Damazan,


Of Marfaves frofts, then Hail aud North wind,
Dordonois frozen by the error of Mezan.


A NNOT.


Sera commis contre Onde a Duché

De Sanlne, & Saint Aubin, & Belœnvre,

Paver.de Marbre, de tours loing pluche,

Non Bleteran refifter-& chef d'œuvre.
Englith.

A Dukedom fhall be committed againft Oinde,

Of Saulne, and Saint Aubin, and Belœuvre,

To pave ah Marble, and of Towers well pick,

Not Bleteran to refift, and mafter-piece,


ANNOT,


XXXVII


| I confefs my Ighorance, and fhould be glad that a better Oexipus than I would
|
t


French:


| La nee aupres de la Thamife,


Cherra par lors, le Roy dedansderré,


Aupres du pont fera veu en chemile,
Un devant mort, puis dans'le fort barre.


a


—


se SKE


2e


Thetruë Prophecies


Englith.
The ftrong Fort near the Thames


Shall fall then, the King that was kept within,


Shall be feen near the Bridge in his Shirt,
One dead before, then in the Fort kept clofe.
ANNOT,


The Dream be tothems that hate thee, and the Interpretation thereof to thine Entmits,


Dan, 4, v, 10,


belonging to the Pope,


XX AV TA

French.
Le Roy de Blois dans Avignon regner,
Un autrefois le peuple emonopole,
Dedans le Rhofne par murs fera baigner,
Jufques a cinq, le derniér pres de Nole.

1

Englhfh,
The King of Blois iz Avignon fball Reign
Another time the people do murmur,


He fhall caufe in the Rhofne tobe bathed through the Walls,


As many as five, the laft fhall be near Nole.
ANNOT.


This foretelleth that a King of France (halltake Auignos, which is a City in France
And that fome‘of the people beginning to murmur and
mutiny, he fhall caufe five of them tobe thrown over the Walls into the Rhofne,
which is a fwift River that paffech by,


XX X1X,
French.
Qu’aura efté par Prince Bizantin,
Sera tollu par Prince de Thotofe,
La foy de Foix, par le chef Tholentin,
Luy faillira ne refufant l’efpoule,
Englith.
What Pal have been by aBizantin Prince,
Shall be taken way by the Prince of Tholofe,
The faith of Foix by the chief Tholentin,
Shall fail bin, not refufing the Spoufe.


ANNOT,


x


I can underftand nothing elfe by Prince Bizantin;, but fome Prince of the houfe
of Genzague,who derive theirpedigtee from thanof the Palaologues, formerly Empe-
rours.ot Coxffantinople, called in ancient time Bizautium, As for the Prince of The-
fofe, there having beennone this two or three hundred
devolved to the Crownof France;
derftood bere;


zagwes, as he hath done formerly feveral times,


Nale muft be fome place thereabouts,


years fince that Country was
but the King himfelf, I fuppofe he muft be un-
fo that the fenfe of this Prophecie, ( ifany be ) is, that the King of
Francefhall take fomething from the Duke of Mantua, who is the head of the Gon-


a +


CEN


in Frame D
rmur and #
UP
Is A


etoile BL
jÉnpe-
TL |
ny we |
tbe un pl
King of Bi
he Gane | |
i


By Ey
4


Lg


of Michael Noftradamus. 32


32

By the faith of Foix, is underftood thelaté Duke of rohan, who defcended from
the houfe of Foix, and who did war againft the {aid Duke of Manteaatthat time
when the King of France, Lewis XIII, would not fuffet his Brother the Duke of Orlewne
to Marry the Princefs Mary, Daughterof the Duke of Nevers, of the houfe of Gon-
zagwe, and lately Queen of Poland.


XL
French.


Le fang du jufte par Taur & la Dorade,
Poor fe vanger contre lès Saturnins,

Au nouveau Lac plongerontla Maznade,
Puisamarcheront contre les Albanins,


Englifh.
The blood of the juft by Taur and Dorade,
To avenge themfelves againft the Saturnins;
In the new Lake fhall fink the Mainade,
Then fhall go forth againft the Albanins.
AN NOT,

Here the Authorhath kept bis mind to himfelf, as for my part, being ignorant of
his barbarous words, I had rather leave the fenfe of this to the judgment of the
Reader, than by an incongruous and far fetched interpretation make my felt ridi-
culous,

XL
French.
Efleu fera Renard ne fonnant mot,
Faifant le Saint public, vivant pain d’orge,
Tyranniler apres tant a UN gop, ai; den
Métrant. le piedides, plus:grands {unla gorge.
a | if Etglifh, |
A Fox foall be elected that faid nothing,
Making a publick Saint, huïam with Bartey bread,
Shail tyrannife after upon a [udden,
And put bis foot upon the Throat of the greatelf.
« ANNOT.. à


This Prophecy feemeth to régard particularly the Pope, whohaving played the
Hypocrite before his Eleétidn, eating nothing but Barley bread, that he might be
reputed a Saint , fhallafter his Eleétion:tyrapnife upon a fudden, and trample
upon the Throat of the greateft Monarchs; as they have done formerly, and would
do yet if they could. Otto

| XLT,
nae Fréuch,
Par avarice, par force & violence;
Viendra vexer les fiens chefs d’Orleans,
Prez Saint Memire aflaut & refiftance,


.., Mort dans fa Tente,diront quil dort leans.


'


Englith.


¥ BAM SAN sted.) mans ede eae MERS 0 2 Stans VTT ji


The true Prophecies
Englifh.


By avarice, by force and violence,

Shall come to vex bis own chief of Orleans;

Near Saint Memire affault and refiftance,

Dead in his Tent, they'l fay be fleepeth there.
ANNOT,

The conftruction of this muft be thus made, The Chiefs of orleans; ( which isa
famous Town in France) {hall come to vex their own (I fuppofe ) Citizens. And
near that place called Saint Memire, fhallbe a fight, where one of thofe chief ones
fhall be killed, or die in his Tent; and fhall be denyed under pretence of being afleep:

XLII L

French.
Par le decide de deux chofes Baftars,
Nepveu du fang occupera le Repne.
Dedans LeCtoure feront les coups de dards,
Nepveu par peur pleira l’Enfeigne.

Englith.
By the decifion of two things, Baftards,
Nephew of the Blood fball occupy the Kingdom,
Within Leétoure fhall be firokes of Darts,
Nephew through fear fball fold up bis Enfign.

ANNOT,


1 think that inftead of decifion it fhould be divifion, and then the fenfe is ealily
made up, thuss that through the divifion of two Baftards, the Nephew of che
Blood fhall occupy the Kingdom, which Nephew afterwards in a fight at Eectowre;


(which is a ftrong Town in Ga/cony ) thall be put to the worft, and compelled co
told up his Enfigns. shh Vt he


XLIY.

French.
Le procree nature] d’Ogmion,
De fept a neuf du-chemin deftourner,
A Roy de longue & amy au my hom,
Doit a Navarre fort de Pau profterner.


Englifh.
The natural begotten of Ogmyon,
From feven to nine fhall put ont of the way,


To King of long, and friend to the half man,
Ought to Navarre proftrate the fort of Pau.


> >


Belly
m Of the
Eton


ele |


of Michael Noftradamus.


ANNO T.
A man needeth a good pair of Speétaclés to fee through all this, what Funder-
ftand in itis that this.Baftard of ogwyan;) by whom.he meaneth the King of Prance,
ought to fubmit the Fort of Paw to Navarre, and good reafon too ; for Navarre is
the Kingdom, ‘and Pas only the chief Town ‘of one Province of it, called ‘Bears,
XLV.
French,
La main efcl rarpe & & la gambe'bandce,
Loris par , de Palais partira,


de mot du guetlaimort\fera tatdée,
Puis dans le =Aleniple a Palques { cigeeral
Engl#fh,


The band on a Scarf, atid thei leg ae

Fhe younger Lewis {ball 60 from Palai : |

At the Watch word bis 3 ath fball We Bye iCtèd.
Then afterwards at. Falter: he feall bleed. i 1. the Teviple:


ANNO‘T. (25 015

The Prince of Condé, whofe name was Lewis, and the youngel of the Children
of Charles of Bourbon, vl he firft Duke of 7 ‘endolme, father to Aathony of Bourbox, King
of Navarre, went away from the Court in the time of Francis the {econd King of
France, and came into Béarn to the King his Brother, * He was fummoned many
times by Francis II. tocome to Court; but finding his name to be amongft thofe
that intended to furprife Lion, he durft not ventures :3:

Neverthelefs he was per (waded by his-lacle the Cardinal of Bourbox, and came
to the Court at Orleans, Iris eafie to believe chat he fainéd himfelf to be hurt by
a fall from his Horfe, or thatreally fe was fo, having his Arm ina Scarf, and bis
Leg [wadled wp, in which pofture he canre to teltifie his obedience to the Kings
commands.

In this pofture of a wounded man, whether really and fi@irioufly pg came b om
Palais, which by miftakeis printed Calais ; the Printer being ignorant, chat i in Bearn,
where the Prince had fheltered himfelfs therë is a Caltle called "Palais; which-was ache
place thatthe Prince ufed to live in,

Being tome to Cours he was prefently arse ha drraigned:and condemned ro
death, “Nevertheless the Kings ficknefs proving mostal,:the execution was fufpen-
ded, andihislitefaved,, .\ After chariche: Prince or alloscafions to revenge him:
felf, and, began about Eaferin April folowing. . It was not by.an open Rebellion
againtt the King, but under pretence ro maintain the,Proteftane Religion: there-
fore the Authoriaich, tharehrs life favedfhall bleed inthe Temple ; becau.e the Princes
BCE Rt Sas the Temple,and..the Church, thar is Religion. . Hencethe fourth

Verfe is clearly underftood, Refteth the third Verte, which faith, chat his life was
differred till the Watch word becaufe the Queen feeing the King her Son upon his
death bed, caufed fecretly the executioh Ot the Sentence tobe differred, that the
might make ufe of the King of Navarre, ‘and’ of the Prince his Brothers favour,
againft the houfe of Guile, for “the ot braining oftheRegéncyi

Moreover I obferve, chat inthe year 1562. the rice of Conde began openly to
rebel, furprifing the City of Orleans the 29 of March, whichwas Eaffer peer yea
which fhewech the truth’ ofthe fourth Verle


Ua


T be true ‘Propbecies


XLVI.

French.
Pol Menfolee mourra trois lieues du Rhofue,
Fuis les deux prochains Tarare deftrois,
Car Mars fera le plus horrible Throfne,
De Coq & d’Aigle, de France frere trois.


Englifh.
Paul Menfolée Shall die three Leagues from the Rhofne,
Avoid the two firaights near the Tarare;
For Mars fhall keep.fuch a horrible Throfne,
Of Cock and Eagle, of France three Brothers.
ANNOT.
By this Pol Menfolée, he meaneth {ome proper name, Tarare isa great Moun-
tain near the City of Lions, that hath two principal ways to gothrongh, which
here he calleth Straights; for indeed they are very dangerous for Thieves and Mur-


derers. The reft is but a chreating of War between the Emperour and France,
when there fhall be three Brothers in France.


XLVII
French.
Lac Trafmenien portera telmoignage,
Des conjurez ferrez dedans Peroule,
Un Zefpolle contrefera le fage,
Tuant Tedefque de Sterne & Minufe.
Englifh.
Trafmenian Lake fball bear witnefs
Of the Confpirators font up in Perugia,
A Delpolle fhall counterfeit the wife,
Killing Tedefque of Sterne and Minute.
ANN OT. .

I think that che Impreffion is falfe here; for inftead of Defpolle , which is a bar-
barous word, and fignifiech nothing, I would have it in French Defpoville, in Englifh
robbed of all; fo that Trafmenian Lake is that Lake in /ta/y not far from the Town
of Perugia, where Hannibal gave that notable overthrew to the Ress, and killed
above 20000. of them, with their conful Flaminins.


That man whom he calleth here robbed of all, fhall kill fome Germans ; for Tue
defcoin Italian, isa German, the two laft words are barbarous,


XLVIII.
French.


Saturne en Cancer, Fupiter avec Mars,
Dedans Fewrier Caldondon, Salvaterre,
Sault, CaStalon, aflailly de trois parts,

Pres de Verbiefque,contli& mortelle guerre.


aba
Engl |
Town |


filed


ante | |


ofic, Icannot make the reft good;


of Michael Noftradamus.


Englifh.
Saturniiz Cancer, Jupiter with Mars,
In February Caldondon,Salvaterre,
Sault, Caftalon, affaulted on three fides,
Near Verbielque, fight and mortal War.
ANNOT.
The multiplicity of barbarous and infignificant words, makes this incapable of


any conftruétion, if any body will exercife his wit thereupon, I thall willingly lend iit
him my ear. |


4


XLIX. en
French. 4 Le
Satur au Bœuf, Fove en l'Eau, Mars en fleche;
Six de Fevrier mortalité donra,
Ceux de Tardaigne a Bruges {i grand breche
Qu’a Ponterofe chef Barbarin mourra.
Englifh.
Satur in Ox, Jupiter #7 water, Marsin arrow, re
The fixth of February fhall give mortality,
Thofe of Tardaigne fball make in Bruges fo great a breach. |
T hat the chief Barbarin foail die at Pontrofe. a
| AN N OT: fl \ |
SaturinOxes that is; Safur in Taurus, Fapiter in Water; that is, Fupiterin Aqua- ||
vies, Mars in arrow, iS Mars in Sagitariëss when thefe things fhall happen. ‘The
fixth day of February fhall bring a great mortality, Tardaigneisa fiGitious name, un-
lefs he intended Sardaigne. Brugesisa Townin Flander , Ponterofe is fome place,


where he faith, that the chief Barbarin fhall die,the chief Barbare wasthe Pope #rb4x
theeighch; but becaufe 1 do not know the particularities of his death ; and che place


)


LOU Ae col ap Sok SENTIER
PAGE SR NP Nes


L.
French. —

La Peftilence lentour de Cabadille,

Un autre faim pres de Sagunt faprefte,

La Chevalier Baftärd de bon fenille,

Au grand de Thunes fera trancher la téfte:
, Englith. ! | ll
The Plague fball be round about Capadille, i
Another famine cometh near to that of. Sipünce, |
The Kuizht Baftard of the good old man,” ag |
Shall caufe the great one of Tunis.to be beheaded, . |


Uu2 ANNOT.


T be true Propbecies


ANNOT.


The difficulty here, is what is meant. by chat word Cappadélle, for my part I think
he meaneth /ta/y, for fome times the Italians ule by way of admiration to (ay Capoli,
or Capadillo. Sagunce isa Townin Spas, which for the love of the Carthaginians
withftood the Romans a great while,ull chey were brought to an extremity of famine,
and then fet fire intheir Town,


. ah à co; co


LI.
French.
Le Bizantin faifant oblation,
Apres avoir Cordube a foy reprinfe,
Son chemin long, repos, pampiation, _
Mer paflant proye par Ja Cologne a prinie.
Englith.
The Bizantin, making an offering,
After be bath taken Cordua.te himfelf again,
His way long, reft, contemplation, ks
Croffing the Sea bath taken a prey by Cologne.
SARS ANINOE.
This is an exprefs delineation of Charles the V. Empire, who at the latter.end of
his days retired into a Monattery , referving unto himfelf for his fubfiftance the re


venue of th@ Kingdom of Caffille, exprefled here by Cordua, which is a City of
Spain, ia


Pg BM gO


LIT
French.


pa rpm oman ne ame ID eRe ee


Le Roy de Blois dans Avignon Regner,
LD’ Amboife & Seme viendra le long de Lindre.
Ongle a Poitiers Saintes aifles ruiner,
il Devant Bony:
| i Englith.
| The King of Blois fball Reign in Avignon,
He fball come from Amboile and Seme, along the Linder,
A Nail at Poitiers fhall ruine the Holy Wings,
is Before Bony.
aie ANNOT.
| The firft Verfe and the interpretation is eafie.
ee Amboifeisa Townin France upon the River of Zaire,
| | The two laft Verfes being inperfe&, admits of no interpretation, onely to let the


Reader know that Posters isa very great City in France , and Capital of the Province
Of Poston.


= tintin je. * mises


French.


think
Cop, À
Minis
ine,


teol |
theres
City of


oletthe
yoroc® À


Froth |


of Michael Noftradamus.


Lilt,
j French,
Dedans Boulogne voudra laver fes fautes.
Il ne poura au Temple du Soleil,
Il volera faifant choles \i hautes,


En Hierarchie n’en fat onc un pareil.


Englith.
He foall defire to wafb his faultes in Bulloin,
In the Church of the Sun, but be fhall not be able,
He fhall fly doing fo high things,


That the like was never in Hierarchy,


NOT,
» One is in Itely, the other in France, che Jaft is


nal Richelies who is the man that did fo high
things , and the likeof which was never in Hierarchy (that is in the Clergy) alittle


afore his death had vowed if he recovered his healch to go in Pilgrimage to Bulloin,

where there is a famous Temple for Miracles, (as they fay) dedicated to our Lady,

which is called here the Sun, by an allufion to chat paflage of the Revelation: 4nd

eh appeared a Woman cloathed with the Suv 3 but che faid Cardinal was prevented by
ca


There is two Towns called Bolleis
that which is meant here; for Cardi


LIV.
French.
Soubs la couleur du traité mariage
Fait magnanime par grand Chiren Selin,
Quintin, Arras, recouvrez ay voiage,


D Efpagnols fait fecond banc Macelin.


Englh.
Under pretence of a Treaty of Marriage,
A Magnanimous aét fhall bé done by the great Cheiren Selin,
Quintin, Arras recovered in the Journey,


Of Spaniards fhall be made a fecond Macelin Beach,


nee, ANNOT, À
Thisis a Prognoftication concerning a King of France, meant here by the great
Cheiren Selin, who under pretence of a Treaty of Marriage , thall recover in his jour-
Ney thefe two Towns Saint Ouixtin and Arras, forthe Shambles are called in Latine
Masellnws. Quod ili macentur pectora que mercatoribus venundantur,
MGV,
| French. :
Entre deux Fleuves fe verra enferré,
Tonneaux & caques unis a pañler outre,
Huit Pont rompus chef à tant enferré,


Enfans parfaits font jupulez en coultre. Ka
SA | Enelith,


T he true Prophecies


Englifh:
Between two Rivers he foall find bimfelf fout up; +
Tuns and Barr:ls put together to pafs over,
Eight Bridges broken, the chief at laSt i Prifon,
Compleat children (ball have their throat cut.
ANNOT.


Itis an accident that hath often happened to a Commander of an Agmy , to find
him (elf either by his own overfight, or by the policy of his enemies, fhut up between
two Rivers, having upon neither of them a Bridge at his command ; as it did hap-
pen once to the Prince of Condé, the Grandfather of chis, inthe time of the Civil war
for Religion, who was forced by it to diffolve his Army , and bid every one fhift for
himfel!, fo that they almoft all efcaped by feveral {mall parties, fome going one way
foie another, at fuch time it is an ordinary fhift to make ufe of empty Veffels and
Cakes to make a Bridge, as our Author doth mention here,


S82
À


LVL

French.
La bande foib'e la Terre occupera,
Ceux du haut lieu feront horribles cris,
Le gros troupeau d'eftre com troublera,
Tombe pres D. nebro efcouvert les efcrits.

Englifh.
The weak party fhall occupy the ground,
Thofe of the bich places fball make fearful cries,
It [ball trouble the great flock in the right corner,
He falleth near D. nebro difcovereth the writings.

ANNOT.


I dare not comment upon this, for fear it fhould be faid of me,what was faid of the
Glofeof Accurtins ; obfcura per ob[curius.


LVII
French.


De Soldat fimple parviendra en Empire,

De Robe courte parviendra a la Jongue,

Vaillant aux Armes.en Eglife ou plus pire,

Vexer les Preftres comme l’eau fait l’efponge.
Englifh.


From a fumple Souldier be foall come to bave the fupreme command,
From a fhort Gown he [hall come ta the long one,

Vaillant in Arms, no worfe man in the Church,

foall vex the Priefts, as water doth a Spunge.


ANNOT.


never knew nor heard of any body to whom this Sranza fight be better
ted, then to the late Ufurper Crowmwel , for from a fimple Souldier ; he be


came


ofthe 4


tid 1,


Of Michael Noftradamus:


came to be Lord Proteétor , and from 2! Student in the
duate in Oxford, he was valliantin Arms, andthe wor


found; as for vexing the Priefts, I mean the Prelatical
beyond him,


335
Univerfity he became a gra-
fe Churchman that could be
Clergy, I believe none went


LVIII
French,
Regne en querelle aux frerés divilé,
Prendre les-Armes 8 ‘les nom Britiziy
Filtre Anglican era tard advife,
Surprins de nuit, mener a lait Gallique,
| Englifh, | haa
A Kingdom ia difpute, and divided betweey the Brothers,
To take the Arms and the Britannick name,
And the Englifh title be fpall advife bimfelf late,
Surprifed is the night and carried into the French air.
AN NOT.


This prognofticateth a great divifion in England between Brothers, about the
Titleand Kingdom of England, infomuch, th


at in conclufion one fhall be furprifed
by night, and carried away into France,


sal Xx,
French,
Par deux fois haut, par deux fois mis a bas,
L'Orient aufli l'Occident foiblira,
Son adverfaire apres plulieurs combats,
Par Mer chaflé au befoin faillira.


| Englith.

Twice fet up high, and twice brought dowir.

The Eaft alfo the W eft fhall wea aoe

His adverfary after many fights,

Expelled by Sea, (ball fail in need.
ANNOT,


This foretelleth of fome confiderable perfon,who fhall be twice fet up,and bot
downagain, The fecond Verfe is pronounced after the manner of the"old Oracles, as
Aiote Æacida Romanos vincere poffe,  :


Fer no body can tell here whither the Eat fhall weaken the Weft
The Jaft cwo Verfes are cafe.


ide,


» OF otherways,
LX,
k French. |
Premier en Gaule, premier en Romanie,
Par Mer & Terre aux Analois & Paris,


Merveilleux faits par cette grand melonie


Violant, Terax perdra le Norlaris.


T be true P ropbecies
Englifh:


The firSt in France, the fir in Romania, |

By Sea and Land'to the Englith and Paris,

Wonderful deeds by that great, company,

By ravifbing, Terax fhall fpoñl the Norlaris.
ANNOT.

The firft in France is the King , the firlt in. Romaniaisithe Pope, whout feemeth
fhall joyn together by Sea and Land, and come againft Paris} who thall call the Exe
glifh co its help, infomuch, that ftrange deeds fhall be done by ther-great company.
As for Terax, it feemeth to be the-proper name offome man, who by ravithing a


woman called here the Nor/aris, fhall fpoil her and caufe fad confequences, Worlaris
by tranfpofition of Letters is Lorraÿ, | 6
L XJ.
French.
Jamais.par le decouvrement du jour,
Ne'parviendra au figne Sceptrifere, '
Que tous Sieges ne forenPen fefour, » sm se »
Portant au Coq don da 12% 4a mulere,. anit 7.


Enoli


Never by the difcovering of the day,

He fball attain to the Sceptriferous fige,

Till all bis feats be fettled, nf

Carrying to the Cock a gift from the Tag to milery.
ANNOT.


Thisfignifieth that one pretending to a Kingdom, hall never attain to it by often
removing his place, until all his feats be fercled, that is, untill his wandring be cea-
fed, Anda gift brought by him to the King of France from Portugal,fignified here by
the Tag, which is the River of Lisbon the Capital City of it, from which gift fhall
proceed mifery.

LXIT-

French.
Lors qu’on verra expilet le Sant Temple,
Plus grand du.Rhofne, & facres:prophaner :
Par eûx naiftra peftilence fi grande,
Roy fait injufte ne fera condamner.

Englifh.
When one [ball fee [poiled the. Holy Temple,
The greateft of the Rholne,and facred things prophaned,
From thent fPall come fo great a peftilence,
That the King being unjuft fhall not condemn them,


|


YY
|
L
|
L


|
M the Ve
Me


,

t Lier
Cn
!


trou,
(CVS bre
on WEG


der


eee
| the Ey
‘Ompany,


line À
 Noryr |


(NOT


l
|


f


Of Michael Noftradamus;


Ter ey ae D à 0 OM pe the
The greateft Temple of the Rhone, is thatof theCity of Lion ,
upon that River of Rhofne, which when it {hall be tabbed and fpoiled,


Reigning, who fhall negle& to punifh thofe Sacriledges,
LXITh
French,
Quand l’adultere bleffé fans coup aura,
Meurdry la femme & le fils par dépit,
Femme aflomée |’ Enfant eftranglera,
Huit captits prins feftoufer fans refpit.


Englifh.
When the Adulterer wounded without a blow,
Shall have murdered the wife and fon by fpight,
The woman knocked down, fhall ftrangle the child,
Eight taken prifoners, and flifled without tarrying. ,
Ey af nical sess { slussed Snes NN OT Le 51 |
This.is the defcription of a fad Tragedy, which to underftand, you! muft joyn-alf!
the Verfes together ; and make it onefenfe, The Adulterer wounded withour:a
blow, is one that fhall get a difeafe, (fappofe the Pox) his wife finding fault with iF,
he fhafl murder her,and her Sonsthe not being quite dead fhall ftrangle another Child
(which it feemeth the had by this Adulterer) and for this fa@ eight thall be taken pri-
foners and immediately hanged, by which you muft {uppofe the fa& tobe done in


France,for there they Judge and Hang immediately; whereby in England chey mutt
ftay till Sefftons- time:


LXIV

French.
Dedans les Ifles les enfans tran{portez,
Les deux de fept feront:en deleipoir,
Ceux de terrouer'en feront fupportez,


Nompclle prins, des ligues fuy l'efpoir.


Englith. |
In the Iflands the Children (ball be tranfported,
Theïtivo of feven fhall bein defpair,
Thofe of ‘the. Conntrey [ball be fapported by,
| Nompelle taken, avoid the hope of the Leagite.

This feemeth to have a great relation toonr late unhappy troubles in England, when
the Princéfs: Elizabeth. and.the Duke'of Glocefter were’ tranfported ‘into the Ifle of
Wight ; which are the two of the feven; (for the Queen hath had feven children)
and the Kings Majefty and-his Highnefs the Duke of rérk ! were driven into the
Lew-Countreis, being ina manner in difpait of ever coming'again , and thofe Coun-
treys were much:the better for the harbouring of them + inthe laft Verfe by NompeHe
Lunderftand Anagrammatically Aonpelier, which being°taken , there is no more

Xx hope


which is feated)
Q 14. then fhall come,
ahorrid Peftilence, which our Author actribureth tothe injuftice-of the King chem,


238 The true ‘Prophecies


hope in the League, as ic did happen inthe time of Henry the IV. King of France,who
never faw the League or Covenant quite routed, till thar Town was taken; for it is
familiar enough to thofe kind of Prophets co make an tsepav rpôrerer, and joyn things
paft, to thofe that are cocome, to darken the Readers anderftanding , and as the
Scripture faith , Ue videntes non videant, "4
LXV
French.
Le vieux fruftré du principal cipotr,
Ll parviendra au chef de fon F mpire,
Vingt mois tiendra le Regne a grand pouvoir,
Tyra i, cruel en délaifant un pire.
Englith.
The old man fruftrated of “bis chief hope,
fe foall attain to the head of bis, Empire,
Twe REY months be fhall keep the Kingdon with great power,
Tyrant, cruel, and leaving à worfe one.


ANNOT,
The words of this Prophecy are plain enough 5 and becaufe I cannot learn in Hi-
ftory that fueh things have come to pafsyét, therefore Iteckon it among thofe de
LUE


Li à


UXVIE
Freach. ,
Quand: l'Etcrieuré Dy M. rrotivée
Ft Cave ancique a Lampe’ defcouverte,
Loy,Roy,& Prince U/pian elprouvee,
Pavillon,Royne & Duc foubs la couverte.
Enelhith.
JVher the writing DM, fall be fond 3
And an ancient Cavedifcovered nitha Lamy
Law, King, and Prince Ulpran-tracd,
Tent, Queen and Duke under the rug ge.
AN NOT,


In the year 1555, Ferdinand Alvaro of Toledo Duke of Albs,being fent by Charles
the V. into /taly to relift the Freach, arrived in Fwne at Milan , and having gathered
together , all his Forces, Befieged the Town St. Face, but Henry Il, King of France
fending fome fuccours by the Duke of Asmale , héraifed up his fiege , and put his
Army into Garrifons. The Duke of #7/ba leaving the Field inthis manner, the
Duke of Aumale belieged Vulpian, wherein were 1c 00. fouldiers in Gatrifor, under
the command of Ce/ar of Naples, befides the Inhabitants.“ Never was aplace fo fu-
rioufly aflaulted ; and fo manfully defended ; fo that ithe ‘French were many times
beaten back;bur at laft after 2 4.daÿs fiege the Duke af Auma/e did glorioufy take it:

The Auchor foretelling the time of this vitorysfaid it was when the writing
D M. in big letters was found, : thatisto fay, abourthe rr; of September-afrer the
Equinox, becaufe in the Ephemertdes , theMeridional defcenfion Of the Planets,


and


= ‘Le


tits PY
this
ta the |


Chu
itheed M
À Frame |
d path
et, De
ode
vi loft
yes
keït, |
iting |
frer the |
Planets,

ant


of Michael Noftradamus. 38


and chiefly of Sol, Venus, and Mercury is marked wich thefe two Letters D. M. which
de{cenfion cometh to pafs after the Equinox of 4utwma towards the end of Septen-
ber, At the fame timewas difcovered an ancient Cave, wherein was found ons of chole
Lamps, chat cannot be pur out,and burns continually without any addition of Oil,by
aninvention that is loft, Suchanocher was foundin the time of 4lexander the VI.


and Adrian the VI.

The Town of /w/pian was ac that time tried by a King and 4 Prince, viz, Henry the
IL andthe Duke of A4wrmale Prince of Lorrain, ‘and Brother tothe Cardinal of Lor-
rain, and to the Duke of Gaife,

The Author addeth, that befides thefethree things, viz, the finding of the letters
D. M. The Cave difcovered thefiege. of Valpiass. there happened a fourth one,viz,
that a Queenand a Duke fhould con{fule together in a Summer-houfe, about the im-
portant atfairs of the Kingdom, To underftand this,we muft'fappofe that Pope Paul
thelV. willing to fecare bis own perfon and the Eccleftaftical State againft the Sps-
#ifb faétion , and that of the Colonefe , did {eizeupon many places belonging to the
{aid Colonefe, and knowing befides that the Spaniards being of the Colonefes party,
would not fail to come upon him, he difpofed the King of France to come to bis fuc-
cours, fo that the Queen having a particular confidence in the Dake of Gwrfe ,.did
confult wich him about this bufinefs in fome Summer-houfe, which the French calla
Pavillon, |


L'XVAET.


French.
Par. Car. nerfaf, a ruine grand difcorde,


Ne l’un ne l’autre n'aura election,
Ner/af du peuple aura amour & concorde.
Ferrare, Collonne grande protection.
Englifh.,
Par. Car. Nerfaf, to. ruine great difcord,
Neither onenor the obber foall be EleGed,
Nerfaf, ball have of the people lowe and concord,
Ferrare; Colonna, great protection,
ANNOT,

Ic is very hard to fay whar the Author meanech by thefe disjunctives Par, Car,
Ner{af, all what canbe gathered by what follows,’ is, chat there {hall be a great va-
riance and ftrife about an Election , (E fuppofe ofa Popeas it ufech ro be) and that
Nerfaf {hall have the good will of the people, and yet none of them fhall be Elected.

As for the fourth Verfe, it is to be noted firft that Ferrara is a {trong Townin /ta/y
belonging tothe Pope, and Colonna isthe name of the chief Family itt Rome, now
whether Ferrara fhall be a protection to Colonna, ot Colonna to Ferrara wie leave it to
the Reader to judge, becaufe the Verfe hath a double fenfe.

i NN"
French.
Vieux Cardinal‘ par le jeune decéu,
Hors de fa charge feverraidelar me,
Arles ne montires double fort apperceu
EclAqueduét & le Prince embaume.
XX 2 English,


G
©


The true Prophecies


Englith.
Ap old Cardinal fhall be cheated by a young one,
And fhall fee himfelf ont of his inployment,
Arles do not fbow,a double fort perceived,
And the Aquedudt, and the embalmed Prince,


ANNOT,


Thetwo firft Verfes are very plain, the two laft not fo ; therefore obfetve that
Arles isa City in France, inthe Countrey of Daspbine or Provence famous for anti-
quity, which ts forwarned here not ro fhew its Fores, nor irs Aqueduéts, (which are
buildings to convey water, nor its embalmed Prince, which it feemeth lyeth chere-
about buried, The Author hath deprived here the Author of the reafons for why >


LXIX.
French,
Aupres du jeune fe vieux Ange baifer,
Et le viendra furmonter a la fin,
Dix ans efgaux aux plus-vieux rabaifler,
De trois deux l’un huitiefme Seraphin.
Englifh.
Near the young one the old Angel [hall bowe,
And fball at Lift overcome him,
Ten years equal, to make the old one ftoop,
Of three, two,one, the eighth a Seraphin.
ANN OT,
This is the defcription of a grand Cheat,whenan old man called here Angel, fhall
ftoop before a young one , whom be fhall overcome at laft , after they have been ten
yearsequal, Thelaft Verfeis Miftical , for there is four numbers, three, two, one,


which make fix; and eight, which hecalleth Seraphin , whether by allufion to thar


Quire of Angels, which fome call the eight, or whether tothe Order of St, Francis
who callech it (elf Seraphical, is not eafie to determine. |


L XX,
French.
Il entrera vilain,mefchant,infame,
Tyrannilant la Mefopotamie,
Tous amis fait d'Adulterine Dame,
Ferre horribie noir de Phyfiognomie:
Englifh.
He fhall come in villaen, wicked, infamons,
To tyranife-Melopotamia,
He maketh all friends by an adulterefs Lady,
Pon], horrid, black in bis Phyfiognomie.


|
| I
on th C


| aL


of Michael Noftradamus.


ANNOT.


Mefopotamia is a Greek word, fignifying a Countrey between two Riverss and
though there be many Countreys fo feated, yet to this day, it properly belongeth to
that Countrey, that lyeth between the two famous Rivers Tigrisand Exphrates near
Babylon 5 thereft is eafie. “i


LX XI.
French.


fn Croiftra le nombre fi grand des Aftronomes,
hich A Chatiez bannis & livres cenfureq
there L’An mil fix cens & fept par facrez glomes,
nay) Que nul au facres ne feront affeurez.
| Eughfh.
; The number of Aftronomers [ball grow fo great,
| Driven away, bannifbed, Books cenfured,
| The year one thoufand fox bundred and feven by facred glomes,
| That none fball be fecure in the facred places.


ANNOT.


The fenfe of this is clear, 57. that about the year 1607. the number of Aftrono-
mers {hall grow very great, of which fome fhall be expelled and banifhed , and their
Books cenfured and fuppreffed : the reft is infignificant to me,


PK,

French.
Champ Perufin O V'Enorme deffaite.
rl fl À Et le conflit tout aupres de Ravenne,
beenten Paflage facra lors qu’on fera la fefte,


‘tg | Vaincueur vaincu,Cheval mange L’avenne.
tottat 1


Etant, Enelifh,

| Perugian Fall, O the exceffive rout,

| And the fight about Ravenna, |
Sacred paffage when the Feaff hall be celebrated, |

The victorious vanquifbed,the Hôrfe to eat up bis Oats,


ANNOT.


Perugia is a City in Italy, and fois Ravenna , by which it feemeth there thall be à
notable Battle fought,as was once before in the time of Lewis the XII-King of France
between Gafton de Foix his Nephew, and Don Raimond de Cardonne Vice-roy of Na-
ples, for there the French got the Battle ; in conciufion of which, the, (aid Gaffon de
| Foix purfuing a Troop of Spaniards that were retiring, was unfortunately kill d , and

fo the victorious were vanquifhed. :


F rench,


The true Prophecies


LXXIIL
French.
Soldat Barbare le grand Roy frapera,,
Injuftement non efloigce de mort,
[7 Avare Mere du fait caufe
Conjurateur & R egne en grarid remort.
Englifh:
A Barbarous Souldier [ball D the K3 ing,
Unjuftly, not far from death,
The covetous Mother fbel! betbe canule of it,
The Confpirator and Kingdow in great remtor/ e.
ANNOT,
T hefe words are fo piain that they needno interpretation.


LX XIV.
French.


En Terre neuve bien avant Roy entré,
Pendant fubjects luy viendr ont faire accueil,
Sa parfidie aura tel rencontré;
Qu’aux Citadins heu de fefte & recueil.

i Engliih.


F 110 being entered f } ar


lera,


into a new Countre AP

P ' (hall come to welcou bine,

| (l His p berfidionf: refs fall find , (uch an encounter

{ ii That to the Citizens it foall be i nftead of feat bed welcont.
il ANNOT,

Thefenfe of this feemeth to be, chat a certain King being far got intoa new con-
quered Countrey , where he fhall deal perfidioufly ith ch his ; Subjects , that then he
fhall meet with {uch an accidentyas to his Citizens fhall be inftead of feaft & welcom

ua
French.
Le Pere & fils feront meurtris enfemble.
Le Prefeéteur dedans fon Pavillon,
ee La Merea Tours du fils ventre aura enfle,
Cache verdure de fueilles papillon.


Englith.
The Father and Son fbail be mane dered togethe
The Governour fball be fo in his Tent;
At Tours the Mother [ball be got with.chi ild by her for:
Hide the greennefs with Later Butter-flye.


fy


i Tabs © hy ects
? Pere He JAH! IE


ls


sp A aA ae ste


ANNOT.


of Michael Noftradamus, 343
ANNOT.


There is nothing hard here but thelaft Verfe, whereby it is fignified, that after
fach an inceft of the Mother wich the Son in the City of Tours ( wichis a Town in
France) the fruit of it fhall be fecretly buryéd, and green Turfs laid upon the place,
and Leaves upon chem, to take away-the knowledge ofir,


LXX VEL.
French,
Plus Macelin que Roy en Angleterre,
Lieu oblcur ne par force aura l'Etnpire,
Ealche, {ans foy, {ans loy, fergnera Terre,
Son temps s’aproche {1 prefque je foulpire.
Enghfh.


More Macelin thex King in England,
Born in obfcur: place, by force fball reign,


Of loofe difpofition without faith without Law thé ground fball bleed,


His time is drawing fo near that I figth for it;


ANNOT.


Macelin, is a Butcher or cruel man;,from the Latine word Macellum, which figni-
fieth the Shambles, 1t 1s without contradiction that by this Prophecy is plain con-
cerning the late tyrant Cromwel, and his unlawful-Governmeiit:


LXXVIL
French:


L’ Antechrift bien toft trois:annithilez.
Vingw Sofept ans durera fa guerre, 1
Les Heretiques morts;captifs efrez.
Sang corps humain eau rougie,ore fler Terre
Enelih, ,. %

By Aatichrifl three hall fhortly be brousht.io nothing,
His War [ball laf feven and twenty years,
The Hereticks dead, Prifoners banifbed. |
Blood, bumane body, water mad: red, E wrth bailed.

| a RU a keh
What he meaneth here by Antichrift is ‘noreafie to détermine, for he cannot


mean the Pope, himfelf being à Papift,- northe etear Antichrit® whole Reign, ac-
cording tothe Scripture, fhalHaft but three years'and a half, itismore likely then
that this Stanza hath coherence with the precedent, and that by.ic he meaneth Henry
the VIII. who for the {pace of about 27 years before he dyed, did handle fomething


roughly the Clergy and Clergy-men,


LX KVATE,

bp | Freigepie® ©
Un Bragantas avcé la langue torte,
Viendra-des.dieux rompre'le Sanétuaire,
Aux Héretiquesil ouvrirada porte,
En fufcitant l’Eglile Militaire,


- eS


T he true Prophecies


| | Englifh.

“A Bragamas with bis crooked Tongue,
Shall. come and breakthe Gods Santinary,
He fhall open the Gates unto Hereticks,
By raifing the Militant Church,


ANNOT.


Bragamas is the fame thing that we call now Bragadocio, By the Gods San@uary;


he meaneth the Temples of the Romifb Religion; who are reputed San@uaries, and
ae full of Images, which they worfhip as Gods, praying and offering Incenfete
them,


LX 1X.
French.
Qui par fer pere perdra, nay de Nouuaire,
De Gorgon {ur la fin fera fang perferant,
En Terre eftrange fera fi tout de taire,
Qu’il bruflera luy mefme & fon entant.
Englifh.
He that by Iron fball deftroy bis Father, Lorn in Nonnaire,
Shall in the endcarry the blood of Gorgon,
Shall in a ftrange Countrey make all fo filent,
That be fhall burn bimfelf and his intent.
ANNOT.


Nonnaire and Gorgon are two barbarous words, as for the fenfe of that and the
reft, he chat (hall be able to read the words, fhall be as wife as my felf.


LXXX,
French.
Des innocens le fang de Vefue & Vierge,
Tant de maux faits par moiens ce grandRoge,
Saints fimulachres trempez en ardant cierge,
De frayeur crainte ne verra nul que boge.
Englifh.
The blood of the innocent Widow and Virgin,
So many evils committed by the means of that great Rogue,
Holy Images, dipt in burning wax Candles,
For fear no body fball be [een to ftir.


ANNOT,
What he meaneth by the great Rogue is not obvious, but the main drift of thig
Stanza feemeth to be,to foretel the abufes that fhould be offered to the Popith Ima«
ges by the Proteftant party,as it was done in the time of the Civil VVars of France,


and alittle while after our Author had written his Prophecies.


By the great Rogue, he meaneth fome chief Commander of the Proteftant party,


that werein thofe days, asthe Prince of Conde, the Admiral of Caftilon, or his Bro-
ther Dandelet,


French:


land


oft |
ih inte
{Fran


rot,


is Bro


J


presi


of Michael Noftradamus.


LX XXI.
French.
Le neuf Empire en defdlation,
Sera changé du Pole Aquilonaire,
De la Sicile viendra l’emotion,
Troubler l'Emprife a Philip tributaire.
| Englifh.
The new Empire in defolation,
Shall be changed from the Northern Pole,
The conrmotion fball come from Sicily,
To trouble the undertaking, tributary to Philip.
ANNOT,
This threatneth the Empire that now isin Germany, ofa great defolation, and te
be removed from its place, and threatneth alfo the Ifland of Sicily of a fearful


commotion, which fhall trouble the undertakings of Philip, thatis, King of Spain,
‘becaufe they ufually are called by that name,


LXXXIL
French.

Ronge long, fec, faifant du Bon valet;
A la par fin n’aura que fon congie,
Poignant poifon & Lettres au colet .
Sera faify, efchapé, en dangié.

Enÿlifh.
Long gnawer, dry, cringing and fawning, . |
In conclufion [ball have nothing but leave to be gone,
Piercing poifon and Letters in bis Collar,


Shall be feifed, efcape, and in danger,


ANNOT, | ee eee
The words of this are eafie to beunderftood, but not who fhould be that man to
whom he giveth thefe four fanfous Epichetes of Leng-gnawer, dry, cringing and
fawning.
LX. XX LET.
French.
Le plus grand voile hors du port de Lave;
Pres de Bixance fera fon entreprife,
D’Ennemy perte & l’amy ne léra,
Le ticrs'a dèux fera grand pillé & prife.
| situ Englhifho; nob a
The greateft Sail out of the Pert of Zara,
Near Bizance fball make bis undertaking ,
x There fhall be no lofs of foes or friends, |
The third fhall make a great pillage upon the two.
Yy


ANNOT:


346. The true Prophecies


ANNOT, |
By Zara fuppole that the Venetians are meant, who have a very ftrong Town of
that name, fituated in Dalmatia, Bizance is Conftantinople, as we have faid before;
now whether this Prophecy was fulfilled when the Venetians took the Ifland of Te-
nedos, {ome 20 years ago, which is not far from Conftantinople, or whether itis to
come,] dare not affert,


LXXXIV,


French. | .


Paterne aura de la Sicile crie,
Tous les aprefts du Gouphre de Triefte, | à
Qui s’entendra jufques ala Trinacrie,
De tant de votles,fuy,fuy,!’horrible pefte.
Engluh.
Paterne fhall have out of Sicily a ery,
Alb the preparations of the Gulpb of Triefte,
That fhall be beard as far as Trinacry,
Of fo many Sails, fly, fly, the horrid plague.
ANNOT.
It hath been impoffible for me to make any-fenfe of this, and therefore believe
that it is falfely printed, and chatinftead of Paterne, it fhould be Palerme, which is


the chief Town m Sicily, Trinacry is Sicily it (elf, fo called, quod tria habeat, pa
fen promontoria,


LXX XV.
French.
Entre Bayonne & à Sainét fean de Lux,
Seta pole de Mars la promottoire,
Aux Hanix d’Aquilon, Nanar hofteraLux,
Puis fuffoque au lit fans adjoutoire. .
Englifh.
Between Bayonne and Saint John de Eux,
Shall be put down the promoting of Mars,
From the Hunix of the North, Nanar /ball take away Lux,
Then fhall be [uffocated in his bed without help
ANNOT,

Bayonne is a Town in France, upon the frontiers of Spain, and Saint Fohn de Lux
is the utmoft frontiere of France, chat way, (thatbeing fappofed) hefaith. thar
about Saint Fobs de Lux, the promoting of the warthall be fet downs that is, thac
peace fhall be made,as it was.about fevenor eight years ago betweenFrance ands pair,


and che Marriage concluded between the King and the /afanta, The two laft Verfes
are non‘enfical, and only fet down to make-up therhime,


Ch
El
B


On at
lr


i |


thy


relieve M


hich :
net §


of Michael Noftradamiis.


LXXXVI:
.Freñchb.


Par Arnani, Tholofe, 8 Villefranque, |


Bande infinie par le. Mont Adrian, ©) |
Pafle Riviere,hucin par, pont la planqué,
Bayonne entrer tous Biehoro crtant.


Englifh,


By ‘Arnani, Tholofe, and Villefranche, sl i | i |
An infinite deal of people by the-Aprian, Wh
Crofs Rivers, noife upon the Bridge and plank i


Come all into Bayonne crying: Bichoro.


ANNOT,


Arnani, Tholofe, and pélléfranché areTowns of a Province in France called Lan-
guedoc, Mont Adrian isa Mountain thereabout, and Hwtin is an old-French word,
fignifying noife and ftrife, the fenfe then of this Prophecy is, that by thofe Towns
and Mountains, hall pafs an infinite multitude of people,with a great noifeand ftrife,


and {hall come aud enter into Bayowne, evéry one crying in that Countrey Language
Bichoro; whichis as much as to fay, és. \. A


cit bX XX VIE
French.


Mort confpirée viendra.en plein.effer,
soon - Charge donnée,.& voyage de mort,

Efleu; crée; receus; par fiens desfait,

Sang d’innocence devant foy par remort? -

Englith:

A confpired death hall come to an effect,

Charge given, and a journey of death...

Eleéted,created, received,by his own defeated,

Blood of Innocency before hing by remorfe.


NNOT,


A
Thete is no miftical fenfe in this, and che words are plain, alchough ofa crabbid
conftruétion:


LXXXVIIL
French:


RTE 7 Engih


+ ou ae dd


ORE Mn Male


(ie Uncle.


i Knight, that then fuch order of Knighthoood fhall be no mo


The true Prophecies:
| Englifh.

A noble King fhall come into Sardinia
Who fhall bold the Kingdom only thrée years,
He fhall joyn many Colours tobis own,
Himfelf afterwards, care; fleep matrirfeome.


ANN OT: on :

Sardinia is an Ifland in the Mediterranean Sea, now in the poffeffion of the Spaz

paniard, fince he took the Kingdom of Naples, the three firft Verfes are fomething
intelligible, the laft is altogether impoffible and barbarous, if


LXXXIX:
French,
Pour ne tomber entre mainsde fon oncle,
Qui fes enfans par regnerctrucidez,
Orant au peuple-mettant pred {ur ‘Pelowele
Mort'8 traifné:entre Chevaux bardez.
| | Englith.
That. he might not fall into-the bands of his: Uucle,
That had murdered his Childven for soul; ei 1134
Taking away frem the peoplejand putting his foot upon Peloncle,
Dead and draton among armed Horfes.
hii ANNOT. |
This fignifieth chat an Uncle fhall murderhis Nephews Children, that ha may


Reign, and that the faid Nephew fhall withdraw, and>fave himfelffrom the faid
Thereft is altogether.obfcure, if not abfurd, DV


XC.

|| | | French. |
Quand des croilez un trouve de fens trouble,
En lieu du facre verra ün Batuf cornu,

Par vierge porc fon heu lôrs fera doublé,
Par Roy plus ordre ne fera foufténu.


»


; 1 ( Englifh.


| When'of the croffed, one of a troubled mind,
a In a facred place fhall fee:a horny Oxe,
| By Virgin Pork then fhall his\placeibe double


lie By King no henceforth, order fball be maintained.


AN NOT.

By the croffed is undetftood fome order of-Knight-hood,. who forthe moft parc
wear that Badge, one of which being mad, and feeing in 2 Chürcha Horny Oxe
come, by a Virgin Hog “fhall be:kept-from harm, of refcued by a Hog or Sow
that was a Virgin, and it feems croffed the faid Oxe, that he fhould not gore the


re maintained nor up-


held by the King of chat Countrey, wherein fuch thing fhall happen:


French,


a
U
1,
|
LA
À
À


oncle À


hema) | |
thelid à


put
Hy (xe |
So M
we the M
10f Ups


of Michael: Noftradamus.
XCE
| AEUS Ye/L NSP Tens:
Parmy les Champs des Rhodanes entrées,
Ou les croilez feront prefques unis...
Les deux Braffiers.en. Pifces rencontrées,
Et un grand nombre par Deluge. punis.


Enghifh. 29010) gasdqoid zida yŒ


8 Throigh the Fields of the Rhodanes comping s in: 1 15 .2djnorn nsVsl


AD à i Dsl 21150 = > ! Mr IO Tet 3¥ a i
Where-the croffed fball be almoft united, ‘ etes sc.
The two Braffiers wet an Pilces, 5, <0 ogtno) od Ile exon sRib À


And a great number punifbed: bya Flood,
le M as , ANNOT. ne
… Rhodanus in Latine is the Riveref Rhefwe, which cometh from: Switeerlandd , and
paffing through the Lake of Geneva, runneth to Lyon, ic feemeth-chen thar in chofe
Fields that are about that River there., will be a fearful inundation... when the Braf-
fers (or rather Crozders, whichis a conftellation fo called) fhall meet in Pifces,which
is one of the twelve Signs of the Zodisck.’- 1.102! 5159


‘KX CHI.

: French.

Loin hors du Regne mis.en.hazard voiage,
Grand Oft duyra, pour foy Koccupera,

Le Roy tiendra les fiens captif, .oftage, .
A fon retour tout Pais pillera., |


Bang litter 21Mogmt ton ahnsib you si 8


Fanfrom the Kingdom à baxardows journey Unblertalér


HE ball lead a great Army, which be foal make bis own, °°


The King fhall keep his prifoners, and pledges,
At bis return he fhall plunder all the Countrey.


ANNOT. ets
Thefe obfcure words fignifie no more but chat a King {hall fend a great Army far
from his Kingdom , the Commander of which Army {hall make the Army his own,
which the King hearing, fhall feize upon the Commanders R elations and-keep chem
Prifoners and Hoftages, for which the faid General being angry, fhall at his recurn
fpoil the Countrey. |
XCIII,
French.
Sept mois fans plus obtiendra prelaturé,
Par fon decez grand fchifme fera naiftre
Sept mois tiendra un autre là Prétüre, hi
Prés de Venife:paix union renaiftre, ? 1:15 rt


The tnd Prophetiés
En@lith.


Seaven months and no more, be foall obtain the Prelacy,
By his deceafe he foall cawfe a’great Schifine,” "UT |
Another fhall be fever months chief Fuftice, Ed suk à A |
Near Venice peace’ and unidn [hall grow’ again, “729 © |
ANNOT. | LA eu |
By this Prophecy three things are foretold, ‘the firft is of a Pope that {hall fit bug
feven months, at whofe death there will bea great Schifme ;=the fecond is ofa great
Governour or Chief Juitice, fuch as were called by the ancient Romavs Pratores {hall |
be inauthority alfo but feven months; andthe third, that*hard by Véwice all chefe Ree
differences fhall be compofed,and peace made again, -* °1 I OW SE 7 ee
XGA hak |
French: iB
bas | Devant la Lac owsplus cherfutigetté; 1 29°: Ini vanaholy Lu
slo De fopt mois & fo OF défie," "" : QUOT se per
Seront Hifpans pat Albanois gaftez, 0 pie ke \ À do
Par delay perte en donnant le confits, 252:
Eñglifh.
Before the Lake wherein moft dear was thrown, 3
Of feven months, and his Arnty overthrown, | | :
Spaniards fhall be fpoiléd by Albanefes} 27 |
By delaying ; lofs ingivine tbe Bäitles
i ANNO! tai
Bet __Icis very difficult,ifnot impoffible totell what our Author meaneth by the Lake:
Ried wherein the moft dear was thrown, and loft his Army... The Abanefes area Nation
Bri between the enctians and Greece, now for the moft part fabjectto thefaid Venetians: Î


mé ©


ot Se. ee <


X CV: ñ |

| French. <
bit Le Seduéteur fera mis dans la Foffe, | thé.
Et eftaché jufques a quelque temps, dete


* Le Clerc uny.le Chefavecfa,Crofle, 0 os rt

a sc: Pyeante drotte:attraira.les contems. Le 7 EAN
ee! = | | Englifh. ° : i

li The Deceiver fhall be put into the Dungeon, for

be And bound fat for a while, ae dr

| The Clerk united,the head with his Crofierftaf, Ly

Pricking upright, fhall draw in the contented. L'or

ANNOT. ru

_ Thetwofirft Verfes are plain, the two laft Verfesnot fo, which feemeth to fore: | I!

all tell ofa great union among the Clergy, which fhall draw tothem thofe tharwere | >

ji peaceably affected, ~~ ©:

yi À | A

Ry


French)


of Michael Noftradamus.
X CVE
French.
La Synagogue fterile fans nul fruit,
Sera receue entre les Infidélés,
De Babylon la fille du pourluit,
| Mifere & trifte luy trenchera les Aifles.


fl À Englifh.

tater | The Synagogue barren, without fruit,

ha | Shall be received among the Infidels, | |

Lt | In Babylon,the daughter of the perfecuted, i
i Miferable and fad fball cut her wings. LA
} ANNOT. ll


| A Synagogueis a place where the Jews affemble for Divine VV orfhip, 4 the
Chriftians do in Churches or Temples,the faid Jews Synagogue is chreatned here to
be unfruitful and barren, and chiefly in Babylon, by the means of a woman, daughter
of one perfecuted 5 belike of fome of their own tribe, whom the reft did perfecute,


| XCVII.
| French.
Au fins du Var changer le Pompotars,
| Pres du Rivage, les trois beaux enfans naiftre,
| Ruine au peuple par Aage competans,
Regne au Pais changer plus voir croiftre.


| Englith.

i | At the ends of the Vax to change the Pompotans,

Wim À Near the Shore fhall three fair Children-be born,

ts, i Ruinc to the people, by competent Age,

- h To change that Countreys Kingdom, and fee it grow no more.
i ANNOT.


The firft Verfe being made of infignificant words, as Var and Pompotans cannot be
underftood; the other three doth foretel of three handfom Children , that fhall be
born near the Shore, which when they have attained'a competent Age, thal! change
the Kingdom of that Countrey, and fuppefsit.


XCVIIT,
| French.
Des sens d'Eglife fang fera efpatiche,
Comme dé l'eau én fi grande abundance,
Et de long temps ne fera retranché,
Veue au Clerc ruine & doleance.


| Englifh.
TE | The blood of Churehmen [ball be fpilt,
as | As water in fuch abundance,


And for 4 good while fhall not be flayed,
1 Raine and grievance fball be [een to the Clerk.
ruth | AN NOT.


ee =


T be true Prophecies
ANNOT


This is eafie to be undetftood , which foreteileth a very great perfecuti-
ontothe Clergy-men, véz, Papifts , of which Religion our Author was , if this be
not already paft in the Civil Wars of Frawce, that were made for Religion, in the be-
ginning of Reformation,where abundance of Clergy-men did perifh on both fides,


2 CA
French.


Par la puiffance des trois Rois temporels,

En autre lieu fera mis Ja Saint Siege,

Ou Ja fubftance de PEfprit.corporel,

Sera remis & receu, pour vray Siege.
Englifh.

By the power of three Temporal Kings ,

The Holy See hall be putin: another place,

Where the fubftance of the Corporeal fpirir,

Shall be reftored,and admitted for a true feat.

ANNOT.


This Stanza is very remarkable, for che thing it foretelfech, wiz. a tranfla-
tion of the See of Rome, that is, the Popedom into another place by three Temporal
Kings, and not onely that, but it feemeth by the fenfe of the laft two Verfes , thac


thefe will keep the Ecclefiaftical authority to themfelves,
a C,
Freach.
Pour l’'abundance de l’Armé refpandue,
Du haut en bas, par le bas au plus haut,
Trop grande foy par jeu vie perdue,
De foif mourir par abondant defaut.
Englifh.


Through the abundance of the Army fcattered,
High and low, low and high,

Too great a belief a life loft in jefting,

To die by thirSt, through ‘abundance of want.


ANNOT,


The fenfe of this is, that by reafon ofa great Army that fhallbe much fcattered, -
and occupy a great deal ofroom, water will be fo fcarce, that fome fhall die for


thirft, it is chat he callech here, To die by thir/t, through abundance of want,


‘
CA


a |


CUS, Pl, pd pt


“cui
this be
ithe be. M


|
ds,


-
trans
emporal |
thie A


orl


of Michael Noftradamus.


Other Stanza’s heretofore Printed, under the VIII.
C. BANG LU. RY,


I
French.


ESS Eront confus plufieurs de leur attente,


ES


Aux habitans ne {era pardonné,
Qui bien penfoint perleverer l'attente,
Mais grand loifir ne leur fera donné.


Englih.
Many foall be confounded in their expectation,
The Citizens fhall not be forgiven,
Who thought to perfevere in their refolution,
But there fball.not be given then.a great leifure for it.
AN NOT.
This is plain, and needeth no interpretation.


11.
French.


Plufieurs viendront & parleront de Paix,
Entre Monarques & Seigneurs bien‘ puiflans,
Mais ne fera accorde de fi pres,

Que ne fe rendent plus qu'autrés obeiffans.


Englifh.

Many fball come and fball talk of Peace, .

Between Monarchs and Lords very powerful,

But it fhall not be agreed to it fo foon,

If they do not fbew themfelves more obedient then others.
ANNOT.


VVeare juft now at the Eve of this Prophecy, when fo many Princes and Poten-
tates do bufie themfelves about a Mediation between che two Crowns of France and


Spain, &Co
it ILL


French.
Las quelle fureur, helas quelle pitié,
Il y aura entre beaucoup de’gens,
On:newvitoncune cell -amitic,
-Ou’auront les Loups' a courir diligens.


Zz Eoglifh,


ee | Ann


This feemeth to point at this prefeat conjuncture of affairs
buifying themfelves about che relief of Flanders, of which I


The true Prophecies


Englifh.
Ha ! what fury, alas what pitty,
There fball be betwixt many people,
There was. never feen fuch a friendfbip,


As the Wolfs fball have in being diligent torun.
ANNOT.


It is indeed a great fury and pity to fee how wicked people, and chiefly Uforers
and falfe dealers , (underftood here by the name of VVolfs) are diligent in doing
mifchief, and to make good the old Proverb, Homo homini Lupus, there being no
other Creature but the V Volf that devours thofe of his own kind,


IV,

French.
Beaucoup de gens viendront parlementer,
Aux grand Seigneurs qui leur feront la guerre,
On ne voudra en rien les efcouter,
Helas! fi Dien n'envoie Paix en Terre.

Esghfh.
Many folks fhall come to {peak |
To great Lords that fball make War againft them,
They {ball not be admitted toa bearing,
Alas! if God doth not fend Peace upon Earth,

ANNOT,


This carrieth its fenfe with it, and is plain;


V.
French.
Piufieurs fecours viendront detous coftez,
De gens lointains qui voudront refifter,
Ils feront tout a coup bien haftez,
Mais ne pourront pour cette heure aflilter.
Englih.

Many helps fhall come on all hides,
Of people far off, that would fain to vefiff,
They fhall be upon a fudden' all very hafty,
But for the prefent they Jball not be able to affift.

ANNOT,


»Wherethete is fo many
{ce no great likelihood.


French:


Cet. vs,


mm


of Michael Noftradamus,


VE
Freach.
Las quel plaifir ont Princes eftrangers, .
Carde toy bien qu’en ton Pais ne Vienne,


Il yauroit deterribles dangers, LP ON
Et en maintes Contrees, metine én la Wieyne,
Englith.


Ha! what pleafure take Forrain Princes 2
heed ny foould come into thy Countrey
Take peed leaft any fb ome into thy Ci trey,


There fhould bé terrible dangers, af c { iH
In fevêral Countreys,and chiefly in Viena, \. | 2
ANNOT.


. There istwo Towns called Vienna's,
and isthe Emperours Sear,the other in
thereft is eafle.. mn.


One isin Germamy, in the Province of Anfiria,
France,a metter of twenty mailesbeyond Lion,


*
sd # :
ë ar

Pi = f


one


F


af Mer
aN CEE)
CE ai) AU
UN] | Hd Wf
4 é SF meas


es) Fee SOR
PAS SN
= Mi Ze NN f


AT


Ô | A VR AS =
A MP)


Michael Noftradamus.


CENT Oi TAS


St


I.
French.


Ans Ja maifon du Traduëteur de Boure,
Seront les lettres trouvées fur la Table,
Borgne,roux blanc,chenu tiendra de cours,
Qui changera au nouveau Conneftable.


Englifh.


In the Houfe of the Tranflator of Boure,

The Letters foall be found upon the Table,

Blind of one eye, red wbite, hoary, fhall kzep its courfe,

Which [ball change at the coming of the new Conftable.
5 ANNOT.

[ris not eafie to underftand what he meaneth by the Tranflator of Bowre,unlefs ic
be (ome mean and pittitul fellow,that lived by Tranflating things from one language
into another, becaufe the French ufe to calla man that is inconfiderable ,. #n homme
Jw boure tat is a man of Flockss and fo much the more am of this opinion, becaufe
of the (curvy Epitheres, he attribuceth to the fame perfon, by which he mighe eafily


be known as of blind of ono eye, red, white, beary, &C.


French,


I
\
[


L
D


lel i
puis
| byw
becillé
relly


Of Michael Noftradamus,


Lt:
French.


Du haut du Mont Aventin voix ouye,
Vuidez, vuidez de tousles deux coftez,
Du fang des rouges fera IIre aflouvie,
D'Arimin, Prato, Columna debottz.


English. ;
From the top of Mount Aventin, 4 voice was beard,
Get you gone, get you gone on all fides ,
The Choler fhall be fed with the blood of the red ones,
From Afimini and Prato, the Colonnas (ball be driven away.


AN NOT,


Mount Aventineis one of the feven Mountains of Rome,from thé top of which our
Author faich chat a voice was heard crying andrepeating, cet you gese, and the reafon
is, becaufe choler and anger fhall feed upon the blood of the Cardinals, underftood
here by thename of red ones.

Ariminiand Prato are two Cities in /taly,

The Colonna is the chiefeft and ancienteft family of Rome.


III
French.


Le magna vaqua a Ravenne grand trouble,


Conduits par quinze enferrez a Fornafe,
AoRome naftra deux Monftres a tefte double,
Sang; feu, deluge, les plus grands a l’elpate,
Englifh.
The Magna vaqua great trouble at Ravenna;
Conducted by fifteen, fhut up at Fornate,
At Rome fhall be born two Monfiers with a double head,
Blood, fire, Flood, the greater ones affonifbed.
ANNOT.


+ This word of Magna vaqua is either falfly printed , or altogether barbarous and
infignificant, and fois chat of Forsafe , which maketh the two firft Verfes incapable
of cranflation; the other are eafie.


1V.
French.
L’Anenfuivant defcouverts par Deluge,
Deux chefs efleus, le premier ne-tiendra,
De fuyriombre: a |’un deux le refuge;
Saccagee cafe qui premier maintiendra.


The true Propbecies..


Englilh.
The year following being difcovened by a Flood,
Two Chiefs elected, the firft fhall not hold,
To fly from fbade, ta-one fhall be, a refuge |
That boufe fhall'be plundered mbich fpall maintain the firft,
:ANNOT, ;
Our Author meaneth, that the year after the former Praphecy is come to pafs,this
{hall alfo be fulfilled, whereby two Chief Gommanders fhall be chofen , the firft of


which fhall not ftandj. but (hall be compelled, to:run away 3 and to feek his fecurity
in the open Fields, and that houle chat did uphold the firft hall be plundered,


V.
French.
Tiers doigt du pied au premier femblera,
A un nouveau Monarque debas‘haut,
Qui Pife & Lurjhes "tyran éctUpéra,
Du précédent corriger le defaut.
Enghfh. | al
The third toe of the foot halt be like the firft,°
To a new high Mouarch come from low effate,
Who being a Tyrant [ball ceafe upon Pife and Luica,


To correct the faults of bim that preceded him.


ANNOT.
The meaning of thisis , thatfome body pretending to mend the Government of
thofe cwo places that are in Italy, fhall tyrannically make bimfelf Mafterof them,


VI.
French:

Parla Guyenne mfinite d'Aglois,

Occuperont par nomd’Angle Aquitaine,

Du Languedoc. 1 palme Bourdclois,

Quils nommeront apres Barboxitaine,

Englith,

‘There fhall bein Guyenha'an infinite number. of Englih,
Who fall occupy it by the name of Angle Aquitaine, «1:
Of Languedoc, I by the Land of Bourdeaux,

Which afterwards they shall call Barboxitaine.
ANNOT.


Here is foretold a famous invafion,that fhall be made by the &g/s/h upon that part
of France called Guyenne, and in Latine Aguitanis, of which Bourdeanx isthe chief
City, infomuch, thatthe Æxglifh afterwards {hall call chat Countrey agl Aqui-


taine,


Freach,


of Michael. N oftradamus.
VII.
| French,
Qui ouvrira le Monument trouvé,
Et ne viendra le ferrer promptement,
ae Mal luy viendra & ne poura prouve,
a | Si mieux doibt eftre Roy Breton ow Normand.
i i Englifh.
cay | He that fball open the Sepulchre found,
1 And fball not clofe it up again prefently,


1 Evil will befall him, and he fball not be able to prove
1 W bether 4s beft a Britain or Norman King.
| | ANNOT,
| The fenfe of this is per{picuous,
| | VIL
| French.
Puifnay. Roy. fait fon père mettre a mort,
4 Apres conflict. de mort.tres in honefte,
Elérit trouvé foupcon, donra, remort,
Quand loup chafle pofe fur la couchetes
| Englifh.
| A younger King canfeth bis father to be put
| To a difboneft death, after a Battle,
| Writing [hall be found, that [hall give [isfpicion and remorfe,
When a buntedW ‘olf fball reft upon a truckle bed.


ANNOT.


| The words and fenfe are plain,

j ix

| French. MISS 5

| Quand Lampe ardente de ae inextinguible,

Sera trouvée au Temple dei Veftales,

Enfant trouvée, feu, eati patiant par crible.

D Nifmes eau perit}’Tholoaleeheow les Halles zi) baste
Englith.,

ii ben a Lamp burning Be unquenchable fre,


all be found in the Temple of the Veftals,


a


Child fball be found, Water running ips a Sie Lee, à
que to perifb by Water, theM. ar het Pal hall fall A LEO ue


ANNO T
The ancient Peffals, were a Kind of Religions Virgins i in the ancient Romans


ut pitt
pechiel
| A


Temple


time, who if they did forfeic their honour, were buried alive in a Cave, witha little.
Bread-and Water, and a Lamp burning, our Author would have, that when a Lamp:
fhall be found lighted with an unquenchable fire, in that place where then their.


369 The:ttue Prophecies


Temple was, that then Nifzses (which is a City of Laneuedos, fall perifh by Water,
and the Market-hall of Tholoufe fhall fall, whether fuch a Lamp may be contrived as
to burn with an unquenchable fire, is too long and tedious a difcourfe to be difputed


here:


N:
Freach.


Moine, Moiieffe'd’ Enfant mort expofe,
Mourir par Ourie & ravy par verrier,
Par Foix & Panniers\le Camp fera pole,
Contre Tholofe, Careas, drefler forrier.
Englifh,
Monk and Nun having expofed a dead Child,
To be killed by a foe Bear, and faatcht away by a Glazier,
The Camp fball be fet by Foix and Panntess,
And againft Tholoute,Carcas fhall raife a Harbinger.
ANNOT.
Foix and Panniers are two Towns in Languedoc, and fo are Tholonfe and Caraffenne,
called here Careas, for the abbreviation of the Verfe, the fenfe then of this prophecy


is, that when the two firft Verfes fhall come to pafs; that then an Army fhall lie abouc
thofe Towns, and Carcaffonne thall be againft Theslon{e, |


| X I,
Bae | French.
We Le jufte a tort a mort l’on viendra mettre,
he Publiquement, & du milieu eftaint,
wee! | Si grande Pefte.en ce lieu viendra naiftre,
| Que les Jugeans fouyr feront contraints.
Englifh.


The juft fall be put to death wrongfully,
Publickly, and being taken ont of the midft,
So great a Plague fball break into that place,
That the Judges foall be compelled to run away.
AN NOT.
Many underftand this of the late King, and laft Plague,
XI LI.
French.


nn Letant d’argent de Diane & Mercure,
| Les fimulachres au Lac feront trouvez,
Le Figulier cherchant argille neuve,

Luy & les fiens, d’or feront abreuvez.


Province
v4) Watts

In Pro
and near


him, Tt
ln; 1


sin,
phecy
about


of Michael Noftradamus.


Enelith.
The fo much Silver of Diana and Mercury
The, Statues fhall be foundin the Lake;
The Potter feekine for mew clay,
He and bis fball be filled with Gold.


ANNOT,


“This Prophecy is concerning a Potter, who feeking and. digging for new Clay’,
{ball find ina drained Lake the Statucs of Diana and Mercary all of filver,befides other
great riches , feeing this Prophecy is not come to pafs yet (chat I know) ic will
not be amifs, for the divertifement of the Reader, to relate herea notable and au-
thentical Hiftory of a Potter that bath much reflemblance with this , and will be a
convincing Argument, that Mines grow in the Earth as Turfs do , and as Virgil
fayeth of the golden branch :

Uxo avulfo non deficit alter, ,

Icis written by Doëtor de Rochas, Phyfitian.to the prefent Chancellor of France.
who was upon the place, and an eye witnefs of the circumftances of it, having alfo
an intereft in it, in che behalfofhis Father, who was overfeer of the Mines in chat
‘Province, therefore I fhalf relate ic in his own Words, as they are in his Book of adine-
ral Waters.

“In Provence near Thowlon, is a Mountain called Carquairend , at the foot of which
and near the brim of che Sea, there dwelled a Porter with all. histools about |
him ; Ic chanced chat on a day a$ he went to ferch Wood in that Mountain,
to bake his wates, he heard a voice ofa little Kid, which fome Shepherd
had left behind them unawares, and was fallen in a little ho'e chat anfwered to
natural, great and deep Caves; chis man feeing no Shepherds about him... chought
prefently it wasa ftrayed Kid, therefore he followed the cry-w.th his ear fo direct
ly, thac he came by the orifice of chat hole, where he heard and {aw the Kid, wluch
he refolved to carry away with his Wood’, there‘ore he took the Cords char were
at his Mules Saddle, and chat he ufed to bind hi Load with, :nd withthe help of
them;and of fome big pieces of V Vood he got down, where , he did obfetve round
abouthim many other Caves, contiguous and feparated from this, which his cu, iofi-
ty caufed him to view, and found in the chief of thefe Caves a gieat quantity of
ftones heaped upon one another, & ofa fubftance and colour of Brafs and among the
reft there was one that came forch onc of the Rock, about the bigne(s , fhape; and:
length of a mans arm, whenit is ftretched oats he did apparently judge tharthe
weight and brictlenefs of that matter had caufed chofe {tones to fall down, and that
the fame chat he {aw come out of the Rock in this manner, was already Joote and like
rofall; this man finding himfelf among {uch an abundance of rich Lingots, which
fortune did offer him,did not know th: value of them, but did like the Cock of Æ/op
which left the precious Pearl to take the Corn of VVheat, thus this Fafos took
very little ofthis Golden Fleece, and only a {mall piece, which he broke from abig-
ger with one of his Tools, and imployed all his induftry to carry away his Kid,which
at laft with much ado he got out, and carried upon his Mule, believingcertainly chap
this provifion would be more profitablero him and his Family,then che yellow ftone
which he bad in his pocket, weighing about five pounds, and which he intended to
give toa Tinkerof Thowlon ; his Goffip and good fiiend ; in hope chat for the fame
he might be prefented witha bottle of VVine, to keep company to his Kid; and
accordingly che next morning by break of day Fewentto Thcwlen, and ftayed in the
Shop of his friend, whodid look with admiration upon {0 re‘plendent Brafs; a
Aaa Gold-fmith


ivy


A Notable
Fiflory.


F Beer it Lt
, STORE PT rat OP ETS


23e


REP me eR


262 The true L’rophecies
Gold-fmith who lodged over the way, and obferved the fplendor ur that Divine
mettal, drewnear, and prefently would have bargained forit, witha great deal of
tran{portation and alteration, ‘The Potter asked him only twenty pence, which the
Gold- {mith would have given him prefently, but the Tinker making fign to him to
retra&t his words, be put his lingoc in his pocket'again , with proteftatiôn: that he
would not part wichit, unlefs he had fomethingthat were worth the pains of going
where he had ic; in conclufion,afrer many conteftations and difputes,the Potter who
did fufpeét chat it might be gold, would noc fell nor deliver it under the fum of thirty
Crowns , which the Gold-fmith paidchim prefently , and which he carried away
with more joy, then ifthe had been poffeffor ot greater-riches; the Gold-(mith-on
the other fide ; who thought that his profit would be above abundred pounds fter-
lings, did refine this ftone; that was about five pound weight ,, out of which he drew
four pound weight, of very good and pure gold, the'reft, was.a kind of drofs . ‘that
made irthus britele ; ,one ought not. co think thatthe Mine isall of the fame perle.
ion, bucit purifiech it felf, according as nature thruftethit out of che Rock. as we
fee that Rubies and Emeralds are purer,then the Rock from whence they come. This
Gold-fmith having found fach fortune , and being refolyed to make the beft ufe of
it, went to the Lord Scaravaque, then Governour of the Town, and imparted unto
him this new difcovery , that he might have his affiftance and favour init, and that
under his power and authority he might follow and wait upon this precious bufinefs
without being difturbed by any body,to which the Governour did fo much the eafier
confent,that this Tradefman did obliage himfelf to give him the belt part of the pro-
fic chat fhouldarife from thence , and thatfhould exceed any Trayelsinto the. Jndjes
or Pers.

la the mean time the Potter was not afleep , the Gold-{miths money had ftirred
his appetite,and the charm of chis witchcraft that worketh generally uponall {pirits,
did puc him upon new hopes. He went into the Mountain with his wife and with the
help of a rope Ladder , which he had provided, and fome Iron tools , wherewith he
had loadéd:his Mule, he went down into the Caves , and with much endeavour did
at laft break that piece, thac came ont of the Rock like a mans arm , becaufe all the
other that were cambled upon the ground , were fo big and heavy that he could not
remove them, when he had broken it down, though it were about fourfcore.and two
pounds weight, neverthelefs with the help of his wife and of his Ropesand Ladder
hé got out again, and ftopt the hole with a large ftone, and fome Earth, upon which
he planted fome fmall Buthes fo ingenioufly, that this hole could never be found our
again,

” The Lord Scaravaqne who was moft imptaient, to conquer like another Talon this
Golden Fleece , and who was fet on by the perfuafions of the Gold-{mith, fent for
the Potter, under pretence to employ him in the making and furnifhing of fome Tiles
and other {mall commoditeis that depended on hisart, ‘The Potter obeyed pre-
feacly, drawn by the hopes to fell his wares well, and miftrufting nothing at all what
they wouldask him.” As foon as he came, the Governour asked him and perfwaded
him with the beft and moft flattering words he could,to tell where he had the yellow
ftone that he fold to che Gold-fmith: The Potter who more and more began to
know the value of this rare Treafure, invented prefently a lie, to free himfelfof the
importunity of chem chat weuld have deceived him ; therefore withan ingenuity,as
fimple as artificial he’ anfwered, he had found it upon the brim of the Sea > where
may be fome Ship had been caft away, or the Waves had caft it upon the fhore,

Che Governout anfwered that this could not be, and therefore threatned him of
violence , and to fend for all that he had in his Houfe , which put the fellow intoa
great perplexity, becaufe of the other ftone chat fhould be found there, therefore he
chofe rather co give it them out of his good will , then co put himfelf in danger of


loofing


f a |
ong
EL
it


A binds, D
J .


au


if
{

(PAL)
peacedt 1]


nnar whe
WCET WHC


|
nnlornéar!
LGernEAtI


Mowlede


Qatar lei
LA
he Centr


nn thiedef
i) TiS def


| ts and


—
= Fr
=
7 dE
"
ro
oo


it


el
ch the
lt to
Ut be
Gung
Hho
y
| aay
th 00
fer.
€ drew
tt
pee.
AS ye
(This
‘uleof
d'u)
that
Une
eealer
ede
Inaits


fred
fs
iththe


nth he |


our did
ll the
id aot
me


adder


which M


nd out


ths
ent fo
je Tiles
ed te
| what
(maded
yellow
ean
fotthe


int
foie,
hin of
into.4
fore he


ager 0 |


looting


tits. Di


of Michael Moftr:'damus.,


loofing all, and perchance of being abufed to boot, without any more ado, he inge-
nuoufly confefled he had another piece’of,the fame ftuff as the former in his Houfe,
which he had likewife found in che fame.place, which he.was ready to put into their
hands, provided he might have his fhareoftc , and be fuffered to get his livelihood
peaceably. The Lord Scaravaque did promife him all what hedefired , and gave
him fome men co keep him company, ‘with ¢émmand'to bting him back again, and
to take fpecial care he fhould noc makeanefcape, At Jat chis:poorman cdme back
again with that piece, which did more inflame che paffion that the Governour had to
know the place whence came that richtrealure; but neither for prayers,. promifes,
or threats he would never reveal it, which did oblige the Governour to thut him
up clofé ina Chamber, where neverthelefs they gave him Vi@ualsand made ready a
Bed,but he refufed both,and by an extraordinary fadnefs,gave{hew that fome noto-
rious mifchance was waiting on him, which proved true, for he was found dead in the
Morning; whichdid putthe Lord Sczravmque ina griet unexprefiible,to fee himfelf
deprived by this accidents, of the fruit chat his,hopes had made himconceive, He
had recourfe to the Potters wife for this difcovery,, buc.the could never ,atcain.to ir,
whatfoever exa@ fearches fhe could make: yea, and after fhe was marriedagain with
a young man,. who had {pent in that fearch moft of histime. - The Lord Searavaque
and other perfons of quality have employed all cheir skills and endeavours. but all
their induftry and charges have been without effet, as well. as of many-others.,.who
attempted the fame; about that time my Father who was oveifeer of the Mines in
Provesce, having received the news of a bufinefs of fuch confequence, that did con-
cern his place , went prefently unto that Mountain, to fee if he could difcover thofe
wonders, I was thenin his company, as alfo that woman, viz. the Potters wife, who
carried us in fevéral places for many days, withoutany fuccels at all:s:although the
gave noti e that fhe could here the Waves of the Sea when the was in the Cave with
her firftHusband,fo that all our endeavours proved ftuitlefs and unprofitable, becaufe
my Father fell fick, which made usforfake our queft; which is of fuch a confe-
quence as not to be neglected. aC te

During the time of our painful vificing that Mountain, Idid confider the parti-
cularities of that rich Mountain , and obferved that the cop of it was almoft all Azur,
which tokens are the beams of that golden Sun.and are the hairs of that fair goodnels,
under whofe feet all things fubmic 5 in a word, are the ‘true and infallible figns chat
underneath are Mines of Gold andSilver,. And as I have' directed all my thoughts
many times to find out the means to compafs {o excellent a work whofe profit would
furpafs all what the Ides furnifh unto ftrangers » and chas with fo much lefs charges
and danger, that there is no need of Ships.ot Fleet to cto’s over the Sea,, from: one
Pole tothe other, nor fight againit any enemies : arlaft Ihave attained to a certain
knowledge, which putteth me in hope,and makes ine promife and engage my word,
thacat leattT thall find’a thred of chat golden Mine, which may, chance to lead us to
the Centre of all theft Treafures , but the Royal Auchority being neceffary to prop
up chisdefign , it belongeth to his Majeftÿ to take what courfe he chinketh beft for
this, and to me to obey, execute his will,” This digreffion which is an affured expe-
riment , (that isa certain truth, is not come into this difcourfe, but only to prove that
Mines grow by augmentation , in converting into their own nature the more {ubrle
parts of che Neighbouring Earth. Thus far Doctor ae Rochas.


Aaa2z French,


3 63!


Thetrue Prophecies


XIE
French.


Les Exilez autour dela Sologne,

Conduits de nuit pour marcher en I’ Auxois ,
Deux. de Modene truculent de Bologze,

Mis difcouverts par feu de Burancois.


Englifh.
The:banifbed about Sologne,
Being conduËted by night to go into Auxois,
Two of Modena, the cruel of Bolonia,
Shall. be difcovered by the fire of Burancots,
' ANN OT.
Sologne isa Province in France , bétween the Pereheand the Main.  Auxois is 4
Countrey inthe South of France, fo called of its chief Town called 4wch, the feat of
an Archbifkop. Modena is à Town in /taly, and Bolonia another not far fromit.  Bs-


ranceïs isa part of the Province of Dasphin, The meaning then of this Prophecy is,
this being known, the Reader may eafily find out the reft of the fenfe,


XLV.
French,
Mis. en planure.chauderon d'Infeéteurs;
Vin miel en ‘huile & baftis far Fourneaux,
Serorit plongez fans mal dit malfaéteurs,
Sept. fum.-extaint att Canon des Borneaux,
Englifh.
A Dyets Kettle being put an a Plein,
With Wine, Honey and Oil,and built upon Furnace,
Shall be dipt, without evil, called Malefaétors,
Seven. fum, put out at the Canon of Borneaux.
ANNOT.
This hath a relation to the punifhment, which in fome parts of France and Flanders
is inflicted upon falfe Coiners, whieh are commonly boiled in Oil, ina great Kettle,
fuch as our Author here faich belong to Dyers, The Author then will have that the


time fhallcome, when feven of that gang fhall be fo punifhed together in a Plain,
where a great Kettle fhall be fet for that purpofe upona Furnace,


X V,
French.
Pres de Parpan les rouges detenus,
Ceux:du milieu parfondtez menez loing,
Trois mis en pieces,& Cinq mal fouftenus,
Pour le Seigneur & Prelat de Bourgoing.


of Michael Noftradamus.
Englifh, .


D ‘Near unto Parpan the red ones det ained,
i Thofe of the middle funk and.carried far off, oe 0"
| Three cut in pieces, and five ill backed,
4 For the Lord and Prelate of Burgoing, |. | ui
| ANNOT. | ue
Parpan is either a barbarous or fained name, by theredoses, he hath hitherto un- ji
derftood fome Cardinals, the Reader may expound the reft according to his fancys
XVI.
French. |
De Caftel Franco fortira l’aflemblée, on
L’ Ambaffadeur non plaifant fera Schifme, Na nn
. À Ceux de Riviere leront en la meflée, Hi
va h Et au grand Goulphre defnieront l'entrée.
hoe | | Englifh.
ji, | Out of Caftel Franco fhall come the 4 ffembly, ; . |
|. °°" The Embaffador not pleafed, fball make à Schifme, jen
| Thofe of Riviere /hall be in the medley, AM ! |
| And {ball deny the-eutry.of the great Gulf, SS tal i
| | ANNOT. [ sein id : | à
Caftel François a Town in Piemont, Riviere isa ftrong Caftle in Bargundy , but | 4 | fi
what he meaneth by the great Gulfe, is morethen Fcan tell, | | pr
| pet 50 ius | XVIL CCE | At qi
4 French. a
| Le tiers premier, pis que ne fit Nero,
È Vuidez vaillant que fang humain refpandre,
| Redifier ferale Forneron, 04 5
Siecle d’or mort nouveau Roy grand efclandre.
| Englith.
Fes Bi The third firft, worfe then ever did Nero,
Keely D Go out valliant, be fhall {pill much bumane blood,
tha 1 He fhail caufe the Forneron to be builded again,
a | Golden Age dead, new King great troubles.
| | Sa OT ORO À. : |
| This. Prophecy pointeth dire@ly atouriAdthors Mafter Charles the IX. King of i
|| France, whom hecalleth hecthethitd fifi ,nbecaule he wasithe third onto Mzwr) II. |
D and came tobe Kingufingmore cruelties then éver Mers did; for he was tlie canfe of
| © the Maflacre of the Proteftants in France in the year 1572, where above a hundred
thoufand people weremurdered,  Fornero#is a barbarous word, put here to make a
Yerfe,and to rhime withNeros. . At chat time hefaith che Golden Age was dead , and My
upon the coming of anew King, who was Henry UJ, great tumults did happen, and
great Wars, asis to be féen in the French Hiftory, LAS


| French


pete pere


a ill


La RSIS


ess


PRE


“T he true Prophecies
X VIIT.
French.
Le Lys Dauffois portera dans Nancy, |
Jufques en Flanders Eleéteur de l'Empire, |
Neufve obturééau grand Montmorency, |
Hors lieux pronez deliviela- clere peyne.
Englifh.
Dauftois ball carry the Lillie into Nancy,
As far as Flandersthe EleGtor of the Empire,
New hinderance to great Montmorency,
Out of proved places deliver dto acliar pain, |
ANNOT.
Although the words and fenfe of this Prophecy be moft obfcure , neverthelefs we (
fhall endeavour as much as we can to render them fomething intelligible to the |
Reader, À
By the firft Verte is to be underftood that Danffais,or rather Danphincis which is the
Title of the Kings of France eldeft Son {hall carry the Lillie, whichisthe Arms of — |
France into Nancy, the chief Town.in Lorrain, which came to pafs in thetime of the L
laft K ing Lewis the XIII. I
By the fecond Verfe is underftood the EleCtor of Triers , who was taken by the /
Spaniards in his own Town, and carried prifoner to Bruxelles. |
By che third and fourth isexpreffed che ill luck of the Duke of Montrwsrency,who
having taken parc with che Duke of Lorrsin,and the Duke of orleans the Kings Bro-
cher, was routed ina Bartle, caken prifoner,and afterwards beheaded at Thewloufe. there


XI X.
French. ene ni
Dans le milieu de la Foreft Mayenne, or
Sol au Lion Ja Foudre tombera, ia
Le grand Baftard iffu du grand du Maine, )
Ce jour Fougeres pointe en fang entrera,
Englith.
In the middle of the Forreft of Mayenne,
Sol being in Leo the Lightning fball fall,
The great Baftard begot by the great du Main,
That day Fougeres fball enter its point into blood.
ANNOT. i: |


Fougeres is either the name of a Townin little Britennyy or that of a Noble Houfe,
che words are very plain, therefore Lleave.the fenfe:to.every ones capacity.


, TER,


=.


XX. aad | +

French. yf AELUON bn.

De nuit viendra par la Foreft de Rennes, di

Deux parts Voltorte Herne, la pierre blanche,
Le Moine noir en gris dedans Varennes,

Efleu Cap. caufe tempefte, feu, fang tranche.


Bagilth,


to the


chisthe


Armsof à
eo! the |


by the |


nen
ngs Boe


hf,


eH


of Michael Noftradam:.s-


= pe Eng lath, noifaouftnos ged à go
By night hall come: on Nine the\'F arrèff ofiRennts)
Two parts Voltorte Herne, the white Stowe, vil
The black Monk in gray within Varennes,
Elected Cap. caufeth tempest, fire, blood cutteth,
ANNOT. , | - mae
Rennes is the chief Town of little Britanny,the fécond Verfe being made of barba-
rous words, isimpoffible to beunderftood, ?! The third and fourth Vetfe fignifieth,


that when a black Monk in that Town ofWatennesfhallæut on gray fute, he fhall
be eleéted Captain, and caufe a great cempeft or broils by fire and blood.


XXL
French.
Au Temple hault de Blois facre S alonne:
Nui& Pont de Loire, Prelat, Roy pernicant:
Cuifeur victoire aux Aaretts de la Lone,
D’ou Prelature de blancs abormeant ?


Englifh.
At the Feb Temple of Blois facred Salonne,
In the night the Bridge of Loire, Prelat, Ki ing Rue
A fmarting Victory in the Marfb of lobe:
Whence Prelature of white ones fball be aborrisél
ANN OTF.

There is a miftake in the firft Verfe, for inftead of Salonne,it muft be written Sov-
laire, which isa Prioryand Churchat che top of Blois, all the reft fignifieth chac in
one night thefe fhall happen, viz. that the Bridge, the Prelat, and a pernicious King
witha {mart viétory fhall perith, whence the Prelature, thatis the place of Command
upon the white ones, vis, Canonsand Prebends in their Surplices) ‘fhall be void
and empty.

XXII:

French.
Roy & fa Cour au lieu dela langue balle,
Dedans le Temple vis a vis du: Palais,
Dans le Jardin Duc de Montor & d’'Albe;
Albe & Mantor, potgnard, langue, en Palais.


Englith.
u King andibis Court imtbe place of langue halbe,
Within tbe Church over againft the Pallace,
In the Garden Duke of Montor and Albe.
Albe and Mantor, dagger, tongue and Pallate.


ANNOT.
This Stanza is very obfcure, for, firft no body can teli what he meaneth by lengae


balbe, which is the foundation of all the reft of the fenfe ; Secondly,what this Duke
of Montor and Mantor fhould be, which has been unknown in the Hiftories hitherto;


and


Mom Mn eM


368 The true Propbectes


and thirdly , what conftruétion and fenfe can be made of thefe disjun@ives: lhe,
Mantor, Dagger; Tongne; Palate, Therefore i'leleave itfreeto every bodies opinion


to make his conftruction, |
XXIIL
ha French.
Puifnay jouant au fréfch deffous Ia tonne,
Ie haut du toic.du milieu fur la tefte,
Le.Pere Royau Temple Saint Solonne;
Sacrifiant dacrera fumede fefte::


Englith.
The youngeft Son playing under the tun,
The top of the Honfe fball fall upon bis head,
The King his Father in the Temple of Saint Soulaiñe,
Sacrificing fhall make feftival /moak.
ANNOT,


By this is meant , chat the youngeft Son of a King, fhall be knocked in the head,


while he is a playing under a tun 5 his Father being at the fame time in the Temple
of Saint Sowlsive at Mats.


XXI V.
French.
Sur le Palais au Rocher des Feneftres,
Seront ravis les deux petits Roiaux,
Pafler Aurelle, Lutece, Denis cloifttes,
Nonnain, Mollods avaler verts noiaux.


Englifh.
Upon the Pallace at the Rock of the Windows;
Shall be carried the two little Royal ones,
To pafs Aurele, Lutece, Denis Cloiffers,
Nonnain,Mollods to fwallow green ftones of fruit,
ANNOT.

Thefe two or three laft Stanzas have been concerning the City of Blois, towhich
it feemeth that this hath alfo relation, for he faith that two lictle Royal Children
fhall be carried at the top of the Caftle, and fhall be conveyed beyond Anvelle (which
is Orleans in Latine Awrelianum) Lutece,whichis Paris ; S, Denis Cloifters, which is
beyond Paris, anda Nunnery befides , where it is like they fhall be left to eat green
ftones of fruit, which is not eafie to be anderftood, no more then the word Mollods,


XX V.
French.
Paflant les Ponts, venir prez de Roziers,
Tard arrive pluftoft quil cuidera,
Viendront les noves Efpagnols a Beziers,
Qui icelle chafle emprinfe caffera.


Op D]


|
|
|
|
|
|


of Michael N oftradamus.
Englifh.


Going over the Bridge, to come near the Rofe-trees
Come late, and fooner then he thought,

The new Spaniards /hall come to Beziers,

Who fhall cafbiere this new undertaken hunting.


3


ANNOT.
Beztersis a City in Languedoc ; che reft may be conftrued by the meaneft capa-
city.
x XX VI.
French.


Nife fortie fur nom des Lettres afpres,

La grande Cappe fera prefent non fien,
Proche de Vultry aux murs des vertes capres,
Apres Plombin le vent a bon efcient.


Engluh.
A filly going out, canfed by fharp Letters,
The great Cap fhall give what is not bis,
Near Vultry by the Walls of green Capers,
About Piombino the wind fhall be in good earneft.
ANNOT. |
This fignifiech that there fhall be a filly fyrrendring of a Town, caufed by fharp
and threatning Letters chat fhall befentintoit, By the great Cap he ufeth toun-


derftand the Pope, who he faith {hall give what is not it, as he hath done many times:


Vuliry, in Latine yelétram , and Piombino ate two Cities in Ztaly , which are threatned
here with mighty winds,


XX VIE
French.
De bois la garde vent clos ront Pont fera,
Haut le receu frappera le Dauphin,
Le vieux Teccon bois unis pailera,
Paflant plus outre du Duc le droit conifn.


Enelith.
The Fence being of Wood, clofe Wind, Bridge [ball be broken,
He that’s received high, (ball firike at the Dolphin,
The old Yeccon fhall pas over (mooth Wood,
Going over the right confines of the Duke.
| ANNOT. Fo |
The firft Verfe fignifieth that a woodden Bridge fhall be broken by a clofe wind,
as did happen to the Millers Bridge, and the Birds Bridge in Paris.
The fecond Verfefeemeth to foretel the con{piracy ot the Marethal of Biron,againit
Henry VV. his Dolphin and Eftate, : | eae | i qu
The third and fourth,the Wars and Gonqueft which the faid King (whom he cal-


led old Téccon, made upon the Duke of Savey, who had corrupted ‘the faid'Marfhul
of Biron. ;


Bbb French,


Tbetrue Prophecies


XX VIII,
French.
Voile Sywacle, Port Maffiiolique,
Dans Venife Port marcher aux Pannons, :
Partir du Goulfre & finus I//irzque, |
Vañt a Sicile, Ligurs coups de Canon.
English. sul
Symaclian Sail, Mafiilian Port, pe
In Venice to march towards the Hungarians, mace th
To go away from the Gulf and Ulirick Sea,
Toward Sicily, the Genoeles with Cannon fhots.
ANNOT.

What he meaneth.by Symaclian Sail, isnot eafieto determine ; Maflilian Port ts
chat of Marfeilles in France, called in Latine Ma/flia,the fenfe of this Prophecy then |
if any be, is chat a great Fleet hall go from thence to Venice, to carry fuccours to the |
Hungarians, whoit feemeth {hall be much diftrefled at that time by the Twrks, and
that Sicily and Genoa fhall add to this Fleet a confiderable fuccour of Men, and War-
like Munition, |
XXIX. F ; (

French.

Lors que celuy qu’a nul ne donne lieu,

Abandonner voudra lieu prins non pris,
| (à Feu, Nef, par faignes, bitument a Chærlien, vir
ae Seront Quintin, Bales repris. |
Len Englifh.

When be that giveth place to no body,

Shall forfake the place taken,and not taken,
Fire, Ship, by bleeding bituminous at Charlieu,


— EET,
: =


i | Then Quintin and Bales hall be taken again. |
ai , ANNOT.
Pe He that giveth place to no bedyisthe Pope; as for the laft Verfe, I had rather read 4


Aa St. Qaintin and Cakes, which are two confiderable Townsin France,then ocherwife,
ji That place taken , not taken was the City of Neyon in Picardy , which wastaken | |
ys by the Spani[h Cavalry, cloathed after the French Mode,which ftratagem deceived the
He Citizens and Soldiers that defended it: fo he faith taken, becanfe ic fell into the f
| hands ofthe Spaniards, and net taken, becaule it was by a ftratagem or deceit,
XXX,
French.

Au Port de Puola & de St. Nicolas,

Perir Norstandeau Gouftre Phanatique,

Cap de Bivance rues crier Helas!


Secours de Gaddes & du grand Philippique.


Part
cythen


stothe |


bs, and
Wa


her te
here
as take
ejedthe
into the


of Michael Noftradamus.


Englith.
At the Harbour of Puola and of St. Nicolas,
A Norman Ship fall perifh in the Phanatick Gulf


At the Cape of Byzantiumithe fireets fhall. cry Alas |


Succours from Cadis and from the great: Phil ippesis
ANNO T,


Puolais for Paulo here, and by it isunderftood the Port of etalta, which being
Befieged by the Turks, Philip the II. King of Spain, fent an Army to relieve it,which


made thofe of Byzantium (which is Conffantinople) cry alas, dre,


FOL,
French.


Le tremblement de Terre a Mortara:

Caffich, St. George a démy perfondrez,

Paix affoupie’la guerre efuailléra, | ,

Dans Temple à Pafques aby{mes.enfondrez. :

| | Englifh. |

There fhall be an Earthquake at Mortara,

Cailich, St. George /hall be half fwallowed up,

The War fhall awake the fleeping pace,

Upon Eafterday fhall be a great hole Junk in the Church,
AN NOT,


Mortara isa Town in italy, by Caffich and St.George he meaneth two other places.


Did bi ob
French.


De fin Porphiré profond Collon trouvée, .
Defloubs la laze efcrits Capitolin,
Os, poil retors, Romain force prouvee,
Clafle agiter au Port de Metheliz:
Enghih.
A deep Column of fine Porphy ry ball be found:
. Under whofe Bafes ball be Roman writings,
Bones, haires twifted, Roman force tried,
A Flect a gathering about the Port of Methelin,
| NNOT,


A
Porphiry is a kind Of hard red Marble fpeckled with white fpots, which is v
{carce, and chiefly in great pieces; cur Author then faieth chat a great Colomn of
that ftuff fhall be found, and about the’Bafis of it fome words in Roman Charaéters,
and that about that time a great Fleet fhall be a gathering at the Port of Methelin,
which isan Ifland in the Archipelago, belonging now tothe Turks; as for the third


Verfe, I cannot tell what to make of ir,


eS * smneieeaniren


The true Prophecies


XX XIU.
French. 14
Hercules Roy de Rome & Dannemark,
De Gaule trois Gayon {urnomme,
Trembler l’Itale-8&c lunde Saint Marc;
Premier fur tous Monarquexenommée.


| Englifh: TE
Hercules King of Rome, and Denmark, °°
Of France three Guyon furzamed,
Shall caufe Xtaly to quake and one of St. Marck,
He fhall be above. alla famous, Monarch,
ANNOT,

All thefe intricated wotds and fenfe foretell that , when:a King of Danmarck na-
med Hercules {hall be made King of the Romans, that then Italy and Venice it felf thall
ftand in great fear of him; and that he fhall be as great a Prince or Monarch as ever
wasin Ewrope; and that very likely , for by his dignity of King of the Romans he
confequently fhall actain to che Empire.

XXXIV
French.
Le part folus Mary fera Mitre;
Retour confliét paflera fur Ja tuille,
Par cing cens un trahir fera tultre,
Narbon & Saulce par coutaux avons d'huile.


Englifh.
The feparated Husband [ball wear a Miter,
Returning, Battle, be (ball go over the Tyle,
By five hundred ome dignified [ball be betrayed,
Narbon and Salces fhall have Oil by the Quintal.
ANNOT. à
The firtt Verfe fignifieth,\that fome certain man who was married, fhall be parted
from his wife, and fhall actain to fome great Ecélefiaftical Dignity,
Thefecond Verfe:is, that in coming back from fome place or entreprife , he fhall
be met and fought with, and compelled co efcape over the Tyles of a Houfe.
The third Verfe is,that a man of great account fhall be betrayed by five hundred of
his men,
And thelaft, chat when thefe things fhall come te pals, Nerbos and Salces , which
are twe Cities of Languedoc, shall reap. and make a great. deal of Oil,


XX XV:
French:
Et Ferdinand blonde fera defcotte,
Quitter la fleur fuivre le Macedon,
Au grand befoing defaillira fa routte,
Et marchera contre le Myraidon.


macho |
AE |
here | |
mans he


Enel P|


of Michael Noftradamus.
Englifh.


And Ferdinand having a. Troop of faire men,


Shall leave the flower to follow the Macedonian,
At bis great need his way fhall fail hint,
And be fball go againft the Myrmidon.


ANNOT, | ore
This Prophecy ought to be underftood of an Emperour of Germany , whofe name
fhall be Ferdinand | who being accompanied with many Germans , that for the moft
part are faire haired people {hall come and War againftGrecia , which isexprefled
here by the names of Macedon and cM yrmidon, the firft of which is a Countrey, and
the lafta Nation, both in Grecia,


XXXVI

French. :
Un grand Roy prins entre les mains d’un jeune,
Non loin de Palquesconfufion, coup. cultre :


Perpet. cattif temps que foudre en la Hune,
Trois Freres lors fe blefferont & meurtre,


Englifh.
A great King taken inthe bands of a young one,
Not far from Eafter, confufion, firoke of a knife, ‘
Shall commit, pittiful tinte,the fire at the top of the Maft,
Three Brothers then (ball wound one auoth
ANNOT.
This Prophecy was fulfilled in the year 1560. when Antony of Bourbon King of
Navarre, and his Brother Lewis of Bourbon Prince of Condé , coming to King Francis
H. at orleans, upon the 29, of Odfeter, the Prince ot Condé


Was put in-prifon, and the
King of Navarre arrefted, The Lord Azd ew Fanyn in bis


Hiftory of Navarre faith,
that the opinion of the Councel was, that the Prince of Cowdee fhould be beheaded, for


having been the chief of the confpiracy at Amboife, and the King of Navarre fhould
be ftabbed in the Kings Chamber by the King bimfelf ; affifted by others for thae
purpofe. The Lady of Montpenfier gave notice of it to the King of Navarre,who be-
ing fent for by the King, charged exprefly Cattin his waiting man and an.old fer vant of
his Father to take a care and preferve his bloody fhitt after bis death til] his fon came
to Age, torevenge it upon the mutderers. God be thanked this, came not to pafs,
for che King having called him’, and going £bout to provoke him with foul words,
he an{wered fomeekly and humbly, that the Kings anger was appealed, where upon
the Duke of Guife going out of the room, faid, O mhat 4 cowardly Prince is this, Thele
things are exprefled in the firft and fecond Verfe » When he faith haragreat King
fhould be put in Prifon by a young one, becaule Anteny of Bowrbon, though hewas
not agreat King in Lands, yer he was a great one in courage and prudence... Andit
was not far from Eafter, fichit was but five months before 9. vzx, from the. beginning
of November, tothe fixch of April 1591. which was Bafterday ; the Author putceth
in this circumftance }'becaufe'the next Eafter after, the King of Navarre was made
General of France under the Queen Regenr, ° |

He addeth the {low of a Knife, as we havelheved + healfo faith
which proved very true; moreover, he faith, what lightning inthe

t


er sand murder done.


alafing bad time,
Hune or Topmaft,
becauf


EE


SSE SRE 1


RENN EEN


374


The true Prophecies


becaufe King Francis died prefently after,~ Inthe fourth Verfe he faith , that three
Brothers fhall be hurt and killed, thofethree Brothers were Antony of Bourbon King of
Navarre, killed at the Siege at Reven, the Cardinal of Bourbon, and Lewis of Bourbon
Prince of Conde, killed at the Battle of Farnac,


XXX VII
French.


Pont & Molins en December, verfez,

En fi haut lieu montera la Garonne :

Murs, Edifice,,Tboulonfe renverlez,

Qu'on ne fcaura fon lieu coutant matrône.
Englith.

Bridges and Mills in December overturned

{n fo high a place the Garonne fball come,

Walls, Building, Thoulofe overturned,

So that none [ball kuow its place, fo much Matrone.
ANN OT.


3


Here is foretold a prodigious inundation of the River Garonne, inthe month of
December, by which the Walls, Building, and the City of Thouloufe is threatned to
be overturned. T he laft word ofall is barbarous,and added to make up the rhime,


Se ROM BT.
French.


L’Entree de Blaye par Rochelle & P Anglios,
Paflera outre le grand Æmathien :
Non loing d’ Agen attendrale Gaulois,
Secours Narbonne deceu par entretien.
Enghih.
The coming in at Blaye by Rochel azd the Englith,
Shall go beyond the great Æmathien,
Not far from Agen fhall expeét the French,
Help from Narbonne deceived by entertainment.
ANNOT.


For the better underftanding of this, the hard words muft firft be made plains
Blaye isa City upon the River Garonne, and the Port-Town to Bourdeanx  Rochelis
a City upon the fame Coaft ; Agen isaCity in Gafcony not far frm Bourdeaux , and
Narbonne is a City in Languedoc, by the Mediterranean Seas; e4mmathian was for:
merly the Countrey of Macedonia, wherein Fulius Cafar and Cc, Pompcins fought their
laft Battle in the Pharfalian Fields, and therefore faith the Latine Poet Lacanas:


Bella per Amathios plu[quam civilia campos.


Thefe things being confidered the fenfe is, that there fhall be an Invafion made by
the Englifh, to whom thofe of Rechel fhall joyn, upon the Town of Blaye, which fhall
proceed as far as 4gex, and that thereabout will beabloody Encounter between che
Englifhand French, beyond that which was fought in the 4 mathian Fields, and that
the fuccours that fhould come from Narbonne to the French, {hall be deluded and hin-
dered by the fpeech and difcourfe of fome,


Baglith;


Galton 1


rol al el
TOF th


Hrelenel
¢ VALU
| the Auch
tothe M
tan Gop


Sopldier


Mish


27 À


go
rh


|


hits D
his
td Ol
ns M


hethet


of Michael. Noftradamus.


XXXIX.

French.

En Arbiffella, Vexema & Crevari,

De nuit conduits pour Savenne atraper,

Le vif Gafcon, Giury, & la Charry,

Derrier Mur vieux & neuf Palais grapper.
English.

In Arbiffella, Vezema and Crevari,

Being conduëted by night totake Savona,

The quick Ga'con, Giury and the Charry,

Bebind old Walls and new Pallace to graple.


ANNOT,.

Arbiffellais a Town fituated by the Sea-fide above Savona, going towards Genoa.
vezema aud Crevariarein the Inland Countrey, and a litt e farther remoted from the
Seathen eArbiffella, The quick Gafcon was Blafius of Monlac , one of the Vallianteft
men of his time,who came'troma fingle Souldier to be Marfhal of France. Guiry and
ta Charry weretwo of his Companions. This Stanza doth Prophetically foretell
two things, oneis,the defign that the Marfhal of Briffac,then Governour of Picmont
had upon Savona : the other, the taking of Pianea by Blafius of Monlac , asto the
firft, che Lord of Kéllars writeth in his Memorials, that the Lord Damzay ent advice
tothe King, thatthe taking of Savonawas more probable then any other defign,
which fignifieth chat the Marfhal of Braffac had of along time eyed that Town , and
therefore he fent by night fome Troops into thofe three little Towns , to fee if they
could furprife Sevess, but thedefign did not facceed; The Hiftories only mention
thatthe Marfhal of Brifac went from Court in the year 1557. withadefign to take
Savons; but this Stanza fpeaketh of the fame defign 15 56.

Arc the fame time in the year 1556. che 29. of Fune Blafins of Monluc as he telateth
in His Commentaries, did furprife the Town and Fort of Piance, called in Latine Cor-
finianam, he had with him the.Captain /a Charry,the Captain Bartholomew of Pezero,
and the fon of Captain Luzzan. At firft the French were beaten back, but che val-
liant Monluc did encourage them again by his example, going the firft in, and faying
only, follow par Captain. |

Which having faid, be thruft himfelf under the Gate , where three or four men
might ftand theltered by the planks ofthe Fort, and having his Sword in the Jefe
hand, and his dagger in the right , he began to break and cut che Brick and made a
hole, which opening by degrees , hethruft his arm through, and pulled the gap {o
ftrongly, that he caufed all the Wall to fall down upon himfelf, without being hurt
by ir. T his is the meaning of che Author in the fourth Verfeywhen he faith, the quick
Gafcos was behind the Wall, 1n profecution of this, the Switzers did beat down the
reft of the Wall, and all cameinto the Town crying, France, France,  Monluc rag
prefently to the Fort, and with the help of his men tookic, tharisthe meaning of
the Author,when he faith,eld and new Palace to graple, The old Pallace was adjoining
tothe Market-place of che Town, in which the Frexch were prifoners with the Cap-
tain Geurgwes to the number of fifty or fixty tied two and two,and fo kept by twenty
Souldiers , whom they did kill as we have faid. The new Pallace was the Fo:r.
The Author ufed chat ancient word grapper, whichin the Provencal languague fige
hifieth,to pull down with ones hands,andin the contrary fenfe,to fhut and plaifter fo
wellfome thing, that chere’will bea neceffity of the help of the hands to open what
was {hat up.


French.


a ll


D TS ALTON TAS ANTE eevee om


The true P ropbecies


XL.
French.
Pres de Quentin dans la Foreft Bourlis, Si


Dans l'Abbaye feront Flamands tranchez,
Les deux puifnez de coups my eftourdis,
Suitte apprefiée & gardes tous hachez.


Englith.


Near Quentin iz the Forreft Bourlis,

Inthe Abby the Flemmings fhall be flafbed.

The two younger fons half a ftonifbed with blows,

The followers oppreffed, and the Guards all cut in pieces.


| ANNOT,
This isa peculiar accident that happened before the taking of the Town of Saine
Quentin by the Spaxiard in the year 15 57. and fell out thus. News being cometo
the King of France, ithat the powerful Army of the Spaniard was gone to Befiege St:
Quentin, he made all imaginable diligence to fuccour its. the Spantaras to hinder che
relief had feized upon an ancient Abby of the Vermandois’, whichis in the next Fors
-reft, chat was anciently called the-Forreft Bourlis, and is at prefent called the Forreft
of the Absay Vermandois, called in Latine Augufta V cromanduorum, builded by an an-
cient Hungarian Captain called Vermandi¢. In procefs of time it was all ruinated, and
only one Abby left, wherein-was the Epifcopal See Which afterwards was trans-
ferred intothe City of Noyer: After the ruine of this Town ; that of St. Owentin
next to it became the chief City of Vermandois ; It was named St. Quentin, becaufe
the Emperor Pines having fent St. Quentin a Roman Senator to be Governour of
it, he did convert the Inhabitants to the Chriftian Faith, and after he himfelf did
| fuffer there Martyrdom,
ll In that Abby a great many Flemmines had intranched themfelves,but the French
going torelieve the Tewn, did force their Trenches and Fortifications , and in the
heat of the fight che cwo younger Sons of the Captain being armed Cap a pée though
they were not killed, yet were aftonifhed with blows they did receive upon their
heads, their followers and Guards being ah cut in pieces,


XLI.


i French


»° Rome me en miel plein d’amertume,


ettre, Ambailade partir de Chanignon,
Carpentras pris par Duke noir, rouge plume.
Englifh,
The great Cheyren fhall fez upon Avignon,
Letters from Rome fhall come full of bitternefs
© J ee } à 2
_. Letters and Embaffies phall go from Chanignon,
Carpentras takew by a black Duke with ared Feather;


ANNOT.


Wie


Thele
nfion and

| dom of Sh
them 104


béSane BF
COmeto 8!


fiege St
ner the
lett Fors
*Fonelt
anne


Red, and |


Asttans B
Sutin M
bec |
nour |
all did |


e French
din the


hough fl
on thelr El


NOT: |


of Michael Noftradamus. 327


ANNOT,


This did happen lately, vi. fome five orfix years ago , when the Duke of Crequy
Embaffadour at Rome was affronted by the Corfes , which arethe Popes Guard: for
which theK ing of France demanded reparation,and feized upon 4vignen,till the Pope
granted him that all the faid Ceres fhould be banifhed, and a Pyramis erected in Rome
to the perpetual infamy of that Nation,


X LIT.
French.
De Barcelonne, de Gennes & Venife,
De la Sicile pres Monaco unis, .
Contre Barbare clafle prendront la vile,
Barbar poulfé.bien loing ju(qu'a Thanis.
Englith.
From Barcelona,-from Genoa aud Venice,
From Sicily wear Manaco united,
Againft the Barbarian the fleet fball take ber aim,
The Barbarian fhallbe driven back as far as Thunis,
ANNOT}
Thé fenfe of thefe words is very plain'and fignifieth onely ; ‘that’ there will be an
union and League between thefe Towns, viz, Barselona,Genoa,Vinice, and the King:


dom of Sicily againft the Turks'; whom they fhall encounter near Moxaco, and‘ put
them to flight, and follow chemas far as Tens,


Oe LLY,
French.
Proche a defcendre l'Armée Crucigere,
Sera guettée paroles Tfmaelites,
De tous coftez battus: par nef Revere,
Prompt aflailies de dix Galeres d’eflite.
Englifh.
The Crucigere Army being about to Land,
Shall be watched by the \imaelites,
Being beaten.on all fides. by the Ship Raviere,
Prefently afjanlted by ten chofen Galleys.
ANNOT,

By thé Cracigere: Army ‘is underftood the Chriftian Army , becaufe the word
Crucigere fignifieth onethat beareth a Crofs , fromthe two Larine words Crax and
gere; the Ifmaelites are the Tarks,who:boaft themfelves to be défcended from //msztl;
the fon of «Abraham and Agar, the meaning of this is , thatthe Chriftians going a-
bout to attempt fome landing place, the Turks fhall watch them , and fet upon them
by Land and Sea, in which Sea fight he mentioneth only ten choice Galleys, and:


nda i
notable Ship called Raviere, (if it be not falfe printed) 1am. much of an opinion that \ |
this came to pafs when Philip the IT: King of Spain made an attempt upon Æ/geirs, by


|
his Admiral Andrea’ Oris, who badto:dowiththe Moores upon the Land ready to re- |


ceive him , and fome part of their Fleet. chat watched him bur ctofS and contrary |


d |


winds caufed him to return re énfecfa, | |
Gec French


T be true Prophecies


XLIV,
French. | Î
Migrez, migrez de Geneve trétous,


S'aturne d'Ot en Fer fe changera,

Le contre Raypoz exterminera tous, |

Avant l’advent le Ciel fignes fera. |
Eoolifh. Ts
Go forth, go forth ont of Geneva all. | a
Saturn of gold, fall be changed into Iron, a
They againft Raypos [ball extérmine them all, ugh
| Before.it bappeneth, the Heavens will fbew figns. ath
ANNOT. x

This isaProphecy concerning Geneva, out of which he warneth everyone to come; &
his reafonis,thac che golden Age of that Town fhall be changed into antlron one:and |


that chere fhallbe one againft Raypos, that fhail extermine them all,before which there |
fhall appear fome figns inHeaven, Now theAuthor being a rankPapift iris to be {up- |
P & ; : a, P
called hoe a. POled that he warneth out of Geneva all thofe of his Faith; becaufe of -
altec eye ae + à « .
dinp sata the coming of Calvin , whomte forefaw was to come into that Town, (
and to changethe Goverimencthereof, andto-extermine them all which
i is to, be underftood , in point of Religion as for what prodigies did precede: thar
1 changes Ihadno time to confult Authors upon it, the judicious Reader may chance
Ht to find them in thofe that have written of this matter.
REY.
French.
Ne fera foul jamais dé demandet,
Grand Mendofus obtiendra fon Empite,
Loing de la Cour fera contremander,
Piemont, Picard; Paris, Tyrbe le pire ies
Ca Enghfh.
ey | He fhall never be meéary of asking,
Great Mendolus /hall obtain his dominion,
Far from the Court be [ball caufe hint to be counterutanded ,
Piemont, Picardy, Paris, Tyrhen the worfe, .
E
A N N O + |


By CH endofus; is Anagrammiatically to be underftood Vexdo(me: bat whoisthac ‘
thall never be weary of asking , or whofe Dominion Feddofise fhall have > Of What is X


é


meant by the laft two Verfes, paffeth my ündérftänding;  :
XL VF. : Ant lo no} 3

French: | 12138 03 1u0d Ti

Vuidez fuyez de Thouloufe les rouges, ce 5 NY 1 a

Du Sacrifice faire expiation, gi Et h

il i) Le Chef du mal defloubs:l’ombre des courses, ect Istimb A 2id (
| Mort eftrangler carne omination. ba. « mi 2


come, |
LOne-And
ich there
be fy.
caule of
Ton, |
Uithich
de that
chance


el th


Of Michael Noftradamus
Enolith,


Get you gene, run away {roy Thouloufe ye ved Ones
There fhall expiation be: wrade of the. Sacrifice,
The chief canfe of the evil under the fade of courdes,
Shall be firanoled, à prefage of the deftruction of much, flef.r.
ANNOT. | | GAO
This Psophecy doth onely and properly belong to the City of Thosloufe, and: by
it are warned, all the red ones, that is, all thofe chac ‘ulually wear Réd or Scarlet
Gowns, as thofe of the Parliament and the Capitols to come out of jt 5 becaufe faith
he, / bere fhall an expiation be made of the Sacrifice, meaning that there thall bea great
flaughter among the Citizens, as it dit happen at feveral times, the fiilt Anne 1563.
another time when the firft Prefident Durauti , and feveral other of the red Gowns


were put to death, de, “The two laft Verfes fignifie,that the chief contriver of this
uproar fhall be ftrangled, and many others befides hith,


XLVII.
French,
Les foubfignez d’indigne deliverance,
Et de la multe auront contre advis,
Change Monarque mis en perrille pence;
Serrez en cage fe verront vis a vis.
| Englifh. :
The underwritten to an.uaworthy deliverance,
Shall have from the multitude a contrary advice,
They hall change their Monarch and put bin in peril,
They ball fee th-nifelves [but up iz a Cage over ag ainft,
nit | LS ANIN OT 0: dis
This is plainly co be underftood of thofe Traycors, the delivered-and figned ‘the


death of King Charles the Fofbleffed Memory; againfithe fen(e andadvi (eof a) eat
three parts of four of the Nation, and who aftetward {aw themfelves forthe m
fhutin Prifon for chis faét and brought to a fhameful end. L


oft part


XLVIETI,
| ; ¥ French.

La grand Cite d’Occean Maritime, |.”
Envitonnée de Marefts en, Cryftal, ..
Dans le Solfticeshyemal &:la prime,
Sera:tentee de vent e(pouvental,

ay AY big Englith: :

Lhe great Marre (ity ofcthe Océan sec
Encompaffed with Chryftaline Fens,

In the Winter Solftice and in the [pring,

Shall be tempted with fearful wind.


Cce2 AN NOT,


ray.


¥ BARON id
1.324608


pn pam rem TA


380 The true Prophecies


ANNOT,
By the great Maritime City of the Ocean, Encompalfed with Cryffaline Fens , isto be
underftood the City of London, for as for that of Venice , it is fituated upon the Me-
diterranean or rather Adriatick Sea: London then is threatned here of a fearful wind,
which whether the Author meanethfor the time that is paft now, and that fhall come
hereafter I know not, fure I am, thac I have within this fifteen yearsfeen two fuch
winds in London , as I never faw the like any where elle; the firft was chat day char
olivier the Ufurpator died, the other was.about fix or feven years ago, caufed by the
lightning chat fell in Hereford-fhire, and did mix witha Weftern wind and came as
far as London 5 carrying the:tops of houfes,and doing then for above rooco, pounds
cammage,
XLTX,
French.
Gand & Bruxelles marcherontcontre Anvers,
Senat de Londres mettront: mortleur Roy,
Le Sel & Vin luy feront:a l'envers,
Pour eux avoir le Regne or defarroy.
Englifh.
Gand and Bruxelles /ball go againft Antwerp,
The Senat of London thal! put their King to death.
The Salt and Wine [ball not be able to'do him good,


That they way have the Kingdom into ruine.


ANNOT,

This Prophecy taken wich allits circumftances , and the fubje&t it treateth of, is
the moft remarkable of all thofechat ever Noftradameus was Author of,for here we fee
1 concatenation of circumftances linked together, to make it true to any bodies eyes,
for firft the number of this Stanza being 49. fignifieth the year wherein the King


died, tor although by che €ngli/h account; who begin their year at the 25, of March,


in may be faidit was in 48, becaufeit did happen upon the 3024, of Fanuary, yet ac-
cording to the general account of the moft part of the World; the year Begin upon
the firft day of Fauwary, (o'that che King dying on the 3574, of Fannary, it may be
faid it was in the year 1649, 3 |

The firft Verfe fignifiech,that at chattime there was no good intelligence between
the Cities of Flanders and Brabant, as remember very well chat chere was not. but
upon what fcore, I have forgotten. ?

The fecond Verte is plain to any body that can either read or hear ir,

The third Verle by the Salt and Wine, underftandeth France, Who was then in War
with the Spaniard , and in fome divifions among themfelves \ fo that they could not
take che Kings part as to relieve and free him by force; but feat Embafladours to me-
diate a compofure of the difference,

The fourth Verfe intimatech that by reafon of the faid Wars chat werein France,
the faid murdering Parliament had liberty todo what they lifted for the bringing the
K'ngdom into ruine.


hof, i
reelee
sets,
ne King
March,
yetac:
nu
may be


betwee


not, bil


ni Wat
ould not
{0


n Fram,


pu M


of Michael Noftradamus.


?
er
wai


+ Hs
| French:
Menfodus toft viendra a fon ha it Regne,
Mettant arriere un peu Te Norlaris,
Le rouge blefme, le mafle a l’interregne,
Le jeune crainte & frayeur Barbaris.

Englifh. |
Menfodus /hall foon come to his high Government,
Putting a little afide the Norlaris,
The red, pale, the Male at the interreigne,
The young fear,and dread barbarifine.


AN.NOT.


cMenfodusis che Anagramme of /’exdofme , by which is meant Antony of Bourbon
Duke of ”esdefme , brother to the then Prince of Condé , and father to: Henry IV,
Norlaris is the Anagram of Lorrain; nowany body that underftandeth any thing in
Hiftory, knoweth what diffention and feud chere was becween the Honfe of Bourbon,


Sand that of Lorrain inthetime of Francis the 1], for the’ Houfe of Bosréon ; though


next to the Royal blood ;was the leaft in favour,and chofe of the Houfe of Lorrain did
Govera:all;"and:'had'fo far prevailed as co have got the Prince of Condé into their
hands, and had him condemned to:have his head cut of, which would have been exe-
cuted, had nor the King that very day fallen fick of the difeafe he died.of, Now this
being ünderftooë our Author will have chat Menfadus ;which is¥emdofme thall lay'afide
the Norlaris, thatis Lorreim: «By thered pale is meant the Cardinak of: Lorrain, bro-
thertothe Duke of Gaife, who grew pale atthis,. By the mate at the interreigneis Lo
obfcure, that we leaveit-tothe judgement of the Reader. |
| eet
| French.
Contre les rouges Sectes fe banderont,
Feu, eau, fer, corde, par paix fe minera,
Au point mourir ceux qui machineront,
Fors un que monde fur tout ruinera,
Englifh,
Againft the red, Sects fball gather themfelves,
Fire, water, iron, rope, by peace it fhall de deftroyed,
| Thofe that fbali conf pire fhall not be put to death,
Except one, who above all fhall undo the World.


ANNOT.


Thename of red Ses, may very well be applied to the Proteftants of ayant a=


gainft whom in thofe days it teemed chat fire, Water, Iron and Rope had confpired,


for they were put to death by each onelofthofe fatal inftruments for their Religion
fake, This:is-a lively expreffionof the unhappy Maffacreof the Prareftants in France


upon St, Barsholemews-day'r5 72,


¥iiR ~


opke


382 NET he true Ppopbecter


The two laft Verfes fignifie, thatiall the Contrivers of that Councel, were of
opinion ac fi ft co proceed {ome ocher way; but only the Duke of Guife, who was the
principal actor in it, and whom our Author faith;, did undo she world; «for he was


che caufe of mifchief, not only then but. ofterwards.
Lit
French.
La paix fapproche Pun cofé & Ta vuérre.
Oncgues ne fur la pourfuite fgrande,
Plaindre homme &femmene fanginnocent-parTerté,
Er ce fera de France-a toute bande: 7
Eoghih.
Peace is coming on one fide, and War onthe other,
There was never [o gréat’d ptr fuing,
Man VPouran’ (ball'b3inoa, Pirocert biped hall be (pih\ss jt
LE shall be in France on all fides. ES


ANNOT. Bs,

This Prophecy was falfilledvin the Reign of Charles the 1X;inithe year 1558,
when the peaceswhs treatediol; and concludedirhe-sear after n$ 59, thé VVar on the
other fide:begunsto. appear by:che raifmg ofthe Proteftants; who begin publickly
their opinion in thecime of Fraacis the Mj and:CharlesahelX,

There wasenever-feen fuch ‘a profecürion ‘of V Varand of Peace together s ufor
there was nevéraneftare moreembroiled ia WV Vars than ‘that of Charlés the 1X, was,
nor where:Peacé:was more foughe after st forthere was nothing but: V Vars and trea-
ties, of Peace, :Men and. V Voimendid'complain om all fides;-for the wrongand:dam-
mages they received from-both parties, theProteftants believing to; doGod a gdod
fervice in deftroying Images, and killing Priefts and Monks. And the Papifts
on the other fide thinking to make a fweet Sacrifice unto God, in practifing the fame
cruelties upon the Proteftants, and fo in'all corners of Frame every one did fet him-


. felf to do evil,


, ent LILL


French, |
Ye Neron jeune dans les trois Chemirées,
Fera de Pages vifs pour. ardoir ietter,
Heureux qui Join fera de tels menées, , de
Trois de fon fang le feront mort guetcer.


Englih. we
The young Nero ia.thethree Chimneys,
Shall caufe Pages to be thrown. to Le burnt alive,
Happy fhall be be who fball be far from this doing,
Thréeof bis own blood fall caufe hint ro be put io death,"
‘is Avia ae Dai lays! StAUNBNWO Bes yo dicob 02. suc, 9:99 yads 10!
A young "Fyrant. called here. Wero,: fall cane: fomePages to! beburat alive in
three Chimneys, and atterwards himfelf fhall be pugtosdeath by, threeofhis own
blood ,this fact favoureth fo much of beftial cruelty, that I cannot belive any Chrifti-


: a0 Prince can ever be guilty of ic,


French,


nenwne


| Wete of


Oe th


Of he my


Atty fot
IX; wa,
nd tres.
dame


da good |


 Papils


thelime B


fthim-


of Michael Noftradamus.
PLV:
French.
Arrivéra au port de Corfibonne,
Pres.de Ravenne;, qui-pillera la: Dame,
En Mer profonde legat de Ulisbone, |
Soubs Roc cachez raviront jeptante ames.


Englith.
There {ball come into the.Port of Cortibonne,
Near Ravenna, thofe that fball plunder. the Lady,
In the deep ba a ill be the Embaffador of Lisbonne,
The hidden under the Rock, [hall carry away feventy Soule.


ANN O.-T,

The Port of Corfiboxne, muft of neceffity be chat of Ancona ;, firft becaufe there is
no Port of the former naménear the City of Ravenna. Secondly, becaufe Ancona
is near Ravesna,

By the Lady is meant the Chappel or Church of our Lady of AA which is
threatned here to be plundred by fome Turks or Pyrates, inticed thereunto by th
manifold riches that are faid to be therein.

The third Verfe {peaketh of a Portwgaes Embaflador, who it feemeth fhall
drowned or buried in the main Sea.

The fourth |Verfe giveth warning of fome Robbers and Pyrates,. very like to be
Turks, who.being in Ambufcado,and fhrouded among the Rocks by the Sea fide;thall
Carty away feventy Souls,


a ag
15


F icin i

French.
1 Horrible guerre qu'en Occident s’apprefte,
L’ An enfuivant viendrada-Peftilence
Si fort terrible, que jenne,:viel, ne befte,
Sang, feu, Meri Mars; Fupiter en France.

Englifh.
An borrid War is à preparing ia the W elf,
The next year {ball come the Plague,
So firangly terrible, that neither-young nor old wor beaP fall ef [cape
Blood, fire, NE Mars, pau in: France:
A:N NO
That word 4 preparing in the .firft Verle, Ten itech that he fpeakerh of atime


wherein War was a making ready, when he was a WITLIN eur,
The weft: of which our ‘Atchor {peaketh,is nor formerly the, Weftwhich is Spain,


“bit 'is the Welt refpectively to.his Counuey of Provence, whichis Picard), Lorrain,
hand che Gountrey ofMets;in all thef@ Places that.are Nivethenty from: Provence, bnshe


was great VVars inthe year 1557 in Picardy in the véar 1558, at Calais and ï hion-
ville, per at laft from the middle ot that year to the ent of j it,were feen two great At “


mies "of both Kings, which threatned a horrid flaughter had not God Almight ty pros


vided againft it by ‘the ti reaty Of Peace of the 34. of April 1559. the year follow ing,
which was 1559. there did happen what he foretelleth, vz, the Plague fo ftrangely
terrible to Young, Old, and Beafts, crc.


Sei, Mn. SRR es


534 The true: Prophecies


And in thofe quarters there was nothing-but Fire and Bloods chatis, Maffacres
and ruinesof all forts, then did Rulein Frame, the three Planets of sFupiter, Mars
and Mercury, Fupiter and Mercury, for the peace that was then concluded, and Mars
for the V Var that was then on foot,

The Hiftory of Provence mentioneth, that that Peftilence was called by the Phy-
fitians, Febris erratica, by which within the fpace of five or fix Months, died almoft
an infinite number of people.


iS
French.

Camp prés de Noudam pañera Goufsanvilke,

Ft a Maïotes Jaiflera fon enfeigne,

Convertrra en inftant plus de mille,

Cherchant le deux remettre’en chaine & legne.
Enehith.

A Camp fhall.by Noudam go beyond Gouflanville,

And fhall leave its Enfign at Maiotes,

And fhall in an'inftant convert above a'thoufand,

Seeking to put thetwo parties in good under ftanding together,

Thefe three words Of Noudam, Gouffanville,and Maïotes are three little inconfide-


rable Countrey Towns, ficuated near one another 3” the theaning then of it is, that
an Army near Nowdam, fhall go through Gouffenvites and hall in an‘inftant convert,


. that is, draw to his party above a thoufand of the contrary party, the bufinefs being


about the procuring of a good underftanding and amity between two great ones.
LVYE
French.
Au lieu de Drux un Roy tepofera,
Et cherchera Loy changeant d’Anatheme,
Pendant le Ciel fitresfort Tonnera,
Portée neulve Roy tuera foy mefme.


Englifh.
In the place of Drux a King [ball reft bimfelf,
And fhall feck a Law changing Anatheme,
In the mean while theHeaven fall Thunder fo flrongly
That a new gate fhall kill the King him elf. )
ANNOT.
Drux isa City in Normandy, near which Henry the IV, got amemorable vidory:


It is faid that in chat place a King fhall reft himfelf, and thall endeavour to change


Religion; bwtac chat time ét fhall Thunder and Lighten fo much, that by the fall
new gate, the King himfelf thall be killed, oLig ? ‘ efallof a


French,


onde.
th
conve,
{seine
fe)
Aes,


coy:


che |]


efilofa


Fr


of Michael Noftradamus.


LVIII.

French.
Au cofté gauche alendroit de Vitry;
Seront guettez les trois rouges de France,
Tous affommez rouge, noir non meurdry,
Par les Bretons remis en affeurance.

Englith.
On the left hand over againft Vitry,
The three red ones of France fhall be watched for,
Allthe red fball be knock dead, the black not murdered,
By the Britains fet up again in fecurity.

ANNOT, |

What is meant here by the three red ones of France is hard to decide, whether
they be Cardinals or Judges ; becaufe both wear commonly Scarlet Gowns, or fome
Noblemen cloathed in Scarlet 5 but it feemeth by this chat there fhall bea lying in
waic for four men, three of which fhall be cloathed in Red, and one in Black, thofe
in Red fhall be knockt down dead, but he in Black thall not, and this is to bedone
on the left hand, over sgainft yitry, whichis a Cityin Champagne.

LIX
French.
A la Ferté prendra la Vidame,
Nicol tenu rouge quavoit produit la vie,
La grand Loyfe naiftra qui fera clame,
Donnant Bourgongne a Bretons par envie.
Englifh.
In the Ferté the Vidame fhall take
Nicol, reputed red, whom life hath produced,
The great Lewis fball be-born, who [hall lay clair,
Giving Burgundy tothe Bricaings through envy,
ANN OT.

This Stanza wanting both quantity ia che Cadence of the Verfe, and Con-
nexion inthe fenfe, fheweth that iis either falfly printed, or elfe the Author had no
mind it fhould beunderftood; we (hall only fay, the Fert? is a Town in Champagne,
Vidame is a Lords Title in France, of which there are but four of chat fort, and are
called in Civil Law Vicedominus, who by his firft Infticution, was temporal Judge of
the Bifhop ; the firft of thofe Vidames, or Vicedomini in France, is that of Amiens
the fecond of Chartres, thethird of Rhemes; and the fourth of Gerber. ;

LX.

French.
Confli& Barbare en la Cornere notre,
Sang efpandu trembler la Dalmatie,
Grand Ifmael mettra {on promontoire,
Ranes trembler, fecours Lufitanie.


Ddd


RARE MA IAE ty HR A ee TLC TL Ro à ie a pt


The true Propbectes


Englifh.
A Barbarian fight in the black Corner, |
Blood fball be fpilt, Dalmatia foall tremble for fear,
Great I{mael fhall [et up his promontory,
Frogs fball tremble, Portugal [ball bring fuccour,
ANNOT.
This Prochecie foretelleth divers accidents in fever


on of any precife time; as forexample, I underftand by chat Barbarian conflit, near
the black Corner, to be (ome famous Battle arnong the Infidels themfelves,fome were
about the Black Sea then he faith, that abundance of Blood foal be {pilt, and Dalmatia
fhall tremble, which is a Province belonging to the Venetians, and bordering upon
Gracia, by great J/wacl he underftandeth the great Sophy of Perfia, whofe name


hath been often fo, By the Frogs it is not eafie to know whether he meaneth
France or Spain; for both abound in thac kind of Infe@s,


LXE
French.
La pille faite ala Cofte Marine,
Incita novg & parens amenez,
Plufieurs de Malthe par le fait de Meffine,
Eftroit ferrez feront mal guerdonnez.


Englifh.
The plunder made u pon the Sea Coaff,
Incita nova and friends brought up,


Many of Maltha, for the fa@ of Meflina,


Being clofe kept, fhall be ill rewarded.
ANNOT.


Ic feemeththat chis Plunder made upon the Sea Coaft, fhall beabout Me:


sina, b
the «mMalthefes, who afterwards fhall rue for it, being taken Prifoners, and rs
punithed.


As for the expreffion Incita nova;
nifie the ftirring of new troubles,


al places, without determinati-


Tt is a barbarous derivation of the Latine,to figs


LXII.
French;
Au grand de Cheramonagora,
Seront croiléz par rangs tous attachez,
Le Pertinax Oppi, & Mandragora,
Kaugon d'Oétobrele tiers feront lafchez.


Englifh.
To the great one of Cheramonagora,
Shall be croffed by Ranges, all tyed up,
The Pertinax Oppi, and Mandragora,
Raugon the third of O&ober fhall be fet loofe.


By YP
NULLE
| angi
| By Be
een |


luth
QUIET ba


letting
me, Way
lOme Were

Palmas
US Upon
Fée


P|


fina, by FI


lee Ft


to fg


|


of Michael Noftradamus.
ANNOT.


The word Cheramonagora, is either altogether barbarous and infignificant, or muft
be derived from-thefe chree Greek-words, xe manus, u45v0s, felus, and."27 duco,
and foit may fignifie one that leadeth along by the hand, in which fenfe may be un-
derftood the King of Frasce, who alone leadeth his people by the hand, without any
help of Councel.

The fecond Verfe figniñieth the Oppofitions he thall meet with among his
Neighbours, combined together to hinder him,

By Opp?, he meaneth here:Opiwm, the Juice of Poppies, which he calleth here
Pertinax ; becaufe of its pertinacious quality in procuring fleep, as alfo eMan-
dragora,

By Raugon, he meaneth fome other foporiferous Herb; fo that it feemeth
that thofe three things fhall be given upon che third of Oéfoéer to fome body, it
{eemeth to that Cheramonagera, by whom fome underftand the King of France,others
Oliver the laft ufurpator:


jo Bs &
| French.
Plaintes, & pleurs, cris, & grands hurlemens;
Pres de Narbonne, a Bayonne & en Foix, —
O quels horribles, calamitez, changemens,
Avant que Mars revolu quelquetois.


Enelith.
Complaints and tears, cries, and great howlings,
Near Narbonne, Bayonne and in Foix,
O what horrid calamities and changes,
Before Mars bath made fometimes his revolution.
ANNOT,


Narbonne, Bayonne, and Foix are Towns of Laneucdec, a Province in France; the
reft is eafie.


LXIV.
French:
L'Æmathien paer Monts Pyrenées.
En Mars Narbon ne fera refiftance,
Par Mer & Ferre fera fi grand menée,
Cap. n'ayant Terre feure pour demeurance.


Englifh.
The Æmathian ‘fhall pafs by the Pyrenean Mountains ,
In March Narbon fhall make no refiStance,
By Sea and Land he fball make fo much ado,
Cap. fhall not have fafe ground to live in.
ANNOT,


The cÆwathian properly thouldbethe Macedonian , but by itis anderftood here


the Spaniard, whofe Countrey is om one fide fenced by the Pyrenean Mountains ; the
reft is plain.


NO d a


;
7
French

$ CMY ‘ag


The true Prophecies .


LX V.

French.
Dedans le coing de Luna viendra dog
Ou fera prins & mis en Terre eftrang
Les fruits immeurs {éront a grand i
Grand vitupere, a l’un grande louange.

Englifh.
He fhall come into the corner of Luna,
Where he fhall be taken and put in ap meen Land,
The green fruits [ball be in great diforder,
A great fhame, to one foall a great praife.

ANNOT.,

This Stanza hath relation and connexion tothe precedent, and by it ought to be,
underftood , that the faid e£mathian or Spaniard {hall come as far as thet corner of
Lana, wherein he (hall be taken and fent into a ftrange Countrey, at which time the
green Fruits and Grafs fhall be much damaged, for ER Hch one of the parties fhall re-
ceive great fhame, and che other great praife, But what he meaneth by the Corner


of Euna, I mutt five the judgement ofitto the Reader, for I do ingenioufly confefs
that I neither know City nor Countrey of that name,


X AV bs
French.
Paix, union; fera & changement,
FE ftats, Offices, bas hault, &z hault bien bas,
Drefer voiages le fruit premier, torment,
Guerre cefler, civils proces, debats,
Englifh.
Peace, union, shall be, and mutation,
States and Offices, pré high, aud high low.
A jour tey shall be prepared for, the firft fruit, pains,
War shall ceafe, as alfo, ci vil fuits, and flrifes.
ANNOT,
This is eafie to be underftood, many interpret it of the downfall of Rome, at which
time all quarrels both of Religion and States would be laid afide > if the world were
all of one mind,


LX VII.
French.


Du haut des Monts a lentour de Dizere,
Port a la Roche Valent. cent aflemblez,

De Chaftean.Neuf, Pierrelate, en Donzere,
Contre le Cres, Byrne foy. AG


Ht to bg, |
corner of |


imath
timethe


sibalre. |


eComé
conte


at hich
rid were


Engl,


This is a peculiar Prophecy for the Provincesof Da
all the Towns and Rivers here mentioned are fituated.


There is a notable fault in the impreffion of the firft Verfe of th
inftead of Mount Aymar, it muft be CHoyrlims
Languedoc fituated by the River Rhofne,the fenfet
limar {hall proceed fome notable and obfcure d
Lyons, which is the City wherethe Saone and the
pofe,there fhall be hiddena great many Souldiers j
isthe 132h. of December,


. The Mount Bailly, andthe Coun
Author faith ) the fierce ones ;


Dauphiné, {ball be hidden, and that füch a Hail thall fall upon the
part fhall be left,


of Michael Noftradamus.


Enghith.

From the top of the Mountains about Dizere

Gate at-the Rock Valence, @ hundred gathered together.
From Chafteau-Neuf, Pierrelate. ix Douvere
Againft the Creft, Romans, shall be gathered.


ANNOT.


uphiné and Languedoc in which


LXVIII,

French. ,
Du Mont Aymgr {era noble obfcurcie,
Le mal viendra au joint de Saone & Rhofne.
Dans bois cachez Soldats jour de Lucie
Qui ne fut onc un fi horrible Throfne.


’ Enelith.
Front Mount Aymar ball proceed a Noble obfcurity,
The evil [hall come to the joyuing of the Saone and Rhofné,
Soldiers fhall be hid in the Wood on St Lucy’s day*


So that there was never fuch an horrid Throne.
ANNOT.


is Stanza , for
7, Which isa Town in Provence or
herefore of this,is that from Mosr-
efign , and chat (hall reach as far as
Rhofne mect,and that for that pur-
na Wood on St, Lucy’s day,which


LXIX,

French.

Sut le Mont de Bailly & Ja Brefle,
Seront cachez de Grenoble les fiers,
Outre Lyon, Vien. cula fi grand grefle,
Langoult en Terre n’en ceflara un tiers.

Enelith. ae
pon the Mount of Bailly, and rhe Conntrey of Brefle
Shall be hidden the frerce ones of Grenoble, : |
Beyond Lyons, Vienna: upon them fball fall fach a bail
That lauguifbing upon the ground the third part fhall not be left,
ANN OT, hee
trey of Brefsia, are by Savoy, in which place(our
that is, theftour men of Grenoble, the chief Town of


À


m, as not one third


Frénch,


T be true Prophecies


Lex, |
French. |
|


Harnois trenchans dans les lambeaux cachez,
Dedans Lyon le jour du Sacrement,
Ceux de Vienne {eront tretous hachez,


Par les Cantons Latins, Mafcon eront.
English.
Ss years
Sharp Weapons fball be hidden in burning Torches, being
In Lyons the day oftthe Sacrament, mip


Thofe of Vienna hall be all cut to pieces,
By the Latin Cantons, after the example of Mafcon.


ANNOT,


This foretelleth a notable Treafonthat fhall be acted at Lyons, upon the Sacra-
ments day, otherwife called Corpus Chriffi day, upon which'the Rowan Catholicks
are wont to make a Proceffion withthe Sacramentabout the Town,with abundance
of burning Torches, of fearful bignefs, infomuch that fome (as at Angeirs ) require
20 or 24 mento carry them, in thofe Torches (our Author faith ) fhall V Veapons
be hidden, by means of which che fa@ fhall be committed, The reft iseafie,


LX XI:
French.


Au lieux Sacrés, animaux veus a Trixe,
Avec celuy qui nofera le jour,
| A Carcaffonne pour difgrace propice,

Na | Sera pole potr plus ample fejonr. de
i Englifh. +
In the Sacred places, Animals [ball be feen at Trixe, vk
With him that fball not dare in the day,

In Carcaflonne for a favourable difgrace,
He fball be [et to make a longer ftay,

ANNOT.


ue Whether the Author did underftand himfelf here I know not, Iam fure I donot:

la Caroaffonneis a City of Languedoc, and Trixe is a barbarous word: |
LX XII.

hi French.


a, mn. | eme


ee Be PE pm


Dar er


Encor feront les Saints Temples pollus,
Et expilez par Senat Tholofain, |
Saturne deux trois Siecles revolus, |
Dans Auril, May, gens de nouveau Levain.


rate


AE 0 ae Et,


acts
tholicks
Undinte
require
eapons


I donot;


of Michael Noftradamus.


Englifh.
Once more. fball the Holy Temples be. polluted,
And depredated by the Senate of Thoulouze,
Saturn two three Ages finifhed,
fa April, May, people of a new Leaven.
ANNOT. |


This is, when the Planet Saturn: hath:finifhed twice three Ages; chatis, 600
years from the time chac chis Prophecy was written, then the Senates of Thowlouze,
being men of a new Leaven (meaning being Proteftants ) {hall caufe the Ro.
mifh Churches to be polluted and depredated in the Months of April'and May,


LX XIIL
French.


Dans Foix entrez Roy Cerulée Turban,

Etregnera moins evolu Saturne,

Roy. Turban:Blanc, Bixuicercœur-ban,

Sol, Mars, Mercure, près la Hurné,
Englifh.

{a Foix fhall come a King with a Blew Turbant,

And fball Reign before Saturn is revolved,

Then a King with a White Turbant [ball make Bizance to quake,

Sol, Mars Mercury, being near the top of the Maft.
ANNOT,


Foix is a Countrey of France, near Gafcony, where the Author (aith, a King with
a Blew Tuïbant fhall come, and fhall govern lefs then an Age, that is 100 years,
after which another King with a VVhite:Turbant fhall come, and {ball Conquer 3:-
zance (which in Latine is Conffantinople ) the Blew or Green Turbant is attributed
to the great Turk, and the V Vhite one to the King of France, by whom the Tarks
have a Prophecie, their Monarchy {hall be fabverted: |


LXXIV.

French.
Dans la Cite de Fertfod homicide, .
Fait-& fait multe, Bocuf-arant ne madtér,
Retour encore aux honneurs d’ Artemride,
Et a Vulcan corps morts ‘épulturer.

Enghth,
In the City of Fertlod one murdered,
Canfeth a Fine to be laid for killing a plowing Oxe, -
There fball be a return of the honours due to-Arremide,


And Vulcan fhall bury dead bodies.
ANNOT,


VVhat is that City of Fertfod, is hard to guefs, chere being none of this name in
Enrope. that I know, The reft of the words are plain, though the fenfe be abftruce
enough, therefore we fhall leave them to the liberty of the Reader,


French,


ak MoS LA LE jan”


ARTS


The true Propbecies


LXX V.

French.
De l’Ambraxie & du pais de Thrace,
Peuple par Mer, Mal, & fecours Gaulois,
Perpetuelle en Provence la Trace,
Avec veftiges de leur Couftumes & Loix.


Englifh.
From Ambraxia, and from the Countrey of Thracia,
People by Sea, Evil, and French fuccours,
The Trace of it fball be perpetual in Provence,
The footfteps of their Cuftoms and Laws remaining,
ANN OT.


VVhat Countrey this Ambraxia fhould be, is yet unknown, for my part I take it
to be a forged word, as for Thracia it is a Countrey between Hwsgary and Greece.

Obferve here that Evil is not an Spichete, to-either People or Sea,but a word
of admiration by it felf, as #s4/wm in Latine, whichis called vox admirantis.


LXXVI.
French.
Avec le noir Rapax & fanguinaire,
Y flu du peaultre de l'inhumain Nerom
Emmy deux Fleuves main gauche Militaire,
Sera meurtry par Foy Chanlveron.
Englilh.
With the Black and bloody Rapax,
Defcended from the paultry of the inbumane Nero,
Between two Rivers, on the left Military hand,
He fball be murdered by Joyne Caulveron.
ANNOT.


This Prophecie portendeth the death of a black,bloody,and ravenous man(which
in Latine is Rapax) who fhall be murdered between two Rivers,by one whofe proper


name fhall be Foyne Chaslueron.


LXXVII.

French.
Le Regne prins le Roy conviera,
La Dame prinfe a mort jurez a fort,
La vie a Royne Fils on defniera,
Et Ja pellix au fort de la confort.


nr.


D


CT


a?


|
|
|
|
|
|


(vtt D


pepe D


of Michael Noftradamus,


Englith. |
The Kingdom being taken, the King (ball invite,


“The Lady taken to death,


Th?’ Fife hall be denyed unto,the Queens Son
And the Pellix [ball be at the height of the Confort.


ANNOT.


You muft obferve, that there is a word fale printed; which is Pe//ix, inftead of
which fhould be Pelex, which in Latine fignifietha Whote or Concubine.
The fenfe therefore of this is,chat a certain King having taken anotherK ingdom,


fhall pat the Queen of it to death, asalfo her own Son, after which, he fhall make
his Concubine Queen,


LXX'VIIL

! French.
La Dame Grecque de Beauté laydique,
Heureufe faite de proges innumerable;
Hors tranflatee au Regne Hifpanique,
Captive prinfe mourir mort miferable:


Eng lith,


«The Grecian Liady of exquifite Beauty,


Mice’ biappy front ianumerable quarrels,
Being trauflated.into, the Spanvh Kingdom:
Shall.be.utade-aiP rifoner, and'die a miferable death.


ANN:O:T,


This Stanzais concerning the Lady Elizabeth of France, Daughter to Heary the Il,
and Sifter to Charles the IX, who being promifed firft to Don Carlo Infante of Spain,
was afterwards Married to his Father Php the 1], at which the young man being
vexed and difcontented, began to raife combuftions in the State, for which, and his
too much familiarity with his Mother in Law): he was ftrangled by his Fathers com:
mand, and fhe poifoned.


LXeXr X;
French,
Le Chef de Claffe par fraude, ftratageme,
Fera timides fortir de leurs Galeres,
Sortis meurdris chef renieux de Crefme,
Puis par l’Embufche luy rendront les {alaires


Enghfh.
The Commander of a Fleet by fraud anil firatagen,
Shall canfethe.fearful ones to come forth of their Galleys,
Come,ont murdered, chief renouncer of Baptifin,


4


After tharbyanAmbufcado they l give him again his falary


Eee ANNOT.


294 Tbe true Prophecies


ANNOT. ite

The two firft Verfes are plain, the third fignifieth, that chefe fearful ones being

come out of their Galleys, part of them fhall be murdered, and among them the

Captain, a renouncer of his Baptifm, or Renegado,and the reft afterwards by-an Am-
bufcado, fhall requite in the fame Coin thofe that had ufed them fo,


LX XX.
French.
Le. Duc voudrales fiens exterminer,
Envoyera les plus forts, lieux eftranges,
Par tyrannie Bixe & Luc ruiner.
Puis les Barbares fansVin feront Vendanges.


Eoglifh.
The Duke fhall endeavour to exterminate bis own,
And hall fend away the ffronge ft of them into remote places,
He fhall alfo ruinate Bize and Luc,
The Barbarians fhall make Vintage without Wine,
ANNOT.
There is a great fault in che impreffion of the Frenc


maketh the fenfe altogether inexplicable, it muft the
written Pife and Lacques, which are two Towns


b Copy in this Stanza, which
n in ftead of Bixe and Luc, be


| in Z#aly, near the Duke of Florence’s
Dominions; one of thefe Towns, vz, Pifa he hath taken already, and from aCom-


mon- Wealth madeit fubjeét to himfelf; the other though feveral times attempted
by him, hath prefervedits liberty co chis day, The laft Verfe fignifieth, that after
this is come to pafs, the Barbarians, thatis, the Florentins fhal make Vintage withous
Wine ;. thatis, fhall plunder and fpoil at their pleafure,


L'XXXI.
French:
Le Roy rule entendra fes Embutches,
De trois quartiers Ennemis affaillir;
Un nombre eftrangeLarmes de coqueluches; É
Viendra Lamprin du traduéteur faillir,
_ Englifh. |
The crafty King fhall hear of his Ambufcadoes;
And fball afsail his Exemies on three fides,
A firange number of Friers, mens Tears,
Shall caufe Lamprtin to defert the Traitor.
ANNOT. | |
The only difficulty here is to know who that Eamprin thould be, who fhall be di:


verted from following a Traitor ( which he meaneth here by the French word Tra-
dééfeur ) and hall be diverted from it by the Tears of Fryers, which are meant here


by the ancient Frente word Coqueleches; which fignifiech a Fryets Cool or Ca-
puchon.


Frenck,


1 =


ree


=


of Michael Noftradamus,


LXXXIT-
hé ARE French,
Cent | Par le Deluge & peftilence forte. ,
eS | La Cité grande de long temps Afliegée,
| La Sentinellé & Garde de main morte,
Subite prinfe mais de nul outragée.
Enghfh.
The great City having been long Befieged,
By an Innundation and violent Plague,
The Sentinal and Watch being furprifed,
Shall be taken on a fudden,but hurt by no body.
ANN OT.

| This is very plain, if by the great City you underftand Paris, who is fabjet to fre-
| quent Innundations and Plagues. |
| LXXXIIL Ho à

| French. i | =
“1 Sol Vingt de Taurus, fi fort terre tremblera, Li
ee 1 Le grand Theatre remply ruinera, al

el LAr, Ciel, & Terre, obfcurcir & troubler, ll


|
Fire D da |
Come À Lors l’Infidele Dieu, & Saints voguera. |
; Il
|
|
|


Mt},


tempted pe il
hat after Englith. i
(LT


The Sun being in the 20th of Taurus, the Earth fhall fo quake, |

That it foall fill and ruinate the great Theater ea

The Air theHeaven,@otheEarth fhall be fo darkened and troubled, ll

That the unbelievers fhallcall upon God, and bis Saints. Un

| ANNOT. al
This famous Earth-quake having not yet happened in Europe, it is like to happen ELU
within few years, for our Authors Prophecies (by his own confeffion ) do not extend nt


further than the year 1700.
LXXXIV,
French.


1 Roy expolé parfaira PHecatombe, | où
Apres avoir trouve {on Origine, |
Torrent ouvrir de Marbre &Plomb la Tombe, il
D'un grand Romain d'Enleigne Medufia. ee |
. À Englifh. |
lké | The King expofed fball fulfill the Hecatombe,
After be hath found ont his Offspring, :
ace D A Torrent {ball open the Sepulcher; made of Marblesgnd Lead, q
| Of a gréat Roman, with « Medulean Erfig#, A 8S IW


Eee 2 ANNOT.


Qa


96 T be true Tropbecies


ANNOT. |

This Prophecie is divided into two parts, : The firft two Verfes are concerning
a King, who fhall perform the Funeral Ritesand Ceremonies to his Parents, when

“he is come to the knowledge of them, having been expofed for loft before,

The two laft Verfes are concerning an ancient Sepuicher ofa Reman, that thall
be digged up and found out bya Torrent, and the Arms of the faid Rowan (hall be
fomething like the head of Medufa, whofe Hairs were Serpents, and was (o fearful co
behold, that by feeing of it, che beholders were turned into ftones,

LXX XV,
French.
Pafler Guenne, Languedoc, & le Rhbofne,
D’ Agen tenants, de Marmande & la Reole,
D'Ouvrir par foy parroy,Phocen tiendra fon Throne,
Conflit aupres Saint Pol de Manfeole.


Englifh.
They fhall pafs over Gafcony, Languedoc, and the Rhofne,
From Agen keeping Marmande, and the Reale,
Te open the Wall by Faith, Phocen fball keep bis Throne,
A Battle fhall be by St. Paul of Manfeole.
AN NOT,
The whole of this Prophecie fignifiech no more, but that an Army fhall pafs


through all thefe places, and chatat laft chere will bea Battle fought by that place.
called St, Paul de Manfeele,, :


ie LXXXVL
it French.
eo a Du Bourg la Reyne parviendront droit a Chartres,


Bt feront pres du Pont Antony pole,
Li Sept pour la paix cauteleux comme Martres,
JU Feront entrée d’Armée a Paris claufe.
jh Englifh.
net From Bourg la Reyne they foall come firaight to Chartres,
And {ball make a ftand near Pont Antony,
Seven for Peace as crafty as Martres,
i Tbcy fhall enter in Paris befieged with an Army.
Tu ANNOT,

Bourg lat Reyne is a little town within fix Miles of Paris, Chartresis the chief City
i of the Province Beanffe, Pont Antony is a little Town between them both, fothat the
DU A Bee fenfe of the whole is this, that feaven men, crafty like cAartres (which arethofe

laa Rufsia Foxes that afford thericheft Furres, called Afartres ZibeHines ) {hall go from
| ii Bourg la Reyne to Chartres, making a little ftay at Pont Antony, and then hall come
i with an Army into Parts, which (hall be befieged at that time, I believe this Pro-


| phecy is come to pafs already in the time ofthe Civil V Vars of Frances but for want
po | of the Hiftory I could not quote the time, :


French;


2


| - ®
| par!
dit)


bag
Ken


Prana
Fute a


Catal À
Ml

f, {|
Lu


V


| A
lolne,


fall pals
at place, D


ef Cy
thatthe
we thole
00 from
‘come
his Pro
formant D:


fr 4


Of Michael Noftradamus,


LXXX VII.

… French.

Par la Foreft du Touphow eflartée

Par Hermitage fera pofé le Temple,

Le Duc d’Eftampes par fa rufe inventée,
Du Montlebery Prelat donra exemple.


ONG Englifh.

By the Forreft Touphon cut of,

By the Hermitage fhall the Temple be fet,

The Duke of Eftampes by bis invented trick,

Shall give example to the Prelat of Montlehery.
| ANNOT,

Hereisa fault in the Impreffion , for inftead of rowphex, it muft be written Too,
which isa Forreft fome 30 Miles from Paris towards Beauffe, near which is feared the
Town of Adentlebery, in the the faid Forreft is feaced an Hermitage, and not far from
thence the City of Zffampes, which carryeth the Title of Dutchy; fo that the fenfe
of itis this, that this Forreft being cut off (as itis now for the moft part) inthe place
where that Hermitage was, fhall be builc a Church or Convent, as it is now Cebeflins
friars, called Marcouffy, and that the {aid Hermitage {hall be taken from the jurifci-
ion of the Town of Mentlebery, under which it was before,


LXXXVIII.
F reach:


Calais, Arras, fecours a Theroanne,
Paix & femblant fimulera l’efcoure,
Soulde d’Allobrox defcendre par Roane,
Deftornay peuple qui defera la routte.
Englith.
Calais, Arras, fhall give fuccours to Theroanne,


Peace or the like, fball diffemble the bearing:


Souldiers of Allobrox fhall defcend by Roane, ta a


People per{waded, fhall fpoil the March;


ANNOT,

This Prophecy did happen in the time of Henry che U, King of Fra:ee, about the
year 1559.

The laft Verfe faith, that thofe two Towns Calais and Arras gave fuccours to
Theroane, that is to. che Countrey where Theronenwe was feated, which was detlroyed
by Charles the V. Emperour. This Countrey was called Ponthits, of which 7 he-
ronenne was the chief Town, ;

The fecond Verfe doth determine the time whereabout this came to pafs, when
he faith, peace or the like fhall diffemble the hearing, becaufe inthe year 155 6. in the
beginning of Febrsary there wasa Truce for five years between the two Crowns of à |
France and Spaix, concerning the Low Countreys, and this Truce fignified not much |
nor was well cemented , fo thatthe Author faith, Peace or the like [bal diffemble the |
hearing ; that is, {hall fain not to hear that che Cardinal Car4ffa did endeavour ia
France to have the Truce broken,


The


nee à nen re ms Ep A gener


—— eS


298 The true Prophecies


The third Verfe is obfcure, becaufe ofa fault inthe Impreffion , wherein they
have put Romane inftead of Noanne, chat is Hannone by tranfpofition of letters, but
that being corrected, the Verfe is clear, fuppofing chat Philibertus Emanuel Duke of
Savoy was General of the Army, againft France in the Low-Countress , and wandering
about to do fome notable exploit, he camedown through the Prevince of Hainanlt,
ca'ledin Latine Hasnonia, and came to Mariembonrg , as if he would have Befieged
it, but after fome light skirtnithes he laid Siege to Recrey, and this is the meaning of
the third Verfe, when he faith, Sowldiers of Allobrox hall defcend by Noanne, that is,
Souldiers in the Army of the Duke of Savoy, which in Latine is 4/obrcx, came down
to Mariembourg, and turned back againto Recroy.

The fourth Verfe mentioneth what did happen at the Siege of Rocroy ; that place
being nor yec very well fortified ; the King was unwilling to put any of his beft Soul.
diers therein, but the Duke of Nevers undertook the defence of it, which he did
really and glorioufly perform, in fo mach, that the Duke of Savey wascompelled to
raife up the Siege, and going back towards St. Quentin, he took Vervins by ftorm,
and gave the booty of it to his Souldiers, who took heart upon it, having been much
difcouraged before by the refiftance of che Duke of Nevers, This is chefenfe of the
fourth Verle, People perfuaded (hall / poil the march; thatis, the people of Recroy per-
fuaded to hold out by the courageand prefence of the Duke of Nevers ,{poiled the
march that the Duke of Savoy had propounded to himfelf, infomuch, that raifing

the Siege he went to /ervins, and from thence to St, Qatntin,
L XX XIX.
French.
Sept ans Philip fortune profpere,
Rabaillera des Barbares l'effort,
Puis fon midy perp'ex rebours affaire,
Jeune Ogmzon ab yimera fon fort.
Englith.
Philip (ball have feven years of profperous fortune,
Shall beat down the attempt of the Barbarians,
Then 12 bis Noon be fball bz perplexed and have untoward bufinefs ,


Young Ogmion fhall pull down bis firength.


ANNOT.

This Stanza was made concerning Philip the II. King of Spais , who for the firft
feven years that he came tohis Crown, had profperous fortune , did brave exploits
againft che Barbarians, and chiefly inthe perfon of his Brother Des Faan of Asftria
who got the memorable Battle of Lepantho againft the Turks , but in the middle of
bis Noon, that isof his Age, fell into great perplexities and crofs bufinefles , being
conitrained to put his onely fon Don Carla to death, and to poifon his wife, una atcer
that never profpered, when young Ogmion (chat is Henry IV. King of France) came
to the Crown.

XC,
French.


Un’ Capitaine de la grand Germanie,
Se viendra rendre par fimulé fecours,
Au Roy des Roys, aide de Pannonie,
Que fa revolte fera de fang grand cours.


Englith


of Michael Noftradamus.
bt | Englifh,
Et | A Captain of the great Germany, . _-
ak | Shall come to yield himfelf with à fained bel,
lee 1 Unto the King of Kings, help of Hungary,
io FI So that bis revolt fall caufe a great AT LEE
de | ANNOT. |
‘om | Pannonis in Latineis Hungary, there is nothing hardin this, unlefs it be oe it he a
| meaneth by the King of Kings, whether it be the great Turk or the Emperour.
is XCI
‘py | | À French.
Id | + 3 à
ein | L’Horrible pefte Peryrthe & Nicopole,
form, | Le Cherfonefe tiendra & Marceloine, i
nau | La Theffalie, naiftera |’ Ampbipole, À
ot 1 Mal incogneu & fe refus d’ Antoine, a
ii À Englifh. |. i
rang | The borrid peftilence fhall fone upon Perynthe and Nicopolis, |
i The Cherfonefe and Marceloine,.— :
1 It fhall wafte Thetlalia and Amphipolis,
| An unknown evil and the refufal of Antony.
ANNOT.
There is feveral faults in the impreffion here ; for inftead of rue) it inuft be
Corinthe, For Marceloine, it mutt be Macedoine: the fubftance of the whole is, chat ae
there fhall bea great plague i in all chefe Countries of A4fiz. The refufal of Antony ts KM
|. foifted here to make up the rime with Macedony, |
| XCM. Veet
| French. |
fl Le Roy Sorel dans Cité neufve entrer: ail


1}, Par ennemis expugner lon viendra, lit


Captif libere, faulx dire & perpetrer, +
Roy dehors eftre, loin d’ennemis tiendra. Ho


the Gt | | Englifh. | | ‘| |


splits D a
bi 1 The King foail defire to enter into the new City, ai
Ag, € |
video! With foes they foal conte to overcoine it,

bei The Prifoner being free, [ball [peak and ats falfly, i
ate | { The King being gotten ont foal keep far from enemies. |
1) ca | |


ANNOT, .

The fenfe of all thefe words fo ill jointed , is no more but that à certain King thall
delire co enter into a new City, and therethey fhall comeand Befiege him. where
he fhall both a&t and {peak deceitfully to get his liberty , which he having obtained,
{hall keep far from his foes. +


French.


T he trne Prophecies


X CHI:
French.
Les ennemis du Fort bien efloignez, |
Par Chariots conduits le Baftion, |
Par fur les Murs de Bourges eforongnez,
Quand Hercules battra l'Hewrathion.
Englifh.
Lhe: enemies being -a.good wayifr


front the Fort:

Shall upin Wagons be conduéhed to the Bulwark,

From the top of Bourges Wallsthey fball be cut lefs,

When Hercules fhall beat the Hemathion.
ANNOT.


Bourges is the chief City of a Province im France called ‘Berry,

There is nothing difficult in this, butonely what. he meaneth by Hercules beating
the <Æmathion , unlefs by Hercules he meaneth the French , and by -£mathion the
Spaniard. |


XCIV.
French.


Foibles Galeres feront unis enfemble,,
Ennemis faux, le plus fort en rempart,
Foible affailies Wratiflavie tremble ;
Lubeck & Myfne tiéndront Barbare part.
Englifh.
Weak Galleys shall be united together,
Falfe enemies, the firongeft shall be fortified,
Weak affaults, and yet Breflaw quaketh for fear,
Lubeck and Milne shall take the part of the Barbarians.
ANNOT,


Breflaw, Lubeck and Mifne, are three Cities of Germanys thereftis plain:


X CV, Al
French. ge
Le nouveau fait conduira l’exercite,
Proche apame julque aupres du Rivage
Tendant fecours de Melanoife eflite,
Duc yeux privé, a Milan fer de Cage.
Englifh.
The new man shall lead up the Army,
Near Apame, till near the Bank
Carrying fuccours of choice Forces from Milan,
The Duke deprived of his eyes,and an Iron Cage at Milan.


2


ANNOT
x ah L En $


[7
in the


of Michael N oftradamus.
ANNOT.


Apamé is a barbarous word , at leaft I cannot tell what Janguage itis, the reftis
plain enough, and fignifieth chat a Duke fhall be deprived of his eyes;and fhall be put
in an Iron Cageat Milan.


XCVI.
French.
Dans Cité entrer exercite defniéé,
Duc entrera par perfuafion,
Aux foibles portes clam Armee amenée,
Mettront feu, mort, de fang effution.


Englifh.


Toe Army being denied the entrance of the City,


The Duke fball enter by perfuafion,
To the weak Gates,clam the Army being brought,
Shall put all to fire and fword..

ANNOT.


Clam here is in Latine prepofition, fignifying fecretly, the reft is eafie:


XCVII.
French.


De Mer Copies en trois parts divifées,

A la feconde les Vivres failliront,

Defefpérez cherchant Champs Elifées,

Premiers en breche entrez victoire auront,
sera Englifh.

À Fleet being divided into three parts,

The vittuals will fail the fecond part,

Being in defpaire they'l feek the Elyfian Fields,

And entring the breach firft,fball obtain viétory.

AN.N OT,


A Fleet being divided into three parts, the fecond divifion fhall fall into want of
viduals, for which being delperate, they fhall attempt the Town of the enemy, and
fhall enter it by the breach, and get the victory,


XG VILI.
French.


Les affligéz par faute d’un feul taïnt,

Contremenant a partie oppofite,

Aux Lygonois mandera:que contraint,

Seront de rendre Je grand chef de Molite:
| Englifh.

The afflicted want of one only died,

Carrying againft the oppolite part,


Shall fend word to thofe of Lyon,they fball be compelled,


To furrender the great chief of Molite.
FEE


ANNOT


7
a


A Mn. eT = a +
” a es me LAGE RCE


Thisis the moft nonfenfical thing that isin all the Book,
the connexion is intelligible, therefore it being
our Author, Lamapt to believe thatit wasat fir
chat came after, were loth to alter it for the refpect of antiquity.


The true Propbecies


ANNOT.
for neither the words not


(o much out of the common road of
ft very falfly printed, and that thofe


X CIX:
French.


Vent Aquilon fera partir le Siege,

Par murs jetter cendres, chaulx, & poufliere,

Par pluye apres qui leur fera bien piege,

Dernier fecours encontre leur Fronticre.

Englifh.

The North wind {ball caufe the Siege to be raifed,

They (ball throw afhes, lime, and duSt

By a rain after that {hall be a trap to them,

It fball be the laft fuccours againft their ,F rontiere.
ANNOT.


Here is defcribed a notable ftratagem of a Befieged Town, who againft rainy
weather caft fo much athes, lime and duft, that therain coming thereupon, it made
fucha mire, as the Befiegers were not able toaffaultit,


Cc
French.

Navale pugne nui& fera fuperée,
Le feu, aux Naves a l'Occident ruine,
Rubriche neuve, la grand néf colorée,
Ire a vaincu, & victoire en bruine.

Englifh.
In a Sea-fight, night fhall be overcome,
By fire, to the Ships of the Weft ruine [ball bapper,
A new ftratagem, the great Ship coloured,
Anger to the vanquifbed, and victory in a Mift.

ANNOT,


He foretelleth ofa Sea-fightin the night, wherein by the light of the burning
Ships night fhall be overcome, the Ships that came from the Wet fhall be worfted,
and by a ftratagem of a great Ship painted in colours , anger {hall renaain to the van-
quifhed, and the victory fhall be got ina Mift,


PROPHECIES
cadran se etnias


traidy | is iG
me A =
F MAQE | G E NT 0 RY
| :
à . {.
French:
l’Enneiny, | ennemy foy promire,
\ Ne fectichdra, les captifs retenus,
Prins preme mort & lerefteren chemise,
Dontañt Je.refte pour eftre fecourus.
TEnglifhé _ . ey
To the enemy, the enemy faith promifed, grein .
Shall not be kept the prifoners [ball be detained,
, of The firft taken, put to deathyand the reft firipped,
nt | Giving the remnant that they may be fucconred.
ROC ea hs
thera ANNOT..... .
Thefe words are plain, though the fenfe be.a little intricated ,, and thecontents
being of {mall conceraments, deferve no further explanation,
x. ‘sash act
THE VERT) FE Rte 21 À tn aes Rate Be TEND,


à «+ " ° ‘
. ee \ ari ens
L woe re LAWN ‘ au
+o. LP ar in \\ Ji à
À


oftradamus.


rn me et


T be true Prophecies


II.
French.


Voile Gallere Voile nef Cachera, |
La grand Claffe viendra fortir: la moindre:
Dix Naves proches le tourneront poulfer,
Grand-vaincüe, unies a foy.j6ïndre.


Englifh.-
The Galley and the Ship [ball bide'their Sails,
The great Fleet fhall make the little one to come ont,
Teg Ships near band,fball ture athe eh à à Sa
| The great-being wanquifbed,they fhallunit ntogethers _À
AN NOT.

Thefe are fome particularities of a Sea fight between a great Fleet and a {mall one,
wherein he faith, that fome had bid their Sails _belike they were unwilling to come
out of the Harbourand to fights bur.be high ch uF reat Fleetwill c
little one tocome oui 5-bhe'teq greac Ships will com cagerte SL
after the great one hath been Overcome, will foyn themfelves to the little

ET
Frerde => 1x à
En apres cinq tfôupeaü ne mettra hors,
Ua fuitif pour Penelon la{chera,
Faux murmurer fecours venir par lors,
Le Chef le Siege lors abandorñherà.


Engh{h: oo 44 41
After that, five fhall not put out bis flock:
He’! let loofe-a runnaway for Penelon,
There fhall be à falfetrumour, ficrours foalkconte then:
The Commander fhall forfake the Siege. ors
ANNOIT.
This Stanza is either nonfenfical or falfely printed, and what he meaneth by Pe-
selon, is utterly unknown, ie


TY,
French.


Sur Ja minuit.conducteur-de l'Armée,

Se fauvera fubit efvanovy, |

Sept ans apres [a fame‘non bläfiiée, a

A Tomretour ne“dird one Gtiye"? 20002 ele!
| Englifh.

About midnight the leader of the Army,


Shall fave bimf elf, rat fuddenly,


Seven years after bis fame Dall not be blamed
And at bis return be fhall never fay yea.


Ct Gee


Ths h
à V
| Me:


On thy


|
À


|


NOT. 1


of Michael Noftradarus.


This1s plain ofa General of ah Arinÿ, who hall folfake his Army? And five him”
felf, and yet feven years afref when hécometh back? Kis ‘fepucation thal be’às cléar®
a if he never Had committed fuch an probe. 7 1 10 Sige à SINK IEND A bi


de “34 i >13VO3H0 DI Htblivd blo vas

300 IPS NOLO. ARYSN £10 51719111 pp ÉVENIS DISH Bd COCHE Silos 19
d rench. r 1

Ao 1 3191 31 2% AGO) eR


mods avhthinde Ceftres feront nouvelle lignée] 113 ic


NOMEN | ja
bas Neuf ldrrewn Etfbôhhe: Bz! Portugnegio 2:31 k
ae Thoaloitxe confumerdnt ledr brave’! 21
10 2933'Q423HO se SR NAN Ta? MA 12@6L ele DSM PO 10" filé
sods er RAA chef, neuf mionftre de Eauragnbenn soc see


f Enolifh. 5 | £ lo en H1907 Mi bnvoled oi sig
NOT us atat à À à » TEA Select # sa ri 1} af Oo)! ty rad
ER br and Calttes ball wiake“a new leagive” Lo )
usée Attiens, Lisbonne, GAG PORUQUCE LS 5 dore à
swstGarcaRThouloufe,fhz/] rake. an endiof:their co federianys, =:
When the new chief foal! come from Dattvagais)'2q Hal ess

| ANNOT.

e Albi, Caftres, Carcalfonne, and Thenlonfe,are Cities of Languedock,which our Au-
thor faith, will enter info\a confederacy among themfelves; andjoyn with Lisbon
and the Portugnez, and this fhall happen when the general of the Armyj hall be one
born in Lawragais, whichis another of the fame Province, . 1 ofl]


VE se raie 7
French. VA ARID SW AW OES

Gardon a Nifmes eaux fihaur desborderont, _
Qu'on cuidera Deucäliür reñaiftre, "1? Lassi hk


Dans le Coloffe la plafpatt fuiront, a sad ot
Veftx Sepulchre feu efteint apparoftre vil ssid ss


. Gardon at Nifmes, waters Jball Pverflex fo bigh,. cane
TP hy ink. hat Doeutalion is bind due atin eo
‘MoSE.of shea mall, rua inte the Colofiaspue’) 543 stuived si VV
And a Sepulcbrejand fire ex tin ui fbed: Pad! uppeawy ion ob I sheV
ANNOT:


Near Nifmes there is the River called Garder, which cometh from Se, Romans,
and difchargeth it felf into the Rhofne at Beawraive, there is to beteen in that City
abundance of Antiquitez, which the Goths had built.1150, years before, there is al{o
many Roman Antiquities, as an Amphitheater, (o well builded chat neither the Gorbs
nor the Saracens, nor Attila, not Charles Martel, with all their power,could not utter-
ly demolifh ic, The Author nameth it Calofns , “Beedle its building appeared like
a Coloffss for folidity, |

There is alfo an ancient Temple which is called the Foyntain, builded asa Oua-
drangle, and fupported by two rows ofgreat Pillars, which at prefeatis a Church
of Nuns, Foi: At © wii

This being fuppofed, the River of Gardow did over haw fo mucty that its VVaters
joyning with that of a Flood that happened there the.nioth of September. 1557. every
one thought that Deacation had been born again, The Author faith this s becaufe


ter ei


in


SN SES st
9 2


i
if it
Na


406 iT he true Propheciet’. \s
in-the fables of the ancients.  Descaliepjs thought to be the Author of the Flood
which ovjd mentioneth: , During shis Flood which wasilike,cooverfow the-Town,
ds well as.che Gountrey..many did recire chemfelvesinto.that Amphisheater.… 31,1

And in thatancient Temple of the Fesutain, the W Waters key PDA Gé great
many old buildings did difcover abundanceof Antiquities, and among the reft one
of thofe Lamps that burneth always, inthe, Sepulchre ofa vefal, which went out
as foon as it felc che fgeth Air. © eae Re te

In confirmation of this, the Hiftory of Prowente Taith> thatithe ftormbegan about
five of the Clock in the Morning and ed till Eight. df the-Glockpenighr, and
that thefe waters did uncover abundance.of Antiquities chat. werehidden 1190. years
before, as Pillars, Portico’s, Meduls, Jafper- ftones, and serpentine-ftones, pieces of
broken Veffels, Epicaphs;*todging Rooms, and Caves, ‘and all othet'things that
ule to be found in che ruines of a Palacesijiion

There was alfo heard inthe Air Dogs barking, \Cillars ofrfire; Armed men fight-
ing,and were feen two Suns in the Clouds of the Colour of Blood,all which were the
(ad prefages of the Civil VVars of France prefently aftet,and:chiefly that of Provence,

the nioth Century in the ninch stanza fpeakerh almott the fame, atid fheweth


that Né/mes hall perifh by ViVatkr: RE UNSS cut Othe salt
a VAT €

BA ino bide bros Jo 851110 SR ARAAMEY bas Sanaa veld

molt chie grand coufliétqu'onappreftéa Naxeyya 503 Iv 0:


od ED Æwufhien diratout je foubriets, 7


L’Ifle Britane pit Vin Sél’en foley,”
Hem, mi. deux Phi. long, temps netiendra Mets.’
: Englifh.
A great War is preparing at Nancy;
The. Æmathien fball fay I fubmit.to all, |
The Britith Ifland fhall be put in care by Salt und Wines j
Hem. mi. two Phi. hall not keep Mets long.
rc aa AN NOT. —
Naney is the chief City of Lorrain, and by the Æmaihien is underftood the French,
the Britifh [fle is England, which is faid here, thal! come into grear diftrels by salt and


VVine, becaufe che Countrey aboundeth in thofe: cwo'Commodities; The laft
Verfe I do not uaderftand, fave chat cers is a great Cityin Lorrain,


VIII.
FO PE French.
Index-8«. Poulfeparfondera le front
De Senegalia le Comite'a fon Fils propre;
La Myrzamze par plüfieurs de plam front, pt
Trois dans fept jours bleflez more. Milo


YEN


Englifh. |
Index and Poulfe hall break the forebead, er Sige ha
Of the Son of the Earl of Senegalia, Ok peta a tn
The, Myrnaméebÿ many ‘ata folbbont, 2") 4 à gaiad eid T


.


Threewithin fewtrdays (ball be wounded to deathe) Ur Se’ f


ety pel” pene


Tom,


el one
Ut out


D about
ht, and
Os Years
Hecesof
NPS that


fight


Nerethe Bel


ent,


theweth M


French,


saltand D
Thil | |


ea H


of Michael Noftradamus.


ANNOT.

senegalia is a Townin Zraly, all what can be gathered out of the obfcurity of this
Stanza, is, that the fon of the Earl of chat Town (hail have his forehead broken, and
within feven days after, chreé more fhall be wounded co death,


IX,

French.
De Caftilon fignieres jour de bruné, |
De femme infame naiftra Souverain Prince, i
Surnum de chaufles per hume luy pofthume, |
Onc Roy ne fut fi pire en fa Province.

Englifh.
Oui of Caftilon figuieres upon a nifty day, |
From an infamous woman fall be born a Soveraign Prince,
His furnante [ball be from Breeches, bimfelfa pofthume,


a
Never a King was worfe in bis Province. il |


| ANNOT. My
Caftilon figuieres is a petty Townin Provence, in which he faith chat a Severaign eh
Prince fhall be born of an infamous Woman, and fhall be a pofthume, which in La- Damn)


|

|
tine fignifieth one chat is bornafter his Fathers deaths he (aieh alfo that his name 1)
fhall be derived from Breeches , and that never a King was worfe in his Countrey; 11)
whether by worfe, he meaneth in manners or fortune, 1 know not, | i
x li | |
French. | |


Tafche de murdre, >enormes Adulteres, |
Grand ennemy de tout le genre humain, il
Que fera pire qu’ayeulx. Oncles ne Pere, a
En fer, feu, eau, fanguin & inhumain. eal
Englifh. Ba
Endeavour of Murder, enormous Adaulteries, ae
A great enemy of all mankind,’ aa
That fhall be worfe then Grand-father, Uncle or Father, LU
Ia Iron, fire, water, bloody and inbumane. een
ANNOT. a
This Stinza as wellas the next hath relation to the precedent, making mention

what a wicked perfon fhall that Pofthume be of which he {poke before.

X Is
French,
Defloubs Fonchere du dangereux paflage, °
Fera pañler le pofthumeta‘bande, |

és Monts Pyrens paller hors fon bagage, M
! © De Parpignaa courira Duc à Tende.


The true Prophecies
Englifh.


Below Joncheres dangerous pallage,
The pofthume [hall caufe bis Army to go ever,
And his Baggage to go over the Pyrenean Mountains,
A Duke {halt run from Perpignan to Tende.
ANNOT.
This is fil! concerning the fame pofthume or Baftard , who fhall caufe his Army
to pafs at Fonchere, and his Bagage to go over the Pyrenean Mountains , which parts


Spain from France , and that upon the fear of hima Duke hall run from Perpignan,
which is the chief City of Rouffidlon to Tende, which is a little Town in Provence.


XII.
French.
Efleu en Pape, d'Efleu fera mocqué,
Subit foudain, efmeu prompt & timide,
Par trop bon doux a mourir provoqué,
Crainte eftainte la nuit de fa mort guide.
| Englifh.
. Eleffed for 4 Pope, from Ele6ted fball be baffied,
Upon a fudden, moved quick and fearful,
By too muchfweetnefs provooked to die, |
His fear being ont in the night fball be Leader to his death.
ANNOT,
This Prophecy was fulfilled in the perfon of the Cardinal Sauta Severina , who iti
the Conclave of Cardinals after the death of Pope Innocent IX was Ele@ed Pope,and


prefently after was baffled by the fame Cardinals, and Clement the VIII. chofen in
his place, for which the other a little while after died for grief. ,


XIII
French.
Soubs la pafture d'animaux ruminans,
Par eux conduits au ventre Herbi-polique,
Soldats cachez, les armes bruit menants,
Non loin tentez de Cité Antipolique.


ÆEnglif.
Under the pafture of Betfts chewing the cud,
Condutted by them to the Herbi-polique belly,
Soldiers hidden, the Weapous making a noife,
Shall be attempted not far from Antipolick City;
ANN OT,
The fenfe of thisis, that fome Souldiers difguifed like Herds-men > thall lead
Oxeninto a place where were hidden before Weapons in the Grafs , but the Wea-
pons making a noife by their clafhing they ‘hall be difcovered’, not far from a place


that he calleth here Antipolique,purpofely to rime with Herbipolique in French, which
word Herbipolique fignifietha Town of Pafture:


French,


"y ys N
f Peru,
Nene,


=


,wtoi à
Ppeund D
bofen in Bi


of Michael Noftradamus.


XIV:

French.
Urnel, Vaucile, fans confeil de foy mefmes,
Hardy, timide par crainte prins vaincu,
Accompagre de plufieurs putains, blefnte,
À Barcelonne aux Chartreux convainct.

Englith.
Urnel, Vaucile, without advice of bis own,
Stout and fearful, by fear taken and overcome,
Pale, and in company of many Whores,
Shall be convitted at Barcelone by the Charterhonfe.


ANN OT.


This Stanzais an Horofcopejwhich the Author made upon that Gentleman narhed


Urnel Vaacille; and fignifieth that che faid man fhould find himfelf in fuch perplexicy
that he could not beable to take advice what to do, and that fear fhould make him
hide bimfelf,to be apprehended, in a place where he flould be taken,

When he was taken, he was prefently convicted of thofe crimes that he was accu-
fed of: therefore the Officers of Juftice did condu@ him tothe Charter-houfe of
Barcelone, which is four miles from the faid Town, in a place called Campo alegre; for
the beauty and fituation of it, to that plicemany Whores did accompany him to rea
ceive the punifhment they had deferved , therefore the Author faich that he wene
thither pale, as forefeeing the tertour of the punifhment he was to undergo,


XV.
French.
Pere Duc vieux d’ans & de foif charge,
Au jour extreme fils defniant l’efguicre,
Dedans le puis vif, mort viendra plonge,
Senat au fils la mort longue & legere.
Englifh, »
Veg Ay Father. Duke, aged and, very thirfty,
In bis extremity, bis fon denying hint the Ewer,
Alive into a Well, where he shall be drowned,
For which the Senate [ball give the fon a long and eafte death.
ANNOT. |
It isa Duke very aged who fhall die of a Dropfie,or of fome other burning difeafe,


| which will make him very chirfty. the Phyficians fhall forbid any water to be given


|


fal led | k.


te ar |


|
in
| }


E |
b |


bim, therefore this Duke fhall pref§ his fon very much to give him the Ewer,that he
may drink his fill, but his fon refufng , the Father fhall fall into fuch a rage , that
being alone he will go and throw himfelf into à Well, where he fhall be drowned.

This unhappy deach will be che caufé of much murmuring, and the Senate or Par-
liament of that place will makeenquiry after it, by which enquiry the {on will be
found guilty, therefore for his punifhment, he (half be condemned to à long and eafie
death, as to live all his days in {ome Monaftery, ©


Geg French,


The true Prophecies


X VI.
French.


Heureux au Regne de France heureux de vie,
Ignorant fang, mort, fureur, rapine,

Par non flatteurs,feras mis en envie,

Roy defrobé, trop'de foy en cuifine.


Englifh.
Happy in the Kingdom of France, bappy in bis Life,


Ignorant of blood, death, fury, of taking by force,
By no flatterers shall be envied,
King robbed,too much faith in Kitchin,


about his Kitchin,


ANNOT. ‘

This is a Prognoftication of a King of France, who though happy in his Reigd
and Life, and being given to no great vices , as bloed, fury , or taking by force,
yet fhall be much envied and robbed by his Subjects; and chiefly by thofe he craftech


XVII.
French.


La Reyne Ergafte voiant fa fille blefme,
Par un regret dans l’eftomach enclos,
Cris lamentables feront lors d’ Angole/me,
Et au germain mariage forclos.


Englifh.


Oueen Ergafte feeing her Daughter pale,
By 2 regret contained in her Brea$t,
Then shall great cries come out of Angolefme,


And the Marriage shall be denyed to the Coufin German.


Xe is unknown what Queen he meaneth by the name of Ergaffe; the reft is cafe.


A NNOT.


Angoleme is a City of Gafcong or Langwedoc,


X VIII.
French.


Le rang Lorrain fera place a Vendofme,
Le haut mis bas, & le bas mis en haut,
Lc fils d'Hamon {era efleu dans Rome,

Et les deux grands feront mis en defaut,


The Honfe of Lorrain fhall give place to Vendofme,


Englifh.


The high pulled down, the low raifed up,
The fon of Hamon fhall be Eleëted into Rome,
And the two great ones fhall not appear.


ANNOT:


Reg
fore,
rue


sue


of Michael Noftradamus.
iS ~ ANNOT,
The two firft Verfes of this Prophecy were fulfil


King of France, in whofe time the Duke of Guile,
fo powerful in Frazce,that they drove the King fr


a rank and authority over the Princes of the Blood > fo that the’ King was forced to


caufe them to be flain, after which Henry IV. who was King of Navarreand Duke
of vendo/me took his place again as firft Prince of the Blood, ”


The two laft Verfes are too ob/cute to be interpreted ; and I believe.were onely
forced by our Author to:make up bis Rime,as he hath done in feveral other places.


X IX.
French,


Jour que fera pour Roine faluée,
Le jour apres le lalut, la Priere, :
: Le compté fait: raifon 8 valbuée,
Par avant humble oncques ne fut fi fiere.
da dev Enghifh,
The day that fbe fhall be faluted Queen,
The next day after the Evening Prayer,
All accompts being fummoned and caf up, -
She that was humble before never was one fo vroud,
ANNOT. É


Icisa woman (be like ofa {mall Fortune) who coming tobe a Queen by her hu


mility, the next day after Evening Prayer fhe hall appear fo proud, as the like was
never feen,


led in the,timeélof Heury the third
and Houfe of Lorrain weregrown
om Paris, and aflumed themfelves


XX
| French.

Tous les éints qu’auront tenu patty,

Pour'rude én lettres mis mort & faccage,

Biens publiez par fixe, grand neanty, |
“Onc Romain peuple né fut tant outrage.

RE aha an Englith.

All the friends that fPall have taken the part

Of the Unilearned, put to death and robved, : oe
Goods fold publickly by proclamation, a great man feixed of the,
Never Roman: people was fo much abufed.


| ANN OT.. As
The fenfe of this is,that a great man that took part wich all chofe t
fhall be put to death, and their goods praifed and fold publickly, upon which goods
another great man fhall feize, and this.is to be done in Rome.


There is fault in the Impreffion of the third French Verfe, for inftead of fixe itmuft
be.fife, and inftead of Neaary it muft be Nancy.


Ggg 2


411


hat Were unlearned:


4 0


French:


OCU ee


T he true Prophecies
X XI.

French.
Par le defpit du Roy fouftenant moindre,
Sera meurdry Iuy prefentant les bagues,
Le Pere & Fils voulant Noblefle poindre,
Fait comme a Perfe jadis firent les Magnes.

Englith.

To fpite the King, who took the part of the weaker,
He fhall be murdered, prefenting to him Fewels,
The Father and the Son going to vex the Nobility,
It fhall be done to them as the Magi did in Perfia.


ANNOT.


This is a King who with his fon taking the peoples part againft the Nobility thall
be killed, in prefenting to him Jewels, and heand his fon fhall be dealt with all as


the Aagi, that is the Grandees of Perfia ufed to do with their Kings
were wont to murder, or depofe,
XXIL
French.
Pour ne vouloir confentir au divorce,
Qui puis apres fera cogneu indigne,
Le Roy des iles fera chaflé par force,
Mis a fon lien qui de Roy n'aura figne.
Englifh.
For not confenting to the divorce,
Which afterwards [ball be acknowledged unworth
The King of the Ifland fball be expelled by force,


?


» whom they


And another Jnbrogated who [ball have no mark of 4 King.


ANNOT,


This is plain concerning England and the late calamities thereof when our gra-
cious King for not confenting to the wicked-fa&ions of the Parliament then , and
that have been acknowledged fo fince, was expelled by force, andan Ufurpator thac


had not the leaft fign of a King fatin his place,


X XIII

French.
Au peuple ingrat faites les remonftrances,
Par lors l’Armée fe faifira d'Antibe,
Dans larc Monech feront les doleances,
Et a Freins l’un l’autre prendra ribe,


Englifh.


The remonfirances being made to the ungrateful people,


At that time the Army fall feixe upon Antibe,


In the River of Monaco they fball make their complaints,


And at Freius both of them {ball take their fbare.


ANNOT.


ty D


alu
mh thy


Of Michael Noftradamue,
| me ANNOT.

… This fignifieth chat at the fame time that the remouftrances hall be made to an
ungrateful people; the Army (hall feize upon the Town of Astibe , which isa Sea


Town between Frasce and Italy , and that there {hall be great complaints at Monaco,


which is another Sea- Town near it, and at che place called Frewws, both parties {hall
either agree, or divide their thares, ;


XXIV.
‘French,
Le captif Prince aux [tals vaincu,
Paflera Gennes par Mer jufquea Marfeille,
Par grand effort des forens lurvaincu,
Sauf coup de feu, barril liqueur d’Abéille:
Eoglifh.
The captive Prince vanquished in Ita] r,
Shall pafs by Sea through Genoa to Marleilles,
By great endeavours of forrain forces overcome
But that a Barrel of Honey fball fave him from the fre.
AN NOT.
A Prince vanquifhed in Z#4/y, and taken Prifoner {hall com
Mar{cilles , where he fhall be once more overcome b


Honey {ball fave him from being burnt, This
can judge,the judicious Readér may make what


XXV.
French,
Par. Nebro ouvrir de Brifanne paflage,
Bien efloignez el tago fara miteftra,
Dans Pelligouxe {era commis outrage.
De la grand Dame affife fur l'Orchefra,
Englifh:
By Nebro to open the pafface of Brifanne,
A great way off, el tago fara mueftra,
In Pelligouxe the wrong [ball be done,
Of the great Lady fitting in the Orcheftra.
| AN NOT.
Here once more I loft my Spectacles, and could not fee throtigh , therefore I had


rather be filent then coin lies, I fhall Only tell you, chat Orcheféra in Latine is the feat
wherein noble Perfonages fit at the behold ing of Stage-plays,


XXVE

French:
Le fuccefleur vengera fon Beau frere,
Occuper-Regne foubs ombre de vengeance,
Occis obftacle fon fang mort vitupere, |
Long temps Bretagne tiendra avec la France.


Tbe true Propbectes ‘

Englifh: ae

The Saccefjeur fball avenge bis Brother in Law,

Shall bold by force the Kingdom, upon pretence of revenge,
That hinderance fhall be killed.bis dead blood afbamed,

A long time fhall Brittany bold with France. |


ANNOT,
This is plain enough of it felf, without any interpretation.
XX VII.
French.
Charle cinquiefme & un grand Hercules,
Viendront le Temple ouvrit de main belliqué,
Ure Colonne, Jules & Afean reculez,
L’E ‘pagne,clet, Aigle neurent onc fi grand pique.
Englith.
Charles the Fifth, and ene great Hercules,
Shall open the Temple with a Warltke hand,
One Colonne, Julius and Alcan put back,
Spain, the Key, Eagle were never at {uch variance.
ANNOT,. , mee y f, .
Charles the V. was the Emperour, and that great Hercules was Henry the IL. King
Of France, whomhe calleth Hercules, becaufe he was King of France, and the Author
nameth often in his Stanza's the Kings of France Hercules or Ogmions , becaufe that
greac Captain of the Antiquity left hisname glorious in the Gawles, whence the an-
cient Hiftorians have given him the name of Hercules Gallicas, Henry the II. alfo
was not only an Hercules by being King of France, but alfo a great Hercules, becaufe
cf his Warlike humour, and for his great feats in Arms,
To open the Temple, fignifieth tomake War, becaufe the Romans in ancient time
were wont to fhut the Temple of anus in time of Peace, and kept it open during the
War. Cafar Augnflus did fhut that Temple oncein his time, which was never done


before but twice, che firft under Numa Pompilius , the fecond after the overcoming
Of Charthage,


XXVIII.
French.


Second & ters qui font prime Mufique,

Sera par Roy en honneur fublimée,

Par grafle &. maigre prefque à deny etique,

Rapport de Venus faux rendra deprimée.
Englith.

Second and third that make prime Mujick

Shall by the King be exalted to honour,

By a fat one, aud a lean one, one in confumpiion,


À falfe report of Venus fball pull ber down.
| ANNOT.


L King
Author
Mle that |
athe an
TI allo |
becaule |


ent time I |


ring the


er done


coming |


of Michael Noftradamus.


| TV ARNO. ou aoe

Notwichftanding the obfcurity of this fenfe , and the bad connexion of the words,
we may perceive that by this Stanza is meant,thata King having two Miftreffes fhall
exale them in great honour, till by a report made by a fat woman and a lean one, chat
isin a confumption, that the faid Ladies prove unfaichful co che King,he will depreis
them as low as they were before, (


XXIX,
ies |). Breach:
De Pol Manfol dans Caverñe caprine,
Caché & pris extrait hors par la barbe,
Captif mené comme befte maftine, _
Par Begourdans amenée pres de Tarbe.
; tan Re Englifh,
From Pol Manfol in a Goats Den,
Hidden and taken, drawn out by the beard
Prifoner, led as a Maftiff, | i
By Begourdans fball be brought near to Tatbe.
eet Pasa. LEA ANNOT. | oe
_ Here and in fome other places of this work is to bé obferved,that the Author doth
fometimes put two Towns inftead of one, that he may diftinguith it from others of
the famename , as herehe calleth Pel Aanfol to diftinguifh the Town of St. Paul,
which is three Leagues from the Rho/we,over againft the Town of Post St. Efprit,trom
that which is in che lower parts of Provence, ss : .
. The fenfe therefore of this Stanza is, that this Bezesrdans (a proper name of a man) be qu
thall pull out another by the beard , that was hidden ina Goats Den, and fhall lead ait
him captive as faras Tarde, which is another Town of Provence, | ll
XXX a
ae French, 14)
Nepveu & fang du St. nouveau venu, Plt
Par le furnom fouftient arcs.& couvert, |
Seront chaflez misa mort chaflez nu, .
En rouge & noir convertiront leur vert,
| | + Bogldh.
| Nephew and blood of the Saint newly come,
By the furname upboldeth Vaults and Covering, | | ll
They fhall be driven, put to death, and driver ont naked. |
They fball change their red and black into green. |
pec | ANNOT.., | | |
Herel confefs to be at a lofs,as may be a wifer man then E, |


bea great Invafion of the Turks into Germany, and that thofe of


their Affes thallcometo their help, and fhall be in fuch numbers,
thall be covered with them.


eee - =


The true Prophecies


X KE
French.


Le Sainct Empire viendra en Gerwtanie,
Tf{maelites trouveront lieux ouverts
Afnes viendront aufly de la Caramanie,
Les fouftenans de Terre tous couverts.


Englifh.
The Holy Empire fball come into Germany,
The Imaelites foall find open places,
Affes fhall alfo come out of Caramania,
Taki 2g their part, and covering the Earth,
ANNOT.


By the 7/xsaelites he meaneth the Turks, who brag to be defcended fr


: om //mael,
Caramania isa Provinceof Turky, fo that the fenfe of this Stanza i


s, that there fhall
Caramania\with
as that che Earth


XXXIL
French.


Le grand Empire chafcun en devoit eftre,


Un fur les autres le viendra obtenir,
Mais peu de temps fera fon Regne & eftre,
Deux ans aux Naves fe pourra fouftenir,
ip Englifh:
The great Empire, every one would be of it,
One above the reft fhall obtain it,
But bis time and his Reign fhall laft little,
He may maintain himfelf two years in bis Shipping.


ANNOT,


This is plain enough without interpretation,


XXXIIL
French.
La faétion cruelle a Robe longue,
Viendra cacher foubs les pointus Poignards,
Saifir Florence, le Duc & le Diphlongue,
Sa difcouverte par Immeurs & F lagnards,
Englifh.
The cruel faction: of long Robe,
Shall come and hide under the fbarp Daggers,
Seixe upon Florence, the Duke and the Diphlongue,
The difcovery of it fball be by Countrey fellows.


ANNOT.


Ima
teh |
Hit
Bath


of Michael. Noftradamus.


ANNO T.


This is.the Prognoftication of a confpiracy againft the Duke and City of Flo.
rence ; by thofe ofthe long Gown, which fhall be difcovered by Countrey fellows,


that live in places without Walls.
XXXIV,
French.
Gaulois qu’ Empire par Guerre occupera,
Par fon Beau-frereiminéur:féta trahi,
Par Cheval rade Voltigeañt trainera,
Du fait le frere long. temps fera hay.


| Enelifh,
A Frenchman who hall occupy an Empire by War,
Shall! be betrayed by his Brother in Law a Pupil,
He fhall ve drawn by a rude prancing Horfe,
For which fa his brother [hall be long. bated.
ANNOT,
This foretelleth of a Fréachman,who (hall by War obtainan Empire or Kingdom,
and fhall be betrayed byhis ‘Brother ‘in-Law a Pupil, whom afterwards he thall


treacheroufly caufe to mount a fierce prancing Horfe , who fhall throw him down
and drag him, for which che faid King (hall be hated long after;


XX XY.
French.


Puifvé, Roial flagrant d’ardant libide,

Pour fe jouir dé-coufine Germaine,

Habit de femme au Temple d’ Artemide,

Allant murdry par incognen du Marne.

led oes Englifhe »

The Kingly youngeft fon heated with burning luff,
For to enjoy his Cofen German, ;

Shall in womans apparrel: go to, the Temple of Artemis;
Going, fball be murdered by-unknown.du.Marne,


ANNOT.
This is concerning the younger fon ofa King’, who being extreamly in lave with


his Cofen German,fhall difguife himfelf in a womans apparel,and (hall go fo difguifed


tothe Temple of Artemide, (that is of fome Church Dedicated tothe Virgin 444r9)
to meet her,but in going, fhall be murdered by an unknown man named a Marne,


X XXWL.
| French.
Apres le Roy, du Sudiguertes parlant,
L’Ifle Harmotique le tiendra;x melpris,
Quelques ans, bofsirongeant un & pillant,
Par tyrannie a l’Ifle changeant pris.


Hhh


Tbe true Propbecies
_ -Englith.
After thar the King of the South [hall bave talked of Wars,
The Harmotick Ifland fhall defpife him,
Some good years gnawing one and plundering,
And by tyranny fhall change the price of the Ifland,
ANNOT:

The two firft Verfes are concerning Philip the IT, King of Spain, who is called here
the King of the South, whom after his vain and fruftrated Invafion of 88. the Harmo-
tique Ifland (that is England) fhall deride , and he after that fhall have fome good
years, that is of Peace, ftill pillaging and plundering his Subjeéts , and fhall change


the price of Eagland, chat is, make it of a higher value , and more flourifhing then
ever it was before, as it did prove in Queen Elizabeth's time,


XX XVII,

French,
Grande aflemblee pres du Lac du Borget,
Se rallieront pres de Montmelian,
Paflants plus outre penfifs feront projet,
Chambray, Morienne, combat Saint Julian,


Englifh.
A great affembly of people near the Lake of Borget,
Will go and gather themfelves about Montmelian,
Going beyond,they [ball make an enter prize,
Upon Chambery, Moriene,and fhall fight at St: Julian.
ANNOT.

This Lake of Borget is in Savoy, as allo -Mentmelian Chambery, CMoriene, and St:
Fulidh , the meaning of it then is , that a great Army: fhall be gathered about that
Lake, which thall go through Chambery, Moriene, and Mentmclian, and fhall fight at
St, Fulian,

XX XVIII,
French.
Amour alegre non loin pofe le Siege,
Au Saint Barbar feront les Garnifons,
Urfins, Hadrie pour Gaulois feront plaige,
Pour peur rendus de l'Armée, aux Grifons.
Englifh.
: Cheerful love doth lay Siegenot far,
The Garrifons ball be at Saint Barbar,
Urfini, Hadria fhall be fureties for the French,
And many for fear fball go from the Army to the Grifons.


ANNOT.

The firft two Verfesare inexplicableis the two laftfignifie that there fhall be an
Army of Fre, with whom Hadria (that is Venice) and the 4rfini the noblefti Family
in Italy {hall cake part, infomuch, that many of the contrary party fhall run for fear
to the Grifons, which is a Nation dwelling in the Valseline and other Countreis there
about, betweenthe Venetians and the Switzers,


French,


Pets bh


rea ms 625 Oe


tdhee À


Ham.


Ego B


Change |


ti D


and Ste
out that
fights


|
|


of Michael N oftradamus:


XXXIX.
| French.
Premier fils veufve malheureux mariage,
Sans nuls enfans deux Ifles en dilcord,
Avant dixhuit incompetant Aage,
De l'autre pres plus bas fera l'accord:
Englith.
Of the firft for a widow, an unhappy match,
Without any Children two Iflands at variance,
Before eighteen an incompetant Age,
Of the other lower shall be the agreement.


ANNOT.


pique,
Etafon fils le Regne demandé.


Englith. :
The young man born to the Kingdom of Britanny,
Whom his Father dying fb


all have recommended


9
After bis death London fhall give bin à topick ,
And fball ask the Kingdom from his for,
| ANN OT.
This Prophecy is plain, concerning his Majefty King
who having been recommended by his dying Father to h
his death they turned tail, and took the Kingdom from


XLI,
; French.
En la frontiere de Cauffude & Charlus,
Non gueres loing du fond de a valée,
De Ville Franche Mufique a fon de Luths,
Environnez Combouls & grand myrtée.


Charles II. now Reigning,
is Subjects , prefently after
him for a good while.


Hhh 2


The true Prophecies
Englith.


Upon the Frontiere of Cauflade and Charlus,
Not far from the bottom of the Valley,
Of Ville Franche there fball be Mufick of Lutes,


Great dancing and great company of people met together.


ANNOT.


Canffade, Charlus, and Villefranche are little Towns in Provence , not far one from


another; the reftis eafie,


XLII. | un
French. hs
Le Regne humain d’ Angelique geniture, pt


Fera fon Regne,paix, unton tenir,
Captive guerre demy de {a clofture,
Long temps la paix leur fera maintenir.


Englith:


The bumane Reign of an Angelical brood,
Shall canfe his Reign to be in peace and union,
Shall make War, captive [butting it half up,
He fhall caufe them to keep peace a great while.


}) | ANNOT. KO
_ Thisis only a foretelling of fome Gallant Prince , who fhall maintain his Subjects
in great peace and tranquility,
x LALE
French 7
Le trop bon temps ,trop de bonté Roiale, doch
Faits & desfaits prompt, fubit, negligence, A er
Leger crotra faux, defpoufe loiale, Si


Luy misa mort par fa benevolence.


Fnelifh.


r . Ç "
The time 100 good, too much of Royal bounty, Mai
Made and unmade, nimble, quick. negligence, few


Fickle fhall believe falfe.o! his loyal Spoufes


He shall Le put to death for bis good will. À at
A à À N N O is heed
This is concerning another King, who through his too much goodnefs, fimplicity Bil,
and negligence, fhall make and unmake thofe about him,and being fickle, (hall believe Th
alle reports, made concerning his own wife;and at laft by his co much goodnéfs fhall be fap
be put to death. dy à
X LIV; i


Par lors qu'un Roy fera ‘contre és fiens,
Natifde Bhs fubjuguera Ligneres,


French; pe thor)


Mammel, Cordube, & les Dalmatiens, Nor


Des fept puis l'ombre a Roy eftrennes & Lemures.


Enol fh,


Sujet


Of Michael Noftradamus;
Evglith. ae
At thattime that a King fall be againft bis own,


One born at Blois fhall fubdue the Ligures,
Mammel. Cordua and the Dalmatians,


After that the fhadow of the feven fball be to the King 4 news
years gift and Hog goblins. |


: : ANN OT. :

Blois isa City in Frances Ligures are the Genoefes,in Latine called
Mammel I cannot tell what to make of it; Cerdaisa City of Spain, ar
tans is a Nation near the 4driatick Sea, and under th
pretation of the laft Verfe to the ingenious Reader,

X L V.
French.
Lombre du Regne de Navarre non vray,
Fera la vie de fort illegitime,
La veu promis incertain de Cambray,
Roy d’Orleans donra mur legitime


English.
The fhadow of the Reign of Navarre not trite,
Shall make the life of illivitimare chance,
The uncertain allowance frou Cambray,
King of Orleans fhall give alawfill Walt


ANN OT. |

The Reign or Kingdom of Navarre is called vot tine , becaufe the King of spats
doth poflefsir, and not the King Of France,who is the lawful King thereof, as alfo in.
regard of che Kings of France , and before of Fane of Altret , and Antony of
Bourbon,

This Kingdom being not rue in regard of the {aid ones, the title and quality is cal-
led here fbadow, The Author faich that che quality of the King of Navarre [hall make
the life of illigitimate charce, because after the death of Francis the Il Catherine of
Medicis being not oppoled in the Regence by Antony of Bourton King of Navarre,
the was willing to gratifie him in what the could.

And becaufe his Brother Lewis Prince of Cora: had been condemined to death and
not executed , it wasa fair occafion for her to fhew the King of Navarre how much
the did ‘deter to him. Therefore twelve days after the death of King Francis he was
freed out of Prifon, and was admitted to juftifie him(elf under the King of Navarrz'$
Bail,

Thus the {hadow of the Kingdom of Navarre not true, did caufe the life of a Prince to
be faved , but chat life was illegitimate, and shat Kingdom not t
by accident, becaufe of the death of King Francis,

Leaving offthe third Verfe to be explained after che fourth ; King (faith the Au-
thor) /bal give Orleans for legitimate, becaufe Cha: les the IX. who during the lite of.
Francis the 11, did bear the title of Duke af Orleans, did fucceed his Brother; thus the
Verfe faith thar Orleans fhall give a King-for legitimate, : | gs Pe
‘Now for the third Verle, youmult fuppole.chac by.the, Treaty at Aradrid 1 5 26.
and after this by that of Cawbyay,the King trancis cheT.did part with the Sovereign-
ty of Flanders, and ofall Ehe-Lew- Cowntreis in favour of Charles the V. Emperour,


pr
VG


igures; as for
id the Dalma-
€ Venetians ; I leave the inter-


rae by chance, that is,


422 The true Propbectes


it is of that wncertais allowance of Cambray, of which the Author talketh here ; and
faith,that in that time viz, of the death of Francis the II. that allowance fall be uncer-
tain, becaufe Francis the I. having no power of himfelf to renounce the rights and
dependance of the Crown of Francé, the Parliament chat was aflembled then, would
have made void that af.wance without breaking the Peace, declaring that the Kings
of France ought to preferve the right they had upon the Low-Countreis , and to re-
quire them again upon any occafion, and upon that France did notrefafe the Ele@ion
which the Low-Conrtreis made of the Duke of A/eacon for their Sovereign Prince
and Duke of Brabant.
XLVI.
French.

Vif fore mort de l'or vilain indigne,

Sera de Saxe non nouveau Electeur,

De Brunfvick mandra d'amour figne,

Faux le rendant au peuple leducteur.

Englifh,

The living receives bis death from Gold, infamous flut!

Shall be of Saxony not the new Llefor,

From Brunfwick fhal, come a fign of love,

F al(ly perfuading the people that he is a feductor.

ANNOT.

This Prophecy is concerning an old Elector of Saxony,who being in health before,
fhall die fuddenly , being poifoned in a golden Cup by a woman, whom he calleth
here infamous flat.

And that from Brun/wick (a Countrey acjacent to Saxony) thall come a Meffenger,
upon pretence of Love ; who fhall perfuade the people chat the faid Ele@or was a
Seducer.

XLVII.

French.
De Bourze Ville a la Dame Guyrlande,
f’on mettra {us par la trahifon faite,
Le grand Prelat de Leon par Formande,
Faux Pellerins & Rauifleurs deffaire,


Englifh.
From Bourze City belonging to the Lady Garlant,
They fhall impofe by a fet treafon,
Thegreat Prelate of Leon by Formande,
Falfe Pilgrims and Ravifbers deftroyed.


ANNOT,


I believe that there isa fault herein the impreffion, and chatinftead of Boarze it
muft be Bourges, which isa famous City in France, and Capitol of the Province of
Berry , for I do not know any Townin Europe called Boarze, What he meaneth by
the Lady Garlant isunknown, I believe alfo that inftead of Leon it fhould be Lyon,
which is another famous City, and the firft Archbithoprick of the faid Kingdom,
Formande is a barbarous word, and I believe put in only to make up the Rime, as he

' ; hath


before,
clleth


eager,
is a


of Michael Noftzadamus. 423
hath done in feveral othet places, as much then as ean be gathered out of the fenfe ig
this, chat from that City Bowrges, which ufdally is aj Dowry for a Queen of
France, whichis called here Gartant, fhall a treafon be hatched againft the Arch-
bifhop of Lion, which I fuppofe came to pafs in the time of Henrythe III. when Peter
of Pisac Archbifhop of the faid Lion , being accufed by the Deputies of Bourges for
fiding with the League, ‘efcaped narrowly to be killed, when the Duke of Gué/e and
the Cardinal hisbrother were; Queen Catherine of Medicis the Kings Mother ha:
ving then thefaid Province and Town of Borges for her jointure:
The laft Verfe hath no relation to the three foremoft ; and hath its interpretation
by it felf, which is plain enough,
XLVIIL
| _ French,
Da plus profond de I’E/pagne ancienne,
Sortants du bout & des fins de F Europe,
Trouble paflant aupres da Pont de Laigne;
Seta deffaits par bande fa grand troppe.
Englifh.
Front the uturoft part of old Spain,
Going out of the extremities of Europe,
He that troubled the travellers by the Bridge of Laigne,
Shall bave bis great Troop defeated by. another.
EME PE Cee 3
Every Traveller knoweth that Ca/tille (which is taken here for Spain) is divided
into two parts viz, Caffilia la Vecchia, and Caffilia la Nuova, our Authorthen faith
that out of Caffilia la Vecchia, which isfituated a¢ the further end-of Europe on that
fide, fhall come a band of men, who fhall deftroy the Thieves that robbed and vexed
the Travellers by the Bridge of Za/gae, which it feemeth was an infamous place fot
tobbing,
XLIX:
French.
Jardin du Monde aupres de Cité neufve,
Dans le chemin des Montagnes cavées,
Sera ‘faili & plongé dans la Cuve,
Beuvant par force eaux Soulphre envenimées.
 Enghifh.
Garden of the World, near the new City,
fa the way of the dig ged Mountains, ‘ |
Shall be feiwed on, and thrown into the Tub,
Being forced to drink Sulphurous poifoned waters.
AN NOT. .,.


This word Garden of the World, dothfignifie a particular perfon , feeing that this
Garden of the World was feized on and poifoned ima Tub of Sulphurous water , im
which he was thtown, es . | |
_ The Hiftory may be this, that Noftradarsus pafling for a Prophet and a great Aftro-
logerin his time, abundance of people came to him to know their Fortunes 2 ee
chie dy


404 ._ enbetihe ‘Prophecies


chieAy thie Fathersto know, chasoftheit,Ghildren, asdid Mr, Lefnier, and Mr. Cote
top> bather of that renowned Jefuic of the fame name, very like thenctharMr, ay
Tardin-having a: fon did, ask, Noftradamus what fhould become of him, and becaufe
bis fonsas named Gofweus, whichin,Greek fignifieth the, World, heanfwered him
with shef@ foursVerles | |

Garden of the World, for Ge[mus of the Garden; In his.travels fhall be taken hard by
thé New City, in a way, that hath been,digged, between.che Mountains, and there
fhall be throwninto.a Tub of.poifoned Sulphurous water-to caufe him todie, being
foicedto drinke that;water which, thofe rogues (had prepared for him, |

Thofe that have learned the truth of this Hiftory, may obfaveit here: This
ought to have come to pafs in the laft Age,feeing that the party menfioned was then
born when this Stanza was written, and this unhappy man being dead of a violent
death, there is great likelyhood, that he was not above forty years old.

‘F here is another difficulty, to know whichis that new City, there being many of
that name in Earope,neverthelefsthe more probable is,thatthere being many Knights
of Maltha bosn in Provence (the native Countrey of our Author) it may. be believed
that by the new City he meaneth the new.City of Ataltha called la yalete ,, hard by
which there is paths and ways digged in the Mountains , which Mountains ate as if ic
were a Fenceand a Barricado againft che Sea, or elfethis Cof/mus might have been
taken by Pyrats of Adgéers, and there in the new City ofthe Ganlerte be put to death
in the manner aforefaid. or |


L.
French.

La Meufe au jour Ferre de Luxembourg,
Defcouvrira Saturne. & trois En Lurne,
Montaigne & plane, Ville, Ciré.& Bourg,
Lorrain Delugé,-trahtfon par grand hurne.

Enplifh.
The Maes by day in the Land of Luxembourg.
Shall difcover Saturn, asd three in the Lurne,
Mountain and plain Town,City,and Countrey Town,
A Lorrain flood, treafon by a great hurne.


ANNOT.


The Afaes isa River that runneth through apartof Lorrainand Luxembourg ; as
for the words Larne and harae I do not underftand them , neither do J thiak they are
to be found in all the Fre#ch Language , both obfolete and modern; all what I can
gather out of this, is,thata great overflowing of the River «aes , fhall be both in
Luxembourg and Lorrais , infomuchthatthree Leaden Mines (which is meant here
by Saturn ) {hall be difcovered, and after chat, a great Treafon fhall happen in the
{aid Lorraiz,

LI.
French.
Des lieux plus bas du Pais de Lorraine,
Seront des bafles: 4iémagnes anis,
Par ceux du Siépe Preards, No¥mans, du Maine,
Et aux Cantons, fe féront reunis.


Enelith,


"|


of Michael Noftradamus. — 428


ANNOT.


4 | Thefenfe of thisis, that the lower Lorrain and Germany being united together,
ue ‘fall have War with the other three Nations , of Picards, Normans, and Manceaux,
Km | which having Befieged a Town, fhall conftrain the Lorrainers and Low-germans, to
Mtn unite themfelves with the Cantons of Switacrland,
mn 1 LIL
i | French.
} LUN |
0 | . .
Au lieu ou Laye & Sceldefe marient,
Th © j Le
+ Th Seront les Nopces de long’ temps mamée,
NAS 4 > Led je )
thi Au lieu d’ Anvers vu la grappe charient,
Vient | cu E rte j :
Jeune vieilleffe conforte intammée.
may Englrth.
Knlohes Ml :
diet M Tn the placemwhere Lave and Scelde ate united
WV Ed | f à >
hedby D Shall the Nuptials besthat were long a doing.
tail M Inthe place of Antwerp where they draw the grape,
Ve been: fiat TITRES inh ep ako: j ae y :
niet À The young unfpotted will comfort the old Age,
i ANNOT.
| There is fault in the Impreffion, for inftead of Layeit muft be Lis; which is a Ri-
| ver thac runneththrough Flanders, and difchargeth it felf into the Scelde 5 Which is
| the River chat pafleth at Antwerp, the fenfe therefore of this Prophecy is, that in the
| place where the River of Zés joyneth with the Scelde, there fhall the Nuptials be
| confummated that were long a doing, and the place of e4ntwerp, where they unload
| the Wines, there fhall a young un{potted Lady Marry,and comfort an old man,
| LT, Le
French.
| Les trois Pellices de loing s’entrebattrone,
La plus grand moindre demeurera a l’ecoute,
Le grand Sel n'en fera plus patron,
Le nommera féu, pelte, blanche, route,
Englith,
ng; 8 M The three Concubines [ball fight one with another a far off,
ph The greateft lefs ball remain watching,
ath Cal ies vice th AA By
Win A The great Selin fhall be no more their Patron,
] | i i r 4 .
athe A And foall call.itfire, pelte, white, route,
\nte D ANNOT,


This Prophecy is concerning the Twrkf Empire , where three of the great Turks
Concubines,which in Latine are called Pellices, thall make War one againft another,
the great 7wrk himfelf favouring neither party,


French,


Fe ht
EE ose VON Tue


VS TAR esata.
oa


T he true Prophecies


LIV.
French.
Née ence Monde par Concubine furtive,
A deux hault mife par les triftes nouvelles,
Entre Ennemis fera prinfe Captive,
Et amenée a Malines & Bruxelles.
Englifh.
Born in this world frou a fiollen Concubine,
Sct up at two heights by the fad news, 3
Shall be taken Prifoner among the Enemies,
And brought to Malines and Bruxelles.
AN NOT,

This is concerning fome Lady of quality, born ofa Concubine, who fhall be fer
up by reafon of fome fad news that fhall be brought, and afterwards fhall be taken
Prifoner, and carryed to Malines and Bruxelles, two Cities of the Low-Coun-
treys,

LV

French.
Les matheureufes Nopces celebreront
En grande joye mais la fin malheureule,
Mary & Mere, Nore defdaigneront,
Le Phibe mort, & Nore plus piteule.

Englih.
The unhappy NupMals fhall be celebrated,
With great Joy, but the end {ball be unbappy,
Husband and Mother fhall [corn Nore
The Phybe dead, and Nore more pitifull.

ANNOT.

If by Phybe we underftand the Admiral of Cha/fillon, and by Nore, Queen Mar-
garet of Valets, the reft will be eafie, Forin the year 1572. a Match was made be-
tween Heary the IV. then King of Navarre, chief of the Proteftant party, and Mar-


garet of Valois, Sifter to Charles the IX. to this Wedding were the chief of the Pro-
reftant party invited, who were there Maffacred, and among the reft Ga/pard of


Coligny, Lord of Chastillon, and Admiral of France, whom he calleth here Phyde
And when he faith, that Husband and Mother fhall [corn Nore, he fheweth the lli¢ht
Opinion and regard that the Queen Mother had for her Daughter, and Heury the
1V. for his Wife, whom he after repudiated. f


“LVL.
| French,
Prelat Roial foy baiflant trop tiré,
Grand Flux de Sang fortira par fa bouche,
Le Regne Anglicque par Regne relpire,
Long temps mort vif en Turrs comme fouche.


Eten
|
Cour |


|


it,
eflioht


et
rary Che


Enel | |


of Michael Noftradamus:
| nts | Englifh,
Royal Prelate bowing hinifelf téo much,
A great flood of Blood fhall come out of bis month;
The Englith Reign by Reign iefpited, |
A great while dead, alive in Tunis like à Lag.
| Oh AN NOTES 5 3 |
A Prelate, is aman ofeminent dignity inthe Church, the Royal Prelate mutt be
a Churchman of the Royal Blood, who bowing himfelf too much, fhall fall into an
Hæmorhagie or Flux ot Blood at his Mouth, The third Verfe fignifiech, thatthe
Kingdom of England fhall be relieved from fome diftrefs by another Kingdom or
Prince that had been a Slavea great while at Tunis, and lyen there, dead alive like à
Log of Wo0d,
LVIT
French.
Le fublevéne cognoiftra fon Sceptre,
Les enfans jeunes des plus grands honnira,
Oncques ne fut un plus ord cruel eftre,
Pour leur Efpoufes a mort noir bannera:
. Englifh.
The exalted fball not know his Scepter |
He fhall put to fbame the young Children of rhe gredteft;
Newer was one more dirty and cruel,
He fhall banifb to Black death their Sponfes.
ANN OT.
This is concerning a great Tyrant, who being exalted to the dignity ofa King,
fhall not know, how to governs but fhall flight and put to fhame the Children of


the greateft Nobility, and fhall banith their Wives out of the Lands: this hath a
relation to the late Tyrant Cromwell,


LVIIL

French.
Au temps du dueil que le Seliz Monarque,
Guerroiera le jeune Æimathien,
Gaule branfler, pericliter la barque,
Tenter Phocens au ponant entretien.

Englith.
In the time of mourning, when the Monarch Selin,
Shall make War againft the young Æmathien,
France foall quake, the Ship [ball be in danger, ,
Phocens foall be attempted the bufinefs ball bein the Weft.


li?3 ANNOT:


28. The true Prophecies


ANNOT, ;

You muft obferve here, that by <Æwathien the Author meaneth the King of
Francv, as he doth in many other places; and by Selin, he meaneth the great Tark,
becaufe fuch was thename of him that lived in his time, this being prefuppofed the
meaning of this is, chat the great Tark fhall fight againft the King of France, and fhali
attempt Phocens, which is Marfeilles, as being a Colony of the old Phocexfes in
Gracia, which fhall cau'e all France to quake, and the Ship tobe in danger, which
is Paris, who beareth a Ship for its Arms.

EUX.
French.
Dedans Lion vingt & cinq d'une haleine,
Cinq Citoyens Germains, BrefJans, Latines,
Par deffous Noble condurront longue traine,
Et delcouvers par abboy de Maftins.
Engtifh.
In Lyons five and twenty of a bresdib
Five Citivens Germans, Breflans, Latines,
Under Nohlemén fhall condn& a long Train,
And fhall be difcovered by the barking of “Maftiffs.
j J Læ
AN NOT.
The Marfhal of St. eAndr’, Governour of Lyon being abfent, the Proteftants
ndertook the taking of it, at che follicitation of fome principal Lords at Court,
among whom were named the Prince of Coxdé, and the Vidame of Chartres, Francis
of Vendofme, Knight of the Order. The Abbotof Sevigny, who did fupply the
place of the Governour, and was named Antony of Albon, fince that Archbifhop of
Arles, having difcovered this Confpiracy, went-to furprife the undertakers, butas
he was going upon the night of thes of September, he met with fome ofthe con-
federatcs upon the Bridge of Saoze, which made him retreat with fome lo{s,

The next day having gathered moreForces,he took three of them that were ftran-
gers and young, thereft efcaping, thofe three were hanged the next Saturday, which,
was the 7 of that Month,

The Marfhal being come to Town, there was Execution made upon fome of the
inhabitants,to the number of 4 chat were hanged,

After that there were informations made concerning the Authors and Abettors of
the faid confpiracy, and many other Citizens and ftrangers were put to Prifon, and
befides them the Vidame of Chartres, who wascarryed to Paris, and put into the
Baffille, and after chatin the Tewrnelles, where he died before his procefs was ended,
the 23 December 1560.

It is what our Author faith in chis stanzas in che firft Verfe he faith, chat there
were five and twenty of a breadth, of whofe fiveand twenty there was five Citizens of
> ] s À : >
the Town, and the reft were Germans, Breflans and Italians, of thefe Citizens 4 were

hanged, and three of the ftrangers,

Thofe 25 undertakers, of which the Author faith, that snder Noblemen they fall
conanct a long Train; thatis, that under the fupport and favour of many Noblemen,
they would undertake a thing chat fhould not end fo foon as it proved afterwardssfor


although this enterprife did fail, yet was the beginning of hortid combuftions that
followed afterwards.


This enterprife it feemeth was difcovered by barking of Maftiffs.


The Apology forthe City of Lyon treateth at lare of this, and nameth all thofe
con{pirators,who for the moft part were of Germany and Geneva,


->


French.


tone
Tuk,
Won


(TE
(Ty
Med the M
ul D
alain
Which


,


teltants
Court,
Front


hop of
, utes
the con:


re fhrans


Pil
ie Of the


torso


wsyf0t


ply the |


y itch)


of Michael N oftradamus.


LX,
| | French.
Je pleure Nice, Monaco, Pife, Genes,
Savone, Sienne, Capoue, Modene, Malthe,
Le deflus fang & glaive par eftrenes,
Feu,trembler Térre,eau malheureufe olte.


Englith.
I bewail Nice, Monaco, Pifa, Genoa,
Savona, Sienna, Capoua, Modena, Maltha,
7} Winer ,
Upon them blood and fword for à new years-gift,


Fire, Earth-quake, water, unhappy nolte.
ANNOT}


All thefe Cities are fituated by the cHediterramean Sea , and moft of them upon
that part of ic, which is called che River of Genoa, andare threatned here by all the
plagues above mentioned, ; as for the word sie itis a barbarous one, forced here to
make up the Rime in French,


LXIi |
French.


Betta, Vienne, Comorre, Sacarbance,
Voudront Jivrer aux Barbares Pannone,
Par picque et feu, enorme violence,
Les conjurez d'efcouverts par Matrone.
Englifh.

Betta, Vienna, Comorre, Sacarbance,
Shall endeavour to deliver Pannone to the Barbarians,
By Pike. and fire, extraordinary viol-nce !
The (e2{piraiors difcovered by a Mutron.

ANNOT.


Ir feemeth that there will be à confpiracy of fome men out of all the above men-
tioned Cities, to furrender Hungary (which in Latine is called Panwonia) to thé great
Turk, but that confpiracy fhall be difcovered: bya Matron, that is, à grave ancient
Woman,


LXII,
French.
Pres de Sorbin pour aflaillit Hongrie,
L’Heraut de Bude le viendra advertir,
Chef Bixantin, Sallon de Sclavonie,
A Loy d’ Araves les viendra convertir,


: Englith.
Near Sorbin, to invade Hungary, .


The Herald of Buda fhall cowre to g1De thei notice of it,


Le


Chief Bizantin, Sallon of Sclavonia,


Shall come to tira thenrto the Ar3bian Religion.


AN NOT,


CE BRAUN HE eo ae


ca LT, Si GR


The true Prophecies
ANNOT.


This feemeth to have ä relation to the precedent , and that near that place he cal-
feth Sorbin, preparations {hall be made to Invade Hungary , but they fhall have


notice of it by fome body of Bada. a
He chat is called here Chief Bizantin, is the great Tork or his grand Vizir, who


hath his abode in Conffantineple, anciently called Bizantinm,


Sav 5 ON D
French.


Cydron, Ragufa, la Cité au Sainct Hiero#,

Reverdira le medicant fecours,

Mort fils de Roy part mort de deux Heron,

L’ Arabe,Hongrie, feront un meime cours,
Engh{b,

CydronyRagufesthe City of Saint Hiéton,

Shall niake green again the Phÿfical help,

The Kings Son dead, by the death of two Herons,

Arabia and Hungary foall go the faute way.
ANNOT.


The meaning of this is, that when thofe three Cities named in the firft Verfe
fhall have need of fuccours, and that a Kings Son fhall die in flying two Herons, then
thall edrabia and Hangary be under the famie Mafter,


LXIV.

French.
Pleure Milan, pleure Lucques, Florence,
Que ton grand Duc fur le Char montera,
Changer le Siege pres de Venife s'advance,
Lors que Colonne a Rome changera.

Englifh,
Weep Milan, weep. Lucques, and Florence,
When.the great. Duke fhall go upon the Chariot,
To change the Siegé near Venice he goeth about,
When Colonne fhall change at Rome.


ANNOT.


This Prophecy feemeth to portend the change of the See of ‘Rosse in fome place
near to Venice, and this is to happen when the great Duke of T#/cany fhall afcend up-
ona Triumphant Chariot, and that the Houfe of Colonne (which is the more power-
full in Rome) fhall take his pare, |


LX V.
French.
O vafte Rome ta ruine s'aproche,
Non de tes Murs, de ton fang,& fubftance,
L’afpre par lettres fera fi horrible coche,
Fer pointu mis a tous jufques au manche.


Englith.


of Michael Noftradamus,
| Englifh.
O great Rome thyruine drawcth near,
Not of thy Walls,.of thy blood and fubftance,
The flarp by Letters fhall make fo horrid a notch,
Sharp Iron thruff in all to the haft.
| ANNOT.
This is a confirmation of the foregoing Prophecy, by which it is (aid that the de-


ftruGtion of Rome [hall not be in her Walls, blood or [abffance ; but onely by Letters or
Do&trine chat fhall put quite down the Roman Religion.


EX Vk
“French.
Le Chef de Londres par Regne PAserich,
L'Ifle d'Efcoffe tempiera par gelée,
Roy, Reb. auront un fi faux Antechrift,
Que les mettra tretous dans la meflée.


Englifh.
The Chief of London by Reign of America,
The Ifland of Scotland [ball catch thee by a froSt,
King and Red, fhall have fo falfe an Antichrift,
As will put them altogether by the ears.
ANNOT.

I conceive this Prophecy can be appropriated to no body better then O13. Crops-
wel, whois called here the Chief of London by Reizn of America , that is,by Reign of
confufion, whofe projects and treafons were all brought to nought, by the viétorious
Mars of the ever renowned General cHonck, who came with his Army from ‘Scotland


to Lexdon in the VVinter time, he is called alfoa fakfe Añtichrift, becaufe he was an
enemy to King and Reb, that is Re/publica or Common- wealth,


L X VTT.
French.
Le tremblement fi fort au mois de May,
Saturne, Caper: Tapiter, Mercure au Bœuf,
Venus aully, Cancer, Mars en Nonnay,
Tombera grefle lors grefle qu’un œuf.


Englith, |
The Earth-quake fball be fo great in the month of May,
Saturn, Caper, Jupiter, Mercury i the Bull,
Venus affo, Cancer, Mars iz Nonnay,
Then fhall fall Hail bigger then an Egee,
ANN OT.


The meaning is, that whenall thefe Cœleftial bodies thall be fo difpofed, that
there will be a fearful Earth-quake and Hail,


CAD Mn Ne


The true Prophecies


LXVIIL

French,
L'Armée de Mer devant Cité tiendra,
Puis partira fans faire longue allée,
Citoyens grande proye en Terre prendra,
Retourner clafle reprendre grand emblée.

Englifh.

The Fleet fball ftand before the City,
Then fhall go away for a little while,
And then fall take a great troop of Citizens ow Land,
Fleet (ball come back and recover à great deal,


ANNOT,


It feemeth here he fpeaketh of two Fleets, one of Wwhichsthall ftanda little while


belorea Town, and carrya great many Citizens away, but that the other Fleet (hall
come in the mean time, and redeem them,


USYX.
French.


Le fait luyfant de neuf vieux eflevé

Seront {i grands par Midy Aguilon,

De fa (œur propre grandes alles levé,

Fuyant meurdry au buiffon: d’A4mbellon.
Englifh,

The bright a€tions of new old exalted,

Shall’ be fo great through the. South and North,

By bis own Sifter great forces fhall be raifed,

Running away-he fhall be nzurdered near the bulb of Ambellon.
ANNOT.


The queftion here is, whether this sewf vieux in French or new oldin Englifh be the
proper name of a man, or. be a Metaphor


mily, when the Reader hath fatisfied himfelf


> to exprefs a young man ofan ancient Fa-
upon that, the reft iseafie enough,
LXX.


French.
L’ceil par objet fera telle excroiffance,
Tant & ardente que tombera la Neige,
Champ arroufé viendra en decroiflance
Que le Primat {uccombera à Khege, 5


; Englifh.
The eye by the objeët fhall make fuch an excre ffency,


Becanfe fo much, and fo burning fhall fall the ps
The Field watered [ball come to decay ;


Infontuch that the Primat fhall fall dibs at Rhege.


ANN OT.


Nor


Fnolith,

The fo much Silver of Diana aad Mercury
The Statues ball be found ia the Lake
The Potter feeking for new clay,

He and bis ball be filled with Gold.


?


AN'N OT.


"This Prophecy..is concerning a Potter, who feeking: and digging for new Clay
fhall findina drained Lake the Statues of Diana and Mercury al of filver,befides other
great riches 3 feeing this Prophecy is not come co pals yer (chat I. know) it will
not be amifs,, for che divertifement of the Reader, to relate herea notable and au-
thentical Hiftory ofa Potter that hach much reflemblance with this , and will bea
convincing Argument, that Mines grow in the Earthas Turfs do , and as iresl
fayeth of che golden branch : ¢

Uno avulfo non deficit alter.

Itis written by Doctor de Rochas, Phyfitian tothe prefent Chancellor of France,
who was upon the place, and aneye iwitnefs of the circumftances of it 3, having alfo
an intereft in it, in the behalf of his Father | who was overfeer of the Mines in thar
Province, therefore I fhalf relate it in his own words, as they,are in his Book of Adine-
ral Waters. ,

In Provence near Theulon,is a Mountain called Carquairen¢, at the foot of which
and near the brim of the Sea, there dwelled a Potter with all histools about
him ; It chanced thatona day as he went rofecch Wood in that Mountain, “iy
to bake hiswares, he heard a voice ofa little Kid ; which fome Shepherd
had left behind chem unawares, and was fallen in a little hole thac-anGyered to
natural, great and deep Caves; this man [eeing no Shepherds about him x though
prefently ic was a ftrayed Kid, cherefore.he followed the cry with his earfo direct-
ly, that he came by the orifice of that hole, where he heard and faw the Kid, which
he refolved to carry away,with his Wood , therefore he took the Coïdsthar were
at his Mules Saddle, and that he ufed to Kind bi: Load with > 2nd with the help of
chem,and of fome big pieces of VVood he gotdown, where:, he did obferve round
about him many other Caves, contiguous and fe parated from this, which his curiofi-
ty caufed hit to view, and found in the chiefwfthefe Caves à gieat quantity. of
ftones heaped upon one another, & of a fubftance and colour.ot Brafs,and among the
reft there was one that came forth out of the Rock, about the bignefs , thape;-and
length of a mans.arm, whenic.is ftrerched outs he did apparently judge thasthe
weight and brittlene(s of chat matter had caufed thofe {iones.to fall down sandethat
the fame char he faw come out of the Rock in chis manner, was.already loote and like


‘to falls this man finding himf{elf among (uch.an abundance of rich Lingots, which


fortune did offer him,did not know the value ofthem,but did like thé Cock of A fop
which left the; precious Pearl to take the Cornof V Vihear; chuschis fafoe took
very little of chis Golden Fleece, and only a {mall piece, which he broke froma big-
ger, with one of his Tools, and imployed all his induftry co.carry away his Kid, which
at laft wich much ado he got out, and carried upon his Mule, believing certainly that
this provifion would be more profitablero him and his Family then the:yellow ftone
which he had in his pocket, weighing about five pounds, and which he intended to
give toa Tinkerof Thoulon, his Goflip and good fiiend ,. in hope that.forthe fame
he might be prefented witha bottle of V. Vine, to keep company to. his-Kid : and
accordingly the next morning by break of day-he.went.to Thoules, and ftayed in the
Shop of his friend , who did Jook with admiration upon {o,refplendens. Brals\;..a

"Aaa Gold-{mith


362 The true Prophecies


Gold-fmith who lodgedover the way , and obferved the fplendor of that Divine
mettal, drewnear, and prefently would have bargained foric , witha great deal of
tran(portation and alteration. The Potter asked him only twenty pence, which the
Gold- {mich would have given him prefently, but the Tinker making fign to him to
retra& his words, he put his lingot in his pocket again, with proteftation that he
would not part withic, unlefs he had fomething that were worth the pains of going
where he had ic; inconclufion,after many conteftations and difputes,the Potter wha
did fufpe& chat it might be gold, would noc fel nor deliver it under the fum of thirty
Crowns , which the Gold-fmith paid him prefently , and which he carried away
with more joy, then if he had been poffeffor of greater riches; the Gold-fmith on
che other fide , who thought that his profit would be above a hundred pounds fter-
lings, didrefine this ftone, that was about five pound weight , out of which he drew
four pound weight, of very good and. pure gold , che reft was a kind of drofs , that
male irthus brittle ; one ought not co chink chat the Mine isall of che {ame perfe-
&ion, bucir purifieth it felf, according as nature thruftethit out of the Rock , as we
fee chauRubies and Emeralds are purer,then the Rock from whence they come. This
Gold-fmith having found fuch fortune , and being refolved to make the beft ufe of
ir, weneto the Lord Scaravaque, then Governour of the Town, and imparted unto
Him this new difcovery , that he might have his affiftance and favour in it, and that
under his power and authority he might follow and wait upon this precious bufinefs
without being diftarbed by any body,to which the Governour did fo much the eafier
confent,that this Tradefman did obliuge himfelf to give him the beft part of the pro-
fic that fhould arife from thence, and that fhould exceed any Travels into the Indies
or Peru.
In the mean time the Potter was not afleep , the Gold-fmiths money had ftirred
is appecite,and the charm of this witchcratt chat worketh generally uponall foirits,
did put himupon-new hopes. He went into the Mountain with his wife and with the
help of arope Ladder, which he had provided, and fome Iron tools | wherewith he
had loaded his Mule, he went down into the Caves , and with much endeavour did
at laft break chat piece, that came ont of the Rock like a mans arm , becaufe all the
other that were cumbled upon the ground , were fo big and heavy chat he could nor
remove them, when he had broken it down, though it were about fourfcore and two
pounds weight, neverthelefs with the help of his wife and of his Ropesand Ladder
he got out again, and ftopt the hole with a large ftone, and fome Earth, upon which
he planted fome fmall Buthes fo inSenioufly, that this hole could never be found out
again,
© The Lord Scaravaque who was moft imptaient, to conquer like another Fafon this
Golden Fleece , and who was fet on by the perfuafions of the Gold-fmith, fent for
the Potter, under pretence to employ him in the making and furnifhing of fome Tiles
and other {mall commoditeis chat depended on hisart. The Potter obeyed pre-
fently, drawn by the hopes to fell his wares well, and miftrufting nothing at all what
they wouldask him, As foon as he came, the Governour asked him and perfwaded
him with thebeft and moft flattering words he could,to tell where he had the yellow
ftone that he fold tothe Gold: fmith; The Potter who more and more began to
know the value of this rare Treafure, invented prefently a lie, to free himfelf of the
importunity of chem that would havedeceived him ; therefore withan ingenuity,as
fimple as artificial he anfwered , he had found it upon the brim of the Sea, where
may be fome Ship had been caft away, or the Waves had caft ituponhe fhore,
he Governour anfwered that this could not be, and therefore threataed him of
violence , and to fend for all thac he had in his Houfe , which put the fellow into a
great perplexity, becaufe of che other ftone that fhould be found there, therefore he
chofe rather to give it chem out of his good will, then co put himfelf in danger of
loofing


nan Wy
ann
See
know fl

| "|
ortited
up clos
1 bn
Bed, du
nous M
Mornin


culties
which to
Under Ww]
uaderne
many ti
lurnals a
id day
Poleto
inowle
tarde
| teCen
Bthsd


i. an
ils, a)


uu


j “ment


Mines 9
Wats of


une
aller
€ pio-
Indies


fred
rt,
ith the
mith he


—__Sw“e  —


outdid |


all the


wld not |


nd tno
Ladder
sich
mnd out


fon this


fent for |


ge Tiles
dpe


dot |


waded
velo
pega to
if of the
quif,
ere
)
whore,
| bigot
into d
ere ht


poet
loth D)


*


of Michael Noftridamus. 3 63


loofing all, and perchance of being abufed toboor, without any more ado, he inge-
nuoufly confeffed he had another piece of the fame ftuffas the former in his Houfe,
which he had likewife found in the fame place, which he was read y to put into their
hands, provided he might have his fhare of it , and be fuffered co get his livelihood
peaceably. The Lord Scaravaque did promife him all what he defired . and Pave
him fome men to keep him company, with command to bring him back again Rand
to take {pecial care he fhould not makeane(cape, At aft this poor man Ginnie back
again with that piece, which did more inflame the paffion thar the Governour had to
know the place whence came that richtreafure ; but neither for prayers, promifes
or.threats he would never reveal it, which did oblige che Governour ro fhut a Ae
up clofe in a Chamber, where neverthelefs they gave him Viétuals and made ready a
Bed,but he refufed both,and by an extraordinary fadnefs,gave thew chat fome noto-
rious mifchance was waiting on him, which proved true, for he was found dead in the
Morning ; whichdid put the Lord Scaravaque in a griet unexpreffible,co fes himfelf
deprived by chis accident , of che fruit chat his hopes had made him conceive, He
had recourfe co the Potters wife for chis difcovery , but fhe could never atcainto ic
whatfoever exa@ fearches fhe could make: yea, and after fhe was married again with
a young man, who had fpent in thac fearch moft of his time,, The Lord Scaravague
and other perfons of quality have employed all their skills and endeavours, but all
their induftry and charges have been without effeét, as wellas of many others + who
attempted the fame; about that time my Father who was overfeer of the Mines in
Provence, having received the news of a bufinefs of {uch confequence, that did con-
cern his place , went prefently unto that Mountain , to {ee if he could difcover thofe
wonders, I was thenin his company, as alfo that woman, viz. the Potters wife, who
carried us in feveral places for many days, without aay fuccefs ac all ;-although the
Gave notice that fhe could here the Waves of the Sea, when fhe was'in the Cave with
her firftHusband,fo chat all our endeavours proved fruitle{s and unprofitable,becaufe
my Father fell fick , which made us forfake our queft, which is of fuch a conte
quence as not to be neglected.

During the time of our painful vificingthat Mountain, I did confider the parti-
cularities of thac rich Mountain , and obferved that the cop of it was almoft all Azur
which tokens are the beams of that golden Sun,and are the hairs of chat fair goodnefs,
under whofe feet all things fubmit 3 in a word, are ché crue and infallible Gons that
underneath are Mines of Gold and Silver, And as I have dire@ed all my thoughts
many times to find out the means to compafs fo excellent a work whofe profit would
furpafs all what the Z#dies furnifh unto ftrangers , and chat-with fo much lefs charges
and danger, that there is no need of Ships or Fleet to cro/s over the Sea, from one
Pole tothe other, nor fight ägäinft any enemies : at lat I have attained co a certain
knowledge, which putteth me in hope,and makes me promife and engage my word,
thacarleaft Ifhall find a thred of chat golden Mine, which may chance ro lead us to
the Centre of all thefe Treafures, but the Royal Auchority being neceffary to prop.
up thisdefign , it belongeth to his Majefty to take what courfe hethinkech belt for
this, and to me to obey, execute his will. This digreffion which is an affured expe-
riment , (that is a certain truch, is not come into this difcourfe, but only to prove that
Mines grow by augmentation , in converting into their own nature the more fubrle


_ parts of che Neighbouring Earth. Thus far Dottor de Rochas.


Aaaz French,


ee


T be true Prophecies


XIII:
French.


Les Exilez autour dela Sologne, |

5 ;
Conduits de nuiét pour marcher en I’ uxois,
Deux de Modene truculent de Bologne,
Mis difcouverts par feu de Burancois.


Englifh.
The banifbed about Sologne,
Being condu&ed by night to go into Auxois,
Two of Modena, the cruel of Bolonia,
Shall be difcovered by the fire of Burancois.
ANNOT.


Sologne is a Province in France , between the Perche and the Main. Anxoïs is a
Countrey in the South of France, {o called of its chief Town called 4#ch, ‘the feat of


- an Archbifhop, Modena is a Town in /taly, and Bolenia another not far fromit. Bs-


rancois is a part of the Province of Dasphin’, The meaning then of this Prophecy is,
this being known, the Reader may eafily find out the reft of the fenfe,


XIV.
French.
Mis en planure chauderon d’Infe&eurs,
Vin miel en huile & baftis fur Fourneaux,
Seront plongez fans mal dit malfaéteurs,
Sept. fum. extaint au Canon des Borneaux.
Englihh.
A Dyers Kettle being put an a Plein,
With Wine, Honey and Oil and built upon Furnace
Shall be dipt, without evil, called Malefaétors,
Seven. fum, put ont at the.Canon of Borneaux.
ANNOT.
This hatha relation to the punifhment, which in fome parts of France.and. Flanders
is inflicted upon falfe Coiners, whichare commonly boiledin Oil, ina great Kettle,
fuch as our Author here faith belong to Dyers, The Author then will have that the


time {hall come, when feven of that gang {hall be fo punifhed together in a Plain;
where a great Kettle fhall be fet for chat purpofe upona Furnace,


X V.
French.
Pres de Parpan les rouges detenus,
Ceux du milieu parfondrez menez loing
Trois mis en pieces,& cinq mal fouftenus,
Pour le Seigneur & Prelat de Bourgoing.


=
= cs
==


(048 1 8


feat of


It Bre
ey b,


Landis
Kettle
that he
4 Plain


|


of Michael Noftradamus.


Englifh.

Near unto Parpan the red ones det ained
Thofe of the middle funk and carried far off,
Three cut in picces, and five ill backed.
For the Lord and Prelate of Burgoing,
ANNOT.


Parpanis either a barbarous or fained name, by the red ones , he hath hitherto un-
derftood fome Cardinals, the Reader may expound the reft according to his fancy.


XVI,
French.


De Caftel Franco fortira l’affemblée,

L’ Ambaffadeur non plaifant fera Schifme,
Ceux de Riviere {eront en la meflee,

Et au grand Goulphre defnieront l'entrée.


Englifh.
Out of Caftel Franco fhall come the 4ffembly,
The Euthaffador not pleafed, fhall make a Schifme,
Thofe of Riviere ball be in the medley,
And {ball deny the entry of the great Gulf,

ANN OT.


Caftel Francoisa Townin Piemonts Riviercisa ftrong Caftle in Burgansy > but
what he meaneth by the great Gulfe, is more then I can tell,


XVII.
French.
Le tiers premier, pis que ne fit Nerow,
Vuidez vaillant que fang humain refpandre,
Redifier fera le Forneron,
Siecle d’or mort,nouveau Roy grand efclandre.
Englhifh.
The third firft, worfe then ever did Nero,
Go out valliant,he fall [pill much humane blood,
He fhail canfe the Forneron to be builded again,
Golden Age dead, new King great troubles.
ANNOT,

This Prophecy pointeth dire@ly at our Authors Mafter Charles the IX. King of
France, whom he calleth he the third firft , becaufe he was the third fon to Henry IL.
and came to be King, ufing more cruelties then ever Mers did, for he was the caufe of
the Maflacre of the Proteftants in France inthe year 1572, where above a hundred
thoufand people were murdered. Forneronisa barbarous word, put here to make a
Verfe,and to rhime withNeron. At that time he faith the Golden Age was dead , and


upon the coming of anew King, whowas Hewry III, great cumults did happen, and
great Wars, as is to be feen in the French Hiftory,


French:


T he true Prophecies
X VIIL
French.

Le Lys Dauffois portera dans Nancy,
Jufques en Flanders Ele&teur de | Empire,
Neufve obturée au orand Montmorency,
Hors lieux pronez delivrea clere peyne.
Englifh.

Dauftois fhall carry the Lillie into Nancy;
As far as Flanders the Elector of the Empire,
New hinderance to great Montmorency,
Out of proved places ,deliver:d to a char pain,

ANN OT.

Although the words and fenfe of this Prophecy be moft obfcure , neverthelefs we
fhall endeavour as much as we can to render them fomething intelligible to the
Reader,

By che firft Verfe is to Le underftood that Danffois,or rather Danphinois, which is the
Title of the Kings of France eldeft Son fhall carry the Lillie, whichis the Arms of
France into Nancy, thechief Town in Lorrain, which came to pafs in the time of the
laft King Lewis the XIII.

By the fecond Verfe is underftood the Elector of Zrsers | who was taken by the
Spaniards in his own Town, and carried prifoner to Bruxelles.

By che third and fourth is expreffed the ill luck of the Duke of Montmorency,who


having taken part with the Duke of Lorrain,and the Duke of orleans the Kings Bro-
ther, was routed ina Battle, taken prifoner,and afterwards beheaded at Thewloufe,


XIX,
French,

Dans le milieu de la Foreft Mayenne,
Sol au Lion la Foudre tombera,
Le grand Baftard iffu du grand du Maine,
Ce jour Fougeres pointe en fang entrera.

| Englifh.
In the middle of the Forreft of Mayenne,
Sol being in Leo the Lightning [ball fall,
The great Baftard begot by the great du Main,
That day Fougeres fhall enter its point into blood.

ANNOT.


Fougerts is either the name of a Townin little Britamny, or that of a Noble Houfe,
the words are very plain, therefore I leave the fenfe to every ones capacity,’


X%;:
French.


De nuit viendra par la Foreft de Rennes,
Deux parts Voltorte Herne, la pierre blanche,
Le Moine noir en gris dedans Varennes,
Efleu Cap, caufe tempefte, feu, fang tranche.
Eagilh,


ht


rous Wi


| rhat W
] |,
pe cit


of Michael Noftradamus.


Englifh,
By night fhall come through the Forreft of Rennis,

| Two parts Voltorte Herne, the white Stone,
1 The black Monk in gray within Varennes,

| Elected Cap. caufeth tempest, fire,blood cutteth...

ANNOT.

| Rennes is the chief Town of little Briranny;the fecond Verfe being made of barba-
rous words, isimpoffible to be underftood, , The third and fourth Verfe fignifieth,


that when a black Monk in that Town of Varennes thal] put ona gray fute , he fhall
be eleéted Captain, and canfe a great tempeft or broils by fire and blood.


| XXE
h French.
Au Temple hault de Blois {acre Salonne,
kr | : Nuit Pont de Lore, Prelat,Roy pernicaut:
4 Cuifeur vidoire aux marefts.de la Lone,
histhe fe D'ou Prelature de blancs abormeant ?
ek 1 Englith.
alte J At the high Temple of Blois facred Salonne,
| | In the night the Bridge of Loire, Prelat, King mifchievous,
| A fmarting Vikory in the Marfb of Lone,
rio D Whence Prelature of white ones [hall be abortive,
ho. Fl ANNOT.
oo There is a miftake in the firft Verfe, for inftead of Salonne,it muft be written Sou.
| laire, which is a Priory and Church at the top of Blois, all the reft fignifiech chat in
one night thefe thall happen, vz. that the Bridge, the Prelat, and a pernicious King


with a {mart viory {hall perith, whence the Prelature, chatis the place of Command
upon the white ones, viz, Canons and Prebends in their Surplices) fhall be void


A and empty.
X'À LI:
French.
4 Roy & fa Cour au lieu dé la langue halbe,
1 Dedans le Temple vis a vis du Palais,
Dans le Jardin Duc de Monitor & d'Albe,
 Albe & Mantor, poignard, langue, en Palais.
Englifh.
| King and his Court in the place of langue halbe,
Hi 4 Within tbe Church over againft the Pallace,
| In the GardensDuke of Montor and Albe,
| Albe and Mantor, dagger, tongue and Pallate.
ANNOT.
This Stanza is very obfcure, fotfirft no body can tell what he meaneth by /engne
halbe, which is the foundation of all the reft of the fenfe ; Secondly, what this Duke


of Monsor and Mantor fhould be, which has been unknown in the Hiftories hitherto ;
and


and thirdly , what conftruétion and fenfe can be made of thefe disjunétives : Albe,


cMantor, Dagger, Tongue, Palate, Therefore i’le leave it freeto every bodies opinion |}
to make his conftruétion, |


By this is meant, that the youngeft Son ofa King, fhall be knocked in the head
while he is a playing under a cun 3: his Father being at thefame time in the Templ
of Saint Seulaine at Mats.


=


F4


Tbe true P rophectes


X X ITI

French.
Puifnay-jouiant at fréfch deflous la tonne:
Le haut du toicdu milieufurAa tefte,
Le Pere Roy at Pemple SaineSolomie° F1
Sacrifiant facrera fum de’fefte.


Englithy
The youngeft Son playing añder the tun.
The top of the Houfe (ball fall upon bis bead,
The King bis Father in the Temple of Saint Soulaine;
Sacrificing foall make fefival [moak.
ANN OT.


5
€


X XI-V.
French.
Sur le Palais au Rocher des Feneftres,
Seront ravis les deux petits Roiaux, and th
Paller Aurelle, Lutece, Denis cloifires, derar
Nonñain, Mollods avaler verts notaux, | Li)


wa
Englifh:
Upon the Pallace at the Rock of the Windows:
Shall be carried the two little Roya ones.
To pafs Aurele, Lutece, Denis Cloifters,


Nonnain,Mollods to /wallow green flones of fruit.
~ Le J J


ANNOT.


Thefe two or three laft Stanzas have been concerning the City of Bis, ta which
it feemeth chat this hath alfo relation, for hefaith that two little Royal Children
{hall be carried at the top of the Caftle, and fhall be co
is Orleans in Latine Awreliantm) Latece whichis Paris ; S. Denis Cloifters which is
beyond Paris, and a Nunnery befides, whereitislike th x


ftones offruit, which is not eafie to be underftood, no more then the word Mollods,


nveyed beyond Agrele (which
ey fhall be left. co eat green |


X XV.

French. 1
Paffant les Ponts, venir prez de Roziers Ti
Tard arrive pluftoft quil cuiderà, , he
Viendront les noves E/pagnols'a Bexiers, A


Qui celle ‘chafle emprinfe catlefa. The


te ex
€ Temple}


Englifh.
Going over the Bridge, to come near the Rofe-trees,
Come late, and fooner then be thought.
The new Spaniards /ball come to Beziers,
Who fhall cafbiere this. new undertaken bunting.


ANNOT.


Beaters is a City in Languedoc ; the reft may be conftrued by the meaneft capa-
City. |


XX VI,
French.
Nife fortie fur nom des Lettres afpres,
La grande Cappe fera prefent non fien,
Proche de Vultry aux murs des vertes capres,
Apres Plombin le vent a bon efcient.


Englih.
A filly going ont, canfed by Jharp Letters,
The great Cap fall give what is not his,
Near Vultry by the Walls of green Capers,
About Piombino the wind fball be in good earneft.
ANNOT. |
This fignifiech that there {hall be a filly furrendring of
and threatning Letters chat fhall befent into ic, By the great Cap he ufeth toun-


derftand the Pope, who he faith {hall give what is not it, as he hath done many times:


Vultry, in Latine pelitrums , and Piombino ate two Cities in Italy , which are threatned
here with mighty winds,


a Town , caufed by tharp


X XVII:

French.
De bois Ja garde vent clos ront Pont fera,
Haut le receu frappera le Dauphin,
Le vieux Teccon bois unis paflera;
Paflant plus outre du Duc le droit comin,

Enolifh. |

The Fence being of Wood, clofe Wind, Bridge [ball be broken,
He that's received bib, [ball firike at the Dolphin,
The old; Teccon fhall puls over finoothW ood,
Going over the right confines of the Duke.

ANNOT. . |

The firft Verfe fignifieth chat a woodden Bridge thall be broken bya clofe wind,


as did happen to the Millers Bridge, and the Birds Bridge in Paris.


The fecond Verfefeemeth to foretel the con{piracy ot the Marethal of Biron, againft


_ Henry VV. his Dolphin and Eftate.


The third and fourth, the Warsand Gonqueft which the (aid King (whom he cal-


led old Teccon, made upon the Duke of Savey, who had cotrupted che faid Marthal
of Biron,


Bbb French,


of Michael Noftradamus, 369


a _
apse a


Se


. Fbetrue Prophecies


XXVIIL.
French.
Voile Sywacle, Port Maffiiolique,
Dans Venife Port marcher aux Pannons,
Partir du Goulfre & finus {//zrique,
Vaft a Sicile, Ligurs coups de Canon.
Engl th.
Symaclian Sail, Maflilian Port,
In Venice to march towards the Hungarians,
To go away from the Gulf and WMlirick Sea,
Toward Sicily, the Genoeles with Cannon fbots.
ANNOT.
What he meaneth by Symaclian Sail, ts not eafie to determine; Maf(ilian Port Bs
that of Marfeilles in France, called in Latine Maffilia,the fenfe ot this Prophecy then
ifany be, is,thata great, Fleet fhall go from thence to Venice, to.carry fuccours to the


Hungarians, whoit feemeth {hall be muchdiftrefled at chat time by the Turks, and
chat Sicily and Genoa fhall add to this Fleet a confiderable fuccour of Men, and War-


hike Munition,

XXIX.

French.
Lors que celuy qu’a nul-ne donne lieu,
Abandonner voudra lieu prins non pris,
Feu, Nef, par faignes, bitumient a Charlien,
Seront Quintin, Bales repris.

Englifh.
When be that giveth place to n0 body,
Shall forfake the place taken and not raken,
Fire, Ship, by bleeding bituminous at Charlieu,
Then Quintin and Bales fhall be taken again,
ANNOT.


He that giveth place to no bedyis the Pope ; as for the laft Verfe, I had rather read
St. Quintin and Cales, which are two confiderable Towns in France,then otherwife.
That place taken , not taken was the City of Noyon in Picardy , which was taken
by the Spanifh Cavalry, cloathed after the French Mode,which ftratagem deceived the
Citizens and Soldiers that defended it: fo he faith taken, becaufe it fell into the
hands ofthe Spaniards, and not taken, becaufe ic was by a ftratagem or deceit,
XXX,
French.
Au Port de Puola & de St. Nicolas,
Perir Noraraitde au Gouftre Phanatique,
Cap de Bixance rues crier Helas!


Secours de Gaddes & du grand Philippique.


Englit,


f
Bell
mad


XW


of Michael Noftradamus.


Englifh.
At the Harbour of Puola aid of St. Nicolas, | |
4 Norman Ship hall perifb in the Phanatick Gulf, |
À At the Cape of Byzantium the flreets fball cry Alas? |
| Succours from Cadis and from the great Philippe.
ANNOT. HUE
Puolsis for Pawlo here, and by it isunderftood the Port of Halss » Which being


Befieged by the Turks, Philip the II, King of Spain, fent an Army to telieve it which
made chofe of Byzantiuns (which is Conffantinople) cry-alas, de ;


XXXI,
French.
A Le tremblement de Terre a Mortara,
LED | Caffich, Sc. George a demy perfondrez, |
| Paix affoupie la guerfe efuaillera, wy qu
ad & Dans Temple 4 Pafquesaby{mes:énfondrez,,. |
Wa. | Eoglifh.
| There fhall be an Earthqnake-at Mortara, |
| Caflich, St. George fhall be half fmallowed #p, ll
| The War fhall awake the fleeping pace, es Ml
| Upon Eafterday fhall be a great hole funk in the Church, | |
AN NOT. | | |
Mortara isa Town in Italy, by Caffich and St.George he meaneth two other places. |
XXXIL
French. | |
De fin Porphire profond Collon trouvée; at
Defloubs la-laze efcrits Capitolin, iN
Os, poil retors; Romain force prouvée: |
Clafle agiter au Port de Merbelin:
| | | Englith. ig. :
herrea A deep Colin of fine Porphy ty foall be found,”
vit, À Vader whofe Bafis foall be Roman writings,
astikea D Bones, haires.twifted, Roman force tried.


alt iA Fleet a gathering about the Port of Methelin.
into tne


Sats


| D di PUN EN OM din Con at pals

Porphiry is a kind of hard red Marble fpeckléd with white {pots , which is vey

| {carce, and chiefly in great pieces; our Author then faiech that a great Colomn of

| cha ftuff fhall be found, and about the Bafis of ic fomé words in Roman Charaters,
| and that about chat cime a great Fleec fhall be a gachering at the Port of M'thelin, 4]
which is an Ifland in the Archipelago, belonging nowtotke Turks; as for the third |
Verfe, I cannot tell what to make of ic,


French.


el be true Prophecies


XXXII.
| French. Le 43
Hercules Roy. de Rome, & Dannemark,
De Gaule trois Gayon furnomme,
. Trembler l’Itake.8 Fun de Saint Marc,
Premier fur tous Monarquerenommée.
Le Englithe ou
Hercules" King of Rome, 4%g'Denmark, ta
Of France three Guyon furiamed, ah
Shall caufe Italy to quake andone of St. Marck,
He fhall be above alla famous Monarch,
ANNO:E,
All chefe intricated wotds and fenfe foretell chat, when-a King of Danmarck na-
ed Hercules (hall be made King of the Romans, that then Ita/y and Venice it {elf (hall
ftand in great fear of him; and-that he fhall be as great'a Prince or Monarch as ever
was in Europe; and that very likely , for-byshis. dignity of King of the Romans he
confequently fhall attain to the Empire.
XXXIV
Frenc hb.
Le part folus Mary, fera Mitre; , ”,
Letour confiét pallera fur la tuille,
Par cing cens un trahir fera ‘tultre,
Narbon & Saulce par coutaux avons d'huile. ©


Englith.
The [eparated Husband (ball wear a Miter,
Returning, Battle, he fball goover the Tyle,
By five bundred:ons: dignified ball be betrayed,
Narbon and Salces /hall have Oil by the: Quantal.
' ANN OT.
‘ihe firtt Verfe fignifiech ; that (ome .certaincman who was married, fhall be parted
from his wife, and fhall attain to fome great Ecelefiaftical Dignity, |
Thé fecond Verfe is, that if coming back from fome place or entreprife , he fhall
be mer and fought wich, and compelled co'efcape over the Tyles of a Houfe.
The chird Verfe is chat aimân\ofgreat account fhall be betrayed by five hundred of
his men.
And rhe!aft, that when thefe things thal! come te pals, Narbon.and Salces., which
are cwo Cities of Languedoc, {hall reap and make a great deal of Oil,
XX Ve:
34 2113 Ereuch: $ LOUE 3
Et Ferdinand blonde fera defcorte: | ashit née
Quitter Ja fleur fuivre le Macedon" °° * MARS 1
Au grand befoing defaillira fa routte,
Et marchera contre le Myrwidon.


wae


spared
he ful
ndred of


whit


Aa nob far (remriEafher fithatavas budfive months berdte "02 trom the


of MichaebsN oftradamus,
aa * Si “Enelith. -
And Ferdinand having, a Troop of faire men,
Shall leave the flower to follithe: Macedonian
At his great need bis way fball fail him,
And he fball go againft the Myrmidon.
ANNOT.
This Prophecy ought to be underftood of an Empérôür of Germany ; whole name
fhall be Ferdinand | who being accompanied with many Germans , thatifor the moft
part are faire haired people thall come and War againft Grecia s which isexpreffed


here by thenames of Macedon and —Myrmidon, the farft of which is a Countrey, and
the lafta Nation, both in Grecia,


)


XXXVL
French.


Un grand Roy prins entre lesmains d’an jeune,
Non Join de Palques confufion, coup cultre +
Perpet, cattif temps que foudre en la’ Hune,
Trois,Freres.lors fe blefleroné &Someurtre:


8 MT ++ Epelith,

“A great King taken in the bands of 4 young one,
Not far from Eafter, confusion, firoke of a knife,
Shall commit, pittiful timeithe fireraty thetép of rhaxh (aft,
Three Brothers then fall waund.onecavothe


ANNOT.


This Prophecy was fulfilled in-che Year 1560.-when Antony of Bourbon King of
Navarre, and his Brother Lewis of Bourbon Prince of Condé > coming to King Fraacis
IT. ac Orleans, upon the 29, of Oéfober, thé Prince of Condé was put in prifon, and the
King of Navarré arrefted, : Fhe Lord Aud ew Fanyn in, his Hiftory of Wavarre,faich,
that the opinion of the Councel was,thit'the Prince of Condce (hoùld be beheaded, for
having been the chief of the confpiracy at Amboife, and the King of Navarre fhould
be ftabbed in the King’ Chamber by the. King himfelf <!2flitted byiothers for thae
purpofe, The Lady of ontpenfier gaye notice of it to the King of Navarre,who be-
ing fent for by the King charged exprefly Cattin his waiting man and an old feryant of
his -Fathentocake a care andipre(erve his bloody fhirt after bis deach till his fon came
£0. Age} torevengeit upowehe ‘murderers’ -<Godbe thanked this Came not to pals,
for. the:King: having caïlédihim: | 2nd going bout to provoke him with foul words,
he an{wered formieekly-and humbly. that the Kings anger'was appealed, jwhere upon
the DokeohGnifegoingiour ofitha room laid, O'what'4 Pov Waly Prince 73 this. Thefe
things a:eexprefledin the fiftiand cond Verfe , when ‘he faith thata great King
fhould be put in Prifon by a young ones bécaite Antony oF Boarbon, though he was
notagread King indsandssygtshé was aeresr one in Courage and prudence, Andie


rand wtnvder done.


beginning
of November; tothe fixthiof 4 pril'rs ot Which was Baftérday; the Author puttech


dn(this:cirdimaftance', bécane the next! Batter after , the King of Navarre was made


Generakol France undèrthe Queer Régént, deg rs de |
He addeth the {lo of a Knife, as we have feed Hedi fotiithe 3 laffing bad tinie,
which proved very true; moreover, he faith, what lightuine inthe Hune ot Topmatt,
pi becauf


PR ee


374 The true Prophecies
becaufe King Francés died prefently after, Iacthe fourth Verfehe faith , shat shree


Brothers [hall be hart and killed, thofe three Brothers were Antony of Bourbon King of


Navarre, killed at the Siege at Roues, the Cardinal of Bosrbon, and Lewis of Bourben
Prince of Conde, killed at the Battle of Farsac,


XXXVI.
French.


Pont & Molins en December verfez,

En fi haut lieu montera la Garonne :

Murs, Edifice, Thonlonfe renverlez,

Qu'on ne fcaura fon lieu courant matrone.
Englifh.

Bridges and Mills in December overturned,

In fo high a place the Garonne fhall come,

Walls, Building, Thoulofe overturned,

So that none fhall know its place, fo much Matrone.


ANNOT.


Here is foretold a prodigious inundation of the River Garonze, inthe month of :


December, by which the Walls, Building, and the City of Thoulonfe is threatned to
be overturned. T he laft word ofall is barbarous,and added to make up the rhime,


K Noa
French.


L'Entrée de Blaye par Rochelle & V Anglios,
Pallera outre le grand Aimathien :

Non loing d'Agen attendra le Gaulois,
Secours Narbonne deceu par entretien.


Englifh.
The coming in at Blaye by Rochel axd the Englifh,
Shall go beyond the great Æmathien,
Not far from Agen fhall expe the French,
Help from Narbonne deceived by Cntertatnment.
ANNOT.


For the better underftanding of this , the hard words mutt firft be made plains |


Blaye is a City upon the River Garonne, and the Port-Fown to Bowrdeawx ; Rochel is
à City upon the fame Coaft ; Agenisa City in Gafcony not far frm Bourdeaux ; and
Narbonne is a City. in Langwed.c , by the Mediterranean Sea; © Æmathian was for-
merly the Countrey ofwfacedonia, wherein Fulius Cafar and C, Pompeiss fought their
laft Battle in che Phar{alian Fields, and therefore faith the Latine Poet Lwcanws:
Bea per mathies plu{quam civilis campos.
T hefe things being confidered che fenfe is, chat there fhall be an Invafion made by


the Englifh, to whom chofe ot Rechel thall joyn, upon the Town of Blaye, which thall:


proceed as faras 4gex, and that thereabonc will be a bloody Encounter between the
Exglifhand French, beyond that which was fought in the «4 mathian Fields, and that
the faccours that thouldcome from Narbonne to che Frenéh, {hall be deladed and hin-
dered by the fpeech and difcourfe of fome.


Eaglifb,


eae


Kg


17 Np


nth of
ed to
‘À


spé


pubs M


Win


of Michael Noftradamus.


XXXIX.
French.


En Arbiffella, Vewema & Crevart,

De nuit conduits pour Savenne atraper,

Le vif Gafcon, Ginry, & la Charry,

Derrier Mur vieux & neuf Palais grapper.
Englifh.

In Arbiflella, Vezema and Crevari, ,

Being condutted by night to take Savona,

The quick Ga'con, Giury and the Charry,

Behind old Walls and new Pallace to graple.


ANNOT,

Arbifellais a Town fituated by the Sea-fideabove Savona, going towards Genoa.
Yecema aud.Crevariarein the Inland Countrey, and a live e father remoted from the
Seathen eArbiffella., The quick Gafcon was Blafius of Menlac , one of the Vallianteft
men of his time,who came from a fingle Souldier to be Marfhal of France. Guiry ani
da Charry weretwo of his Companions. : This Stanza doth Prophetically foretell
two things, oneis,the-defign that the Marthal of Brsfac,then Governour of Piemort
had upon, Savena : the other, the taking of Pianca by Blafius of Monlac’, asto the
firft, the Lordof Yéllars writeth in his Memorials, that the Lord Damzay (ent advice
tothe King, thatthe, taking of Savona was more probable then ‘any other defien,
which fignifieth chat,the Marthal of Briffac had of along time eyed that/Town , and
therefore he fent.by night fome Troops into thofe three little Towns , to fee ifthey
could furprife Savosa, butthedefign didnot facceed: The Hiftories only mention
thatthe Marfhäl of srifac went from Court inthe year 1557, withadefiga to take
Savona; but this Stanza (peakerh of che fame defign 1556.

Acthe fame time in the year 1556. the 29, of Fume Blafins of Monlue.as he télateth
in his Commentaries; did furprife the Town and Fort of Piance, called in Latine Cor-
finianwm, he had with him the Captain /e Charrysthe Captain Bartholomew of Pénero,
and the fon of Captain Lwzzan. At firft the Frexch were beaten back | but the val-
liant Monlue did encourage them again by his‘example, going the firft in, and faying
only, follow your Captain.

Which having faid, he thruft himfelfunder the Gate , where three or four men
might ftand fheltered by the planks of the Fort , and having his Sword in the lefe
hand, and his dagger in the right , he beganto break and cut the Brick and madea
hole, which opening by degrees , hethruft his arm through, and pulled the gap fo
ftrongly, that he caufed all the Wall to fall down upon him(elf, without being hurt
by it. Thisis the meaning of the Author in the fourth Verfe,when he faith, the quick
Gafeow was behigd the Wall; \n profecution of this, the Switzcrs did beat down che
reft of the Wall, and all cameinto the Town crying, France, France: Monluc ran
prefently to the Fort, and with the help of his meu took it, that is the meaning of
the Author,when he faith,old and new Pallace to graple, The old Pallace was adjoining
tothe Market-place of the Town, in which the French were prifoners with the Cap-
tain Gosrgues to the number of fifty. or fixty tied two and two,and fo kept by twenty
Souldiers, whom they did kill as we have faid. The new Pallacewas the Foit.
The Author ufed that ancient word grapper, whichin-the Provencal languague fig-
nifieth,to pull down with ones hands,and in the contrary fenle,to (hut and plaifter fo
wellfome thing, that there will be a necefftty of the help of the hands to open what
was fhat up.


French.


(PDT, Se MEET re


The true Prophecies


oe

French. -

Pres de Quentin dans la Forelt Bourlis, | |
Dans !’Abbaye feront Flamands tranche, ot


Les deux puilnez de coups my eftourdis, od


Suitte appreflée & gardes tous hachez.
Englifh,

Near Quentin in the Forreft Bourlis,

In the Abby the Flemmings fhall be flafbed,

The tro younger fous balf a flonifbed with blows

The followers oppreffed, aud. the Guards all cut in pieces.
ANNOT.


This:isa peculiar accident that happened before the taking of the Town of Saint
Luentia by the Spaniard inthe year à 5 57. and fell out thus, Ne
the King of France, thatthe powerful Armylof the Spaniard was
Ruentin, he madeall imaginable diligence to faccour its : the Spaniards to hinder the
relief had feized upon an ancient Abby of the Vermandois?


ws being’ come to
Sone to Befiege St:


» Whichisin the next For-


reft, chat was anciently called the Forreft Bourlis, ands at prefent called che Forreft


of the Abbay Vermandois, called in Latine Augufta Veromatduorum, builded by an an- TI
cicht Hwngarian Captain called Vérmandig : Awprocefs of time it was all ruinated, and union
only one Abby left, wherein wasthe Epifcopal See, which afterwards was crans- com
ferred intothe City of Woyon:' After the ruineof this Town, chat of St, Owventin them


next to it became the chief City of Vermandois is: lewas named'St, Quentin; becaufe
the Emperor Didclefian having (ent St. Quentin à Roman Senator to be Governour of
it, be did convert the Inhabitants to the Chriftian Faith,’ and after he himfelf did
fufter. there Mareyrdom,

In chat Abby a great many Flemmines had intranched themfelves,but the French
going to relieve the Town, did force their Trenches and Fortifications , and in the
heat of the fight che two younger Sons of the Captain being armed Cap 4 pée though
they were not killed, yet wereaftonifhed with blows they did receive upon their
heads, their followers and Guards being all cut in pieces,


X LT.
French


€


€ grand Chyren foy faifir d'Avignon,
4
4


L
De Rome. Lettres en miel plein d’amertume
Lettre; Ambaflade partir de Chanignon,
Carpentras pris par Duke noir, rouge plume.. * Mi
Englifh, | th
3 icant Lr: | din
The great Cheyren hall [eix 2 upon Avignon, bin,
Letters frou Rome fhall come full of bitternefs, ni
Letters and Embaffies fall go from Chanignon, w


va]


Carpentras taken by a black Duke with ared Feather. tis tm


S
eu


>


ANN OT.


Ue |


COME to


ges,


inder the
leit For.
 Forrelt
Ny af an


ted, and D
tsttans- |


Quentin


Decale |
enour of D


melt did


e French D


id in the
though


on thet 9


. to che perpetual infamy ofthat Nation.


union and I:eague bétiween thefe Towns, viz, Barcelona Gers


dom of seei/y againft che Turks’, whom they fhall éncounter near 294160
them to flight, and follow chem as fat as Tenis,


of Michael Noftradamus.


ANNOT,

This did happen lately, viz, fome five or fix years ago , when
Embafladour at Rome was affronted by the Corfes , which
which theK ing of France demanded rep
granted him chat all the faid Corfes fhoul


the Duke of Crequy
bich arethe Popes Guard: for
aration, and feized upon Avignen,till thePope


d be banithed, anda Pyramis ere€ted in Rome


XLV
French.
De Barcelonne, de Gennes & Venife:
De la Sicile pres Monaco unis ad)
Contre Barbare clafle prendront la vile,
Barbar poulfé.bien loing jufgu’a Thanis.
Englifh.
oFno Barcelona, from Genoa and Venice,
From Sicily wear Manaco united,
PAgainft the Barbarian the fleet [ball take ber aim,
Supa Oe Darbertan fhallbe driven back as far as Thunis,
anis o7ni ora :: ANNOT:
» Thefente of chefe words is very plain’and fignifieth onely, that there will be an


04 Vinice, and the King-
> and put


4


X LITT,
French.
Proche a defcendre ] Armée Crucigere,
Sera guettée par les Ifinaelites,
De tous coftez battus par nef Riviere!
Prompt aflailies de dix Galeres d’eflite.
Enelith,
The Crucigere Army being about to Land,
Shall be watched by the Umaelites, .
Being beaten on all fides by the Ship Raviere,
Prefently afjanlted by ten chofen Galleys.
ANNOT, : Ne
BythéCrrcigere Army is underftood the Chriftian Army; becatfethe word


Crucigere fignifieth one that beareth a Crofs , fromthe two Latine words crax and
Sero; the Ifrsaelites are the Turks,who boaft themfelves to be defcended from 1fmacl,
the fon of eAbrakam and Agar, the meaning of this is ,thatthe Chrift
bout to attempt fome landing place, the Turks fhall watch them , and fet upon them
by Land and Sea, in'which Sea fight he mentioneth only tenchoice Galleys, anda
notable Ship called Raviere, (if it be not falfe printed) 1 am much of an Opinion that
this came to pafs when Philip the II: King of Spain made anattemptupon Algeirs, by
his Admiral André d’Oria, who bad to dowith the Moores upon the Land, ready to re-
ceive him , and fome part of their Fleet that watched him, but crofs and contrary
winds caufed him to return re infecfa,


lans going a-


Chee French.


y 7
3/7


Tbe true Propbecies


XLIV.

French.
Migrez, migrez de Geneve tretous,
Saturne d'Or en Fer fe changera,
Le contre Kaypox exterminera tous,
Avant l’advent le Ciel fignes fera.


Englith.
Go forth, go forth out of Geneva all,
Saturn of gold, fball be changed into fron, ,
They againft Raypos fhall extermine them all, Que
Before it bappeneth, the Heavens will fhew figns. ano
ANNOT. sé


This isaProphecy concerningGeneva,out of which he warneth every oneto come;
his reafon is,chat the golden Age of that Town fhall be changed intoan Iron one;and
thac there fhall be one againft Raypos,that fhail extermine them all,before which there
fhall appear fome figns inHeaven Now theAuthor being a rank Papift,it is to be fup-
pofed chat he warneth out of Geneva all thofe of his Faith ; -becaufe of
the coming of Calvin , whomhe forefaw was to come into that Town,
and to change the Government thereof, and to extermine themall, which
is to. be underftood , in point of Religion,.as for what prodigies did precede:chat
changes Lhadnotimeto confult Authors uponit, the judicious Reader may:chanc
to find them in thofe chat have written of this matter. |


X LV.
French.
Ne fera foul jamais de demander,
Grand Mendofus obtiendra {on Empire,
Loing de la Cour fera contremander,
Piemont, Picard, Paris, Tyrben le pire, |
Engliih thee
He fhall never be weary of asking, a)
Great Mendofus fhall obtain bis dominion,
Far from the Court be fhall caufe him to be countermanded
Piemont, ‘Picardy, Paris, Tyrhen the wore.
ANNOT.
By «Mendofus, is Anagrammatically co be underftood Fesdôfme ; but who is that


thall never be weary of asking , or whofe Dominion Veado(me fhall have., or what is
meant by che laft two Verfes, paffech my underftanding,


XLVI.
French,


Vuidez fuyez de Thouloufe les rouges,

Du Sacrifice faire expiation, +: | |
Le Chef du mal defloubs l'ombre des courges,
Mort:eftrangler carne omination. E


Called here ae
gain Raypos.


>


Of Michael Noftradainus.
Englith, oH

| Get you gene; run amayfron Thouloufe ye red ones,
There fball expiation be made of the Sacrifice,

The chief caufe of the evil under the fhade of gourdes,

| Shall be ftrangled, a preface of the deftruction of much fley.


This Psophecy doth onely and properly belong to theCity of Thouloufe, and by


y Wear Red or Scarlet
outofir, becaufe faith
hat there fhall be a great
ft Anne 1563,
: of the red Gowns
gnifie,that the chief contriver of this


it are warned all che red ones, that iS, all thofe chat ufual!
Gowns, as thofe of the Parliamencand the Capitols to come
he, 7 bere fhall an expiation be made of the Sacrifice, meaning t
flaughter among the Citizens, as it die happen at feveral times, the fi:
another time when the firft Prefident Durauti , and feveral other
were puttodeath, Ge, Thetwolaft Verfes fi


tone, fal uproar fhall be ftrangled, and many others befides him,

nent D XLVIL

there | French.

ip. M Les foubfignez d'indigne deliverance,

ule of Et de la multe auront contre advis, |
Tom, | Change Monarque misien perritle pence,
sm | Serrez en cage fe verront vis a vis.

das M | Englhfh.


The underwritten to an-ueworthy deliverance,
Shall have from. the multitude a contrary advice,
They: fhall change their Motureh and put bint in peril,


They fball fee thimfelves hut up id a Cage ower againft,


ANN OT, |
This is plainly.to beunderftood of thofe Trayrots:; the delivered and figned the
death of King Charles the [of bleffed Memory, againftithe fente and ddvile of aileatt
three parts of four of the Nation, and who afterward faw thémfelves for the mat part
| that in Prifon for chis fa& and brought toa fhameful end..


XLVIIL
ie | French.
; La grand Cité d'Occean Maritime,
| Environnée de Marefts en Cryftal,
Dans le Solffice hyemal & Ja prime;
Sera,tentee de-vent elpouvental,
T be great Maritime, ( ity, of the Veeangs 2
Encompafjed with Chryftaline Fens,
In the Winter Solftice and in the pring,
Shall be tempied with fearful wind.


Ccc2


380 T be trne Prophecies


ANNOT. | |
By the great Maritime City of the Ocean, Encompalfed with Criffaline Fens , isto be
underftood the City of London; for as for that of Venice , it is fituated upon the Me-
diterranean or rather Adriatick Sea: London then is threacned here of a fearful wind,
which whether the Author meaneth for the time that is paft now, and thar hall come
hereafter I know not, fure I am, that I have within this fifteen years feen two {uch
winds in London , as I never faw the like any where elfe; the firft was that day that
olivier the Ufurpator died, the other was about fix or feven years ago, caufed by the
lightning chat fell in Aereford-(bire , and did mix with a Weftern wind and'came as
far as London »»carrying the cops of houfes,and doing then tor above 10060, pounds
dammage,
be om
French.
Gand & Bruxelles marcherontcontre Anvers,
Senat de Londres mettrone a-mort leur Roy,
Le Sel & Vin luy feront a Tenvers,
Pour eux avoir le Regne or defarroy.


Englith.
Gand and Bruxelles fhall go againft Antwerp,
The Senat of London fhall put their King to death,
The Salt and Wine fhall not be able to do him good,


That they may bave the Kingdom into ruine.


AN NOT.
This Prophecy taken with allies circumftances , and


| the fubje&t it treateth of » is
the moft remarkable of all thofechat ever Noftradamus was Author of, for here we fee


a concatenation of circumftances linked together, to make it true to any bodies eyes
for firft the number of chis Stanza being 49, fignifiech the year wherein the King
died, foralchough by the €yglifh account, who begin their year at che 35, of afarch
it may be faidit was in 48, becaufeic did happen upon the 304; of Fantary, yet Wr
cording to the general account of the moft pare of the World, the year begin upoa
the firft day of Faswary, fo that the King dying on the 3o0¢h, of Fanuary, it may be
faid it was in the year 1 649, )

The firft Verfe fignifiech,thacat that timethere wasn
the Cities of Flanders and Brabant, as Tremember
upon what fcore, I have forgotten.

The fecond Verfe is plain to any body that can either read or hear it.

The third Verle by the Salt and Wine, undeïftandeth France, who was thenin War
with the Spaniard , and in fome divifions among themfelves, fo chat they could not
take the Kings part as to relieve and free him by force, but {ent Embafladouts to me-
diate a compoture of the difference,

The fourth Verfe intimateth chat by reafon of the {aid Wars that


the faid murdering Parliament had liberty to do what they lifted fort
Kingdom inte ruine.


0 good intelligence between
very well chat there was not, but


were in France,
he bringing the


«il
Dy the
es


Non,
PUUlnds


Of, if
ne fee
eyes,
e King
Mark,
yet a:
n.upoa
ny De


tween


yf, but


a War
gldnot
to me.


Frnt,
Nf tN


!
‘rent


of Michael Noftradamus.


L.
French: |
Menfodus toft viendra à fon ha it Regine
Mettant arriere un peu le Norlaris,
Le rouge blefme, le mafle a l’interregne,
Le jeune crainte & frayeur Barbaris.

Englifh.

Menfodus fhall foon come to bis high Government,
Putting a little afide the Norlaris,
The red, pale, the Male at the interreione,
The young fear,and dread barbarif jie.
ANNOT.


cMenfodus is the Anagramme of Veado/me, by which is meant Aztony of Bourbon
Duke of Vesdofme , brother to the then Prince of Conde, and father to Henry IV,
Norlaris is the Anagram of Lorrain; now any body that underftandeth any thing in
Hiftory, knoweth what diffention and'feud there was between the Houfe of Bourbon,
and that'of Lorrain in the time of Francis the Il, for the Houle of Boarton , though
next tothe Royal'blood;was ché leaft in favour,and thofe of the Houle of Lorrain did
Goveriÿ all; and had fo far prevailed as to have got the Prince of Condé into their
hands,and had him condemned to have his head cut'of, which would have been exe-
cuted; had not the King that very day fallen fick of the difeafe he diedof. Now this
being underftood Our Author will have that Mezfodus which isVendofme Mall lay afide
the Nordaris; chatis Lorrein:’ By the red pale is meant thé Cardinal of Lerraiz , bra-
ther co the Duke of Gaife; who grew pale‘at this, By themale at the interreigneis fo
obfcure; chat we leave it to the judgement of the Reader.


LI

French.
Contre les rouges Sectes fe banderont,
Feu, eau, fer, corde, par paix fe minera,
Au point mourir ceux qui machineronr,
Fors un que monde fur cout ruinera,

Englilh,
Againft the red, Sects fhall gather themfelves, :
Fire, water, iron, rope, by peace it [ball de deftroyed,
Thofe that fbali conf pire fball-not be put to death,
Except one, who above all ball undo the VW orld.


ANNOT.,


Thenameof red Sets, may very well bé appliedto.the Proceftants of France , a-
gainft whom in thofe days it teemed tha fire, Water, Iron and Rope had confpired,
for they were put to death by each ong of thofe faral inftruments for.their Religion
fake. This is alively expreffion of the unhappy Maflacre of the Proteftants in France


>


Upon St, Barthelemews day 1572.


The


ec, M. Mrs inner


SANE


ee


TRE I Cm


382 The true Fropbectes


The two laft Verfes fignifie, that all the Contrivers of that Councel, were of


opinion at firft to proceed fome other way, but only the Duke of Guife, who was the
principal actor in it, and whem our Author faith, did-undo the world ; for he was
the caufe of mifchief, not only then but ofterwards.
LIL,
French.

La paix fapproche d’un cofte-8r la guette,

Oncgués ne fut la pourfuite figrande,

Plaindre homme & femmene fanglnnotent pär Terre!


Et ce fera de France a toute-bande.


{


Engiifh.
Peace is coming on one fide, and War ow the other,
There was neuer fo great à pur fuing,

Man, Woman {ball bemoan, Innocent blood fhall be fprle,


It shall be in France on all fides.


ANNOT.
his Propbecy was fulfilled in the Reign of Charles the 1X, inthe year 1558,
when the peace was treated o!,,and concluded the year after.15 59, the V Varon the
other fide begun .to appear by.che raifing,of the Proteftants,.who begun publickly
their Opinioninthetime of Francis che Il, and-Charles the IX,
There was never feen fuch, a profecution, of V Var and of Peace togethers for
there was neveraneftare more embroiled.in VVars than thatof Charles the 1X,. was,


Bor where Peace was more fought afters for there was nothing but V.V.ats'and trea-


ties of Peace, Men and VVomen did complain on all fides, for the wrongiand dam-
mages they received from both parties, the Proteftants believing to do. God a.good
fervice in deftroying Images, and killing Priefts and Monks. And the Papifts
on the other fide thinking to make a fiveer Sacrifice unto God, in practifing thefame
cruclties upon the Proteftants, and fo in all Corners of France every One did fet him-
felt to do evil,
LIT
ate
i rceilé ‘D
[ < \ y ss à : NS pd
Le Neron jeune dans les trois Cheminees,
Fera de Pages vifs pour ardoir tetter,
Heureux qui loin fera de tels menées,
Trois de fon-fañv le feront mort guetter.
Engliih.
The young, Nero in the three Chimucys.
Shall caufe Pages to be throwa to be burnt alive,
Happy fall he be who [hall be far from this doing,
Three:of his oveaiblood fall caufe bim'to'be-put to death.


ve ANNO T, ie aed

A young Tyrant called here Nero, fall caufe fome Pages:to be burntalivein
three Chimneys, and afterwards himfelf fhall be put co death by. three of his own
blood this fact favoureth fo much of beftial cruelty,that I cannot beliveany Chrifti-
an.Prince can ever be guilty of it,


French,


onthe
lickly


is lot
Was,
trés
ddam-


Kral
0


brille


run, 4


of Michael Noftradamus.


C2 en
French.


Arrivera au port de Cor fibonne, |
Pres de Ravenne; qui pilleta la Dame,
En Mer profonde legat de Ulisbone,
Soubs Roc cachez raviront feptante ames


Englith.


There fhall come into the Port of Cortibonne,

Near Ravenna, thofe that fhall plunder the Lady,

In the deep See Lall be the Embafjador of Lisbonne,

The hidden under the Rock, [ball carry amay feventy “Sony.


ANN GT,

The Port of Curfibenne, muft of neceffity be that of Ancona ;, firft becaufe there is
no Port of the forme? nati@near the City of! Ravenita. Secondly, beeaule Ancona
isnear Raven,

By the Lady is. meant the Chappelor Cul dde Lady of Loretto, which is
threatned here to be plundred by fome Turks or, Pyrates, inticed thereunto by the
manifold riches chat are faid to be therein.

The third Verfe fpeaketh of a Portugats Embaflador, who it féemech fhall
drowned orburied.in the main Sea:

The. fourth, Verfe givetwarningof fome Robbérsänd Pyrates./ very like tobe
Turks, who.being:in Ambufcado;and eh tibet among the Rocks by the Sea fide, thall
carry away kevsaty Souls, \

French.


L’ Horrible guerre qu’en Occident s’apprefte,
L’An enfuivant viendrada Peftilenée;
Si fort rerrible;.quejenne, viel, ne belte,
Sang, feu, Mercu. Mars; Juniter en Fraice.
Englith: !
An horrid War is a preparing ia the W ‘eft,
The next year fhall come the Plagne, 5101
So ffrangl terrible that.ncitheryoung-nor old,nor beaff fhall el efcape
Blood, fire, Marci, Mars, Japitét jh Éric


| AN NOT: |
That word 4 preparing in the rk Verfe, fignifiech that he Galen of @ time,
wherein War was a making ready, when he was a.writing.
The wet of which our Adchor fpeakerh, isnot forme; ly the Weft which is 5 Spain,
buts the Weft refpectively to his Countrey.of Provence, whichis Picard), Lorrain,
eand the Countrey of Mers;in all thefe Places thacare;WiVelterly from Provence, there
was great VVars inthe year 1557 in Picardy in theyear 1558, at Calais and T hion-
ville, “and at laft from the middle ot that year to the end of it,were feen two great Ar-
mies "of both Kings, which threatned a horrid flaughter,had not God Almighty pro-
vided again it by ‘the treaty of Peace of the 34, of April 1559. the year following,
which was 1559. chere did happen what he foretelleth, wiz. the Plague fo ftrangely
terrible to Young, Old, and Beafts, ec.


A


y
D m1


29 4


The true Prophecies


And in thofe quarters there was nothing. but Fire and Bloods thatis, Maffacres
and ruines of all forts, then did Rule in France, the three Planets OfsFapiter, Mars


and Mercury, Fupiter and Mercury, for the peace that was then concluded, and Mars
for the V Var that was then on foor.


The Hiftory of Prevence mentioneth, that chat Peftilence was called by the Phy.
fitians, Febris erratica, by which within the fpace of five or fix Months, died almoft
an infinite number of people,

EME
French.
Camp pres de Nowdam pallera Gonffanville,
Et a Maiotes Jailiera fon enfcigne,
Convertira eh inftant plus de mille,
Cherchant le deux remettre en chaine & legne.
_ ; Enalifh: f
A, Camp fhall,by Noudam zo beyond Gouffanville,
And fball leave its Enfign at Maiotés, x
" And hall in divin fant convert iabove¢ thpnfantd oc ieee.
“Seeking top it the tivo parties in goad itnderfanding together, Lip
ANNOT: | |
Thefe three words of Noudam, Gouffanville and Aratores are three little inconfide.


rable Countrey .Towas, fituated néar-one anothers the meaning then oficis, that
an Army near, Nowda, {hall go through Gouffanviles and: fhalf in an inftant convert
that is, draw to his party above a thoufand of the contrary patty, !the bufinefs being
about the procuring of a good underftan ding and amity between two great ones.
EVUE
French.
Au lieu de Drux un Roy tepofera;
Et cherchera Loy changeant d’Anatheme,
Pendant le Ciel fftresfort Tonnera,


?


Portée neufve Roy tuera foy mefme.
s y


Englifh. |
In the place of Drux à King [ball ref bimfelf


And fball feeka Law changing Anatheime,


In the mean while theHeaven {ball T bunder fo Strongly,
That a new gate [hall kill the K tng bins felf. i
ANN OT.
Drax isa City in Normandy, near which Henry the
It is faid that in chat place a King thall reft himfelf,
Religion, butat that time ét fhall Thunde
new gage, the King himfelf fhall be killed


IV. gotamemorable victory:
nlelf, and fhall endeavour to change
t'and Lighten fo much, that by. the fallof.a


French,


Wal 3


LU


What is meant here by the three red ones of France is hard to decide, whether
they be Cardinals or Judges ; becaufe both wear commenly Scarlet Gowns, or fome
Noblemen cloathed in Scarlet 5 but it feemeth by this chat chere fhall bea lying in
wait for four men, three of which fhall be cloathedia Red, and one in Black, thofe
in Red {hall be knockt down dead, but he in Black fhall not, and this is to bedone
onthe left hand, over sgainft pitry, whichis a City in Champagne. |


This Stanza wanting both quantity in the Cadence of the Verfe, and Con-
nexioninthe fenfe, fheweth chat icis either falfly printed, or elfe the Author had no }
mind it fhould beunderftood; we fhall only fay, the Ferté is a Town in Champaene, ug ||
Vidame is a Lords Title in Frasce, of which there are but four of that fort, and are th
called in Givil Law Vicedominus, who by his firft Infticution, was temporal Judge of
the Bifhop; the firft of thofe Vidames, ot Vicedomini in France, is that of Amiens,
the fecond of Chartres, thethird of Rhemes, and the fourth of Gerberos,


of Michael Noftradamus.


LVIELI
French.


Au cofté gauche alendroit de Vitry;
Seront guettez les trois rouges de France,
Tous affommez rouge, noir non meurdry,
Par les Bretons remis en afleurance.
Englifh.

On the left band over againft Vitry,
The three red ones of France fhall be watched for,
All the red [ball be knockt dead, the black not murdered,
By the Britains fet up again in fecurity.

ANNOT,


LIX
French.


A la Ferte prendra la Vidame,
Nicol tenu rouge quavoit produit la vie,
La grand Loyfe naiftra qui fera clame,
Donnant Bourgongne a Bretons par envie, 1]
Englifh. ll
In the Ferté the Vidame fhall take
Nicol, reputed red, whom life bath produced, il
The great Lewis fball be born, who fball Lay clair, a
Giving Burgundy to the Britains, through envy, ia
ANNOT.


LX. il
French: Ut
Confli& Barbare en Ja Corneré notre,
Sang efpandu trembler la Dalimatie,
Grand Ifmael mettra fon promonraire,
Ranes trembler, fecours Lu fitanie.


Ddd


ee A =


a


The true Prophecies


Englifh..
A Barbarian fight in the black Corner,
Blood fhall be fpilt, Dalmatia fhall tremble for fear,
Great I{mael fhall fet up bis promontory,
Frogs [ball tremble, Portugal foall bring fuccour.
ANNOT,

This Prochecie foretelleth divers accidents in feveral places, without determinati-
on of any precife time; as forexample, Junderftand by that Barbarian confi, near
the black Corner, to be (ome famous Battle among the Infidels themfelves,fome were
about the Black Seas then he faith, that abundance of Blood fhall be [pilt, and Dalmatia
fhall tremble, which is a Province belonging to the Venetians, and bordering upon
Gracia; by great Jfwael he underftandeth the great Sophy of Perfia, whofe name


hath been often fo, By che Frogs it is not eafie to know whether he meaneth
France or Spain, for both abound:in that kind of Infe&s,


LXL
French:


a pille faite a la Cofte Marine,

Tacita nova & parens amenez,

Plufieurs de Malthe par le fait de Me ine,
‘{troit ferrez feront mal guerdonnez.


Englith.
The plunder made upon the Sea Coaft,
Incita nova and friends brought up,
Many of Maltha, for the fact of Meffina,


Being clofe kept, fball be ill rewarded.


ANNOT.
It feemeth that his Plunder made upon the Sea Coaft, fhall beabout Mefsiza, by
the «Malthefes, who afterwards thall rue for it, being taken Prifoners, and feverely
punifhed.


As for the expreffion Incite nova, it is a barbarous derivation of the Latine,to figs
nifie the ftirring of new troubles,


LXIk
French.

Au grand de Cheramonagora,
Seront croilez par tangs tous attachez,
Le Pertinax Oppi, & Mandragora,
Raugon d'Oétobre le tiers feront lafchez.:

Englifh.
To the great one of Cheramonagora,
Shall be croffed by Ranges, all tyed up,
The Pertinax Oppi, and Mandragora,
Raugon the third of O&ober fhall be fet loofe.


Lu


ralt is
vet he 4


Dit
i Bea
le Were
lt
5 Upon
flame
leaneth


by
everey


NOT:


of Michael Noftradamus.


ANNOT.

The word Cheramonagora, is either altogether barbarous and infignificant, or muft
be derived from thefe three Greek words, xe: manus, Hivos, falas; and eye, duco,
and foit may fignifie one that leadeth along by the hand, in which fenfe may be un-


derftood the King of Frasce, who alone leadeth his people by the hand, without any
help of Councel. |


The fecond Verfe fignifieth the Oppofitions he fhall meet with among: his
Neighbours, combined together co hinder him,


By Oppi, he meaneth here Opiwm, the Juice of Poppies, which he calleth here


Pertinax ; becaule of its pertinacious quality in procuring fleep, as alfo en
dragora,

By Raugon, he meaneth fome other foporiferous Herb; fo that it feemeth
that thofe three things fhall be given upon the third of odfoder to fome body, it
feemeth to that Cheramonagera, by whom fome underftand the King of France,others
Oliver the laft ufurpacor.


i Ba

French. |
Plaintes, & pleurs, cris, & grands hurlemens,
Pres de Narbonne, à Bayonne & en Foix,
O quelshorribles, calamitez, changemens,
Avant que Mars revolu quelquefois.


Eoglifh.
Complaints and tears, cries, and great bowliner,
Near Narbonne, Bayonne azd in Foix,
O what horrid calamities and changes,
Before Mars bath made fometimes bis revolution.
ANNOT.


Narbonne, Bayonne, and Foix are Towns of Langnedec. a Province in France ; th
reft is cafe.


=
a)


LXV

French.
L’ A:mathien pater Monts Pyrtne>s.
En Mars Narbow ne fefa teftfatce,
“Par Mer 8& Terre fera fi grand: menee,
Cap. n'ayant Terre feure pour demeurance. |

: Enelith.
The Æmathian fall pafs by the Pyrenean Mountains,
In March Narbon fbalbnake no refiStance, :
By Sea and Land he [ball make fo much ado,
Cap. fball no¢-have fafe ground to hve in
| ANNOT, hs |
The <Æwathian properly fhould be the Macedonian , but by it is underftood here


the Spaniard,whofe Countrey is on one fide fenced by the Pyrenean Mountains ; the
reft is plain;


Dd d x Frené h.


|
|


T be true Prophecies


LX Y.,
French.
Dedans le coing de Luna viendra rendre,
Ou fera prins & mis en Terre eftrange, iy
Les fruits immeurs feront a grand efclandre,
Grand vitupere, a l’un grande louange.
Englith. thi
He [ball come into the corner of Luna,
Where be [hall be taken and put in a frange Land,
The green fruits fhall be in great diforder,
A great fhame, to one {ball be great praife.
ANNOT. |
This Stanza hath relation and connexion to the precedent , and by it ought to be °
anderftood , that the faid «4 mathian or Spaniard fhall come as far as the corner of
Lana, wherein he {hall be taken and (ent into a ftrange Countrey, at which time the
green Fruits and Grafs fhäll be much damaged, for which one of the parties fhall re-
ceive great fhame, and the other great praife, Butwhat he meaneth by the Corner


of Luna, 1 muft leave the judgement ofitto the Reader, for I do ingenioufly confefs
chat I neither know City nor Counttey of that name,


XLVI.
French.
Paix, union, fera & changement, rie
Efiats, Offices, bas hault, & hault bien bas, k
[ii Drefler voiages, le fruit premier, torment,
q i Guerre cefler, civils proces, debats, |
|| in Englifh. of
quil Me Peace, union, shall be, and mutation, sthe
a States, and Offices, low high, aud high low,
A journey shall be prepared for, the firft fruit, pains,
War shall ceafe, as alfo, civil fuits, and ftrifes.
ANNOT,

This is eafie to be underftood, many interpret it of the downfall of Rome,at which
a time all quarrels both of Religion and States would be laid afide , if the world were
et all of one mind,

A LXVII.

WW French.

ae Du haut des Monts a lentour de Dixere,
Port a la Roche Valent. cent aflemblez,
a De Chaftean-Neuf, Pierrelate, en Donxere
He Contre le CreSt, Romans {oy aflembler.


Englith,


of Michael Noftradamus.


ie Englifh.
| From the top of the Mountains about Dizere
Gate at the RockValence, a hundred gathered together,
| From Chafteau-Neuf, Pierrelate, iz Douzere
| Againft the Creft, Romans, shall be gathered.


ANNOT.


This is a peculiar Prophecy for the Provinces of Dauphiné and Languedoc in which
all the Towns and Rivers here mentioned are fituated.


LXVIII,

French. 1

Du Mont Aymar fera noble obfcurcie. Wi
. * . ° 9 ; (RE

Le mal viendra au Joint de Saone & Rhofne, Hy


CE RACE ere 4


‘ « ; OU {lle | |
robe: Dans bois cachez Soldats jour de Lucie à) |
nerf M Qui ne fut onc un fi horrible Throfne. 1
mette . al
fale Englith. aa
Cone From Mount Aymar fhall proceed a Noble obfcurity, a

conte: fF The evil fhall come to the joyning of the Saone and Rhofne. il


Soldiers fhall be hid in the Wocd on St. Lucy’s day,
So that there was never fach an horrid Throne.
_ ANNOT.
There is anotable fault in the impreffion of the firft Verfe of this Stanza stor
inftead of Mount Aymar, it muftbe CHostlimar , which isa Town in Provence or va |
Languedoc fituated by the River Rhof#e,the fenfe therefore af this,is,chat from Moat- i
limar fhall proceed fome notable and obfcure defign , and that fhall'reach as far as
Eyons, which is the City where the Saone and the Rbofne meet, and that for that pur- i
pofe,there fhall be hidden a oteat many Souldiers in a Wood on St, Lacy’s day,which it
is the 13th. of Decembeg, | |
LXIX,
Frencl.
Sur le Mont de Bailly & la Breffe,
Seront cachez de Grenoble les fers, nh
Outre Lyon, Vien. cula fi grand grefle, |
Langoult en Terre n’en ceflara un tiers. ol
Englifh. an
Upon the Mount of Bailly, aud ibe Conntrey of Brefle, |
Shall be hidden the fierce ones of Grenoble, ‘ |
Beyond Lyons, Vienna, upon then: foall fall fuch a bail, à |
That lauguifbing upon the ground,the third part fall not be left. |
| ANNOT, |
The Mount Bailly, andthe Countrey of Bré/sia,are by Savoy, in which place (our aun
Author faith ) the fierce ones’ thatis, the ftout men of Grenoble, the chief Town of ak |


Dauphine; {hall be hidden, and that fuch a Hail fhall fall upon them, as not one third
part fhall be left.


French.


The true F rophectes


TEX:
French.
Harnots trenchans dans les flambeaux cachez,
Dedans Lyon le jour du Sacrement,
Ceux de Vienne feront tretous hachez,
Par les Cantons Latins, Mafconeront.
Englwh.
Sharp Weapons fhall be hidden in burning Torches,
In Lyons the day of the Sacrament,
Tbofe of Vienna fhall be all cut to pieces,
By the Latin Cantons, after the example of Mafcon.
| ANNOT.


This foretelleth a notable Treafon that thall be adted ar Lyons, upon the Sacra-
ments day, otherwife called Corpus Chrifti day, upon which the Roman Catholicks
are Wont to make a Proceffion with the Sacrament about the Town,with abundance
of burning Torches, of fearful bignefs, infomuch that fome (asat Angeirs ) require
20 or 24 mento carry them, in thofe Torches (our Author faith ) fhall V Veapons
be hidden, by means of which the fa& thall be committed, The reft js eafic,


L XX Ts
Freach.
Au lieux Sacrés, animaux veus a Trixe,
Avec celuy qui nofera Je jour,
{T BMP oy BL À ?
A Carcalfonne pour dulgrace propice,
Sera pole pour plus ample fejont.
Englifh.
In the Sacred places; Animals fhall be feen at T
With hin that fhall not dare in the day,
In Carcaflonne for 4 favourable difgrace,
À - sd J i
He fhall be fet to make a longer ftay
ANNOT.


Whether the Author did underftand himfelf here I know not, Tam fure I donot:
Carcalfonneis a City of Languedoc, and Trixe isa barbarous word,


LXXII,

French.
Encor feront les Saints Temples pollus,
Et expilez par Senat Tholofuin
Saturne deux trois Sieclesrévolus, _
Dans Auril, May, gens dénouveiu Levain.


rixe,


of Michael Noftradamus.


Englifh.
Once more [ball the Holy Temples be polluted, |
And depredated by the Senaie of Thoulouze,
Saturn two three Ages finifbed,
{n April, May, people of anew Leaven.
ANNOT.
This is, when the Planet Satwra hath finifhed twice three Ages; thatis, 600
years from the time that this Prophecy was written, then the Senates of Thow/ouze,


being men of a new Leaven (meaning being Proteftants ) fhall caufe the Ro-
mifb Churches to be polluted and depredated inthe Months of 4pr5/ and 4447,


LXXIII
French
| Dans Foix entrez Roy Cerulée Turban,
ve | Et regnera moins evolu Saiurne,
Gien. | Roy Turban Blanc, Brzance coeur ban,


tholicks M
Lu | Sol, Mars, Mercure, pres la: Hurne.
un(e | :


rei : Englith.
mis In Foix fhall come a King with a Blew Turbant,

| And fhall Reign before Saturn is revolved,

Then a King with a White Turbant [ball make Bizance to quake,


Sol, Mars Mercury, beino near ihe top of the Maft.


ANNOT, .
Foix is a Countrey of France, near Gafcony, wherethe Author faith, a King with
a Blew Turbant fhall come, and fhall govern lefs then an Age, that is 100 years,
after which another King with a VVhite Turbant thall come, and fhall Conquer Bz-
zance (which in Latine is Conftantinople ) the Blew or Green Turbant is attributed
to the great Turk, and che V Vhite‘one to the King of France, by whom the Tarks
have a Prophecie, their Monarchy {hall be fubverted,


| LXXIV.
| Freach.

| Dans la Cité de Fert/od homicide,

1 | Fait & fait multe Bœuf arant ne mader,
|


(|


Retour encore aux honneurs d’ Artemed?s

dun | Et a Vulcan corps morts{epulturer.
Englifh.

In the City of Fertlod ome murdered, '
| Caufeib a Fine to be laid for killinga plowing Oxe,
i} There ball be a return of the honoursidue to Arcemide,
| And Vulcan fhall bury dead bodies.
1 ANNOT,
| VVhat is that City of Fertfod, is hard to guefs, chere being none of this name in


Ewrope that I know. The reft of the words are plain, though the fenfe be abftruce
‘enough, therefore we fhall leave them to the liberty of the Reader,


French,


De |’ Ambraxie & du pais de Thrace,
Peuple par Mer, Mal, & fecours Gaulois
Perpetuelle en Provence la Trace,

Avec veftiges de leur Couftumes & Loix.


The true Prophecies


LXX V.
French.


Englifh.


From Ambraxia, and from the Countrey of Thracia,


People by Sea, Evil, and French fuccours,


The Trace of it fhall be perpetual in Provence,
The footfteps of their C uftoms and Laws remaining.


ANN OT.
VVhat Countrey this Améraxia fhould be, is yet unknown, for my part I take it


to be a forged word, as for Thracia it is a Countrey berween Hungary and Grecce.
Obferve here that Evil is not an Epithete, to either People or Sea,but a word
of admiration by it felf, as 4/7 in Latine, whichis called vox admirantis.


Avec le noir Rapax & fanguinaire,
Yffu du peaultre de l’'inhumain Neron,


LXXVI.
French.


Emmy deux Fleuves main gauche Militaire,


Sera meurtry par Foy Chaulveron.


Englifh.


With the Black and bloody Rapax,
Defcended from the paultry of the inhumane Nero,
Between two Rivers, on the left Military band,


He fball be murdered by Joyne Caulveron.


ANNOT.


This Prophecie portendeth the death of a black, bloody,and ravenous man(which


in Latine is Rapax) who fhall be murdered between two Rivers


name fhall be Foywe Chanlueron.


LXXVII.
French.


Le Regne prins le Roy conviera,


La Dame prinfe a mort jurez a fort,


La vie a Royne Fils on defniera,
Et la pellix au fort de la confort.


"


»by one whofe proper


of Michael Nofiradaiius.


10 Tr AM Rt
1 The Kingdom being taken, the King fball invite.
The Lady taken to death, tics
| The Life fhall be denyed unto the Queens Son,
| And the Pellix fball be at the height of the Confort.

You muft obferve, that there isaword falfe printed, which is Pellix, inftead of
which fhould be Pellex, whichin Latine fignifieth a Whore or Concubine.


The fenfe therefore of this is,that a certain King having taken anotherK ingdom,


fhall pat the Queen oft to death, asalfo her own Son, atter which; he hall make
his Concubine Queen,


LXX VIII.
' «qu French.
It La. Dame Grecque de Beauté Jaydique,
wo Heureufe faite de proces innumerable,
iim F ‘Hors tranflatée au Regne Hifpanique,
| Captive prinfe mourir mort miferable.


one ih
The Grecian Lady of exquifite Beauty,
Made happy from inanmerable quarrels,
Being tranflated into the Spanifh Kingdom
Shall be made 4 Prifoner, and die a miferable deaths


a | ~ » AN NOT, Rie. Ve
This Stanzais concerning the Lady Elizabeth of France, Daughter to Henry the IT;
and Sifter to Charles the IX. who being promifed firft to Don Carlo Infante of Spain,
was afterwards Married to his Father Philip the 11, at which the young man being

- vexed and difcontented, began to raife combuftions in the State, for which, and his


too much familiarity with his Mother in Law, he was ftrangled by his Eathers com-
mand, and {he poifoned.


LX XTX,
| French. ÿ

hi Le Chef de Claffe par fraude, ftratageme,

RUE | Fera timides {ortir de leurs Galeres
Sortis meurdris chef reniéux de Crefme,
Puis par l'Embufche luy rendront les falairés

Englih.

The Commander of a Fleet by frand did ffratagerr,
Shall caufe the fearful ones to come forth of their Galleys,
Come out murdered, chief renouncer of Baptifur,


After that by an Ambufcado they'l give him again bis falar 'y


Ex, | Eee ANNO TF:


The true Prophecies


_ ANNOT. | | |
The two firft Verfes are plain, the third fignifieth, that thefe fearful ones being |
come out of their Galleys, part of them fhall be murdered, and among them the
Captain, a renouncer of his Baptifm, or Renegado,and the reft afterwards by an Am-
bufcado, fhall requite in the fame Coin thofethat had ufed them fo,
LX XX.
French.
Le Duc voudra les fiens exterminer,
Envoyera les plus forts, lieux eftranges,
Par tyrannie Bize & Luc ruiner.


Puis les Barbares fansVin feront Vendanges,


Englith.
The Duke fhall endeavour to exterminate his own
And fball [ex away the firongeft of them into remote places, >
He fhall alfo ruinate Bize and Luc,
The Barbarians /bal! itake Vintage without Wine.
. ANNOT. |
There is a great faulcin the impreffion of the French Copy in this Stanza, which
maketh the fenfealtogecher inexplicable, it muft then in ftead of Bixe and Luc, be |
written Pife and Læcques, which are two Towns in /taly, near the Duke of Florence’s |
Dominions; one of thefe Towns, v2z, Pifa he hath taken already, and from aCom-
mon- Wealth madeit fubjeét to himfelf ; ‘the other though feveral times attempted
by him, hath preferved its liberty to this day, Thelaft Verfe fignifieth, that after


this is come to pafs, the Barbarians, thatis, the Florentins hall make Vintage without
Wine; thatis, fhall plunder and fpoil at cheir pleafure,


al L XXXL.
te | French.
ate Le Roy rufé entendra fes Embufches,
ei De trois quartiers Ennemis aflaillir, is
Un nombre eftrangeLarmes de coqueluches, my hah
Viendra Lamprin du traduéteur faillir, |p ter
i Englifh.
Hi 1 The crafty King [ball hear of his Ambufcadoes:

| iH ‘ And fhall afsail bis Exemies on three fides,

ji À ffrange number of Friers, mens Tears
Shall canfe Lamprin to defert the Traitor.
A ANNOT. | rs bis
ab a The only difficulty here is to know who that Lampris thould be, who thall be di-
ra verted from following a Traitor ( which he meaneth here by the French word Tra-
md a docteur ) and fhall be diverted from it by the Tears of Fryers, which aremeant here


ME bike by the añcient Frehch word Cogaelsches, which fignifieth a Fryets Cool or Ca-


French,


of Michael Noftradamus,


LXXXII.
| French.
nthe À Par le Deluge & peftilence forte.
| La Cité grande de long temps Affiegée,
h La Sentinelle & Garde de main morte,
| Subite prinfe mais de nul outragée.


Englith,
The great City having been long Befieged,
By an Innundation and violent Plague,
The Sentinal and Watch being furprifed,
Shall be taken on a fudden,but burt by no body,


ANN OT.


+ | This is very plain, if by the greac City you underftand Paris, who ig fabje& to fre-
| quent Innundations and Plagues.


EXX XIII,
French.
Sol Vingt de Taurus, fi fort terre tremblera,
| Le grand Theatre remply ruinera,
rent L’Air, Ciel, & Terre, obfcurcir & troubler,
Come Lors l'Infidele Dieu, & Saints voguera.
tate D Englith. , ;
si The Sun being in the 20th of ‘Taurus, the Earth fall fo quake,
| That it foall fill and rninate the great Theater
The Air the Heaven,etheEarth fall be fo darkened,and troubled,
That the unbelievers fhall call upon God, and bis Saints.
ANNOT. | |
This famous Earth. quake having not yer happened in Europe, it i like to happen


Within few years, for our Authors Prophecies (by his own confeffion ) do not extend
füfcher chan the year 1700.


|
| LXXXIV.
] French.
| Roy expofe parfaira l’Hecatombe, -
| Apres avoir trouve fon Origine
| Torrent ouvrir deMarbre &Plomb la Tombe:
D'un gtand Romain d'Enfeigne Medufia.
| | Englifh..,.
sith a The King expofed foal fulfill the Hecatonibe,
| After he bath found ont bis Offspring, | |
| A Torrent fhall open the Sepulcher, made of. Marble and Lead,
| | Of'a great Roman, with a Medufean.Exfiga,


Eee 2 ANNOT.


396 T he true Prophecies
ANNOT.

This Prophecie is divided into two parts,: The firft two Verfes are concerning
a King, who fhall perform che Funeral Rites ahd Ceremonies to his Parents, wher
he is come to the knowledge of them, having been expofed for loft before.

The two laft Verfes are concerning an ancient Sepulcher ofa Reman, that fhall
be digged up and found outby a Torrent, and the Arms of the faid Rowar (hall be
fomething like the head of Medu/a, whofe Hairs were Serpents, and was fo fearful to
behold, that by feeing of it, che beholders were turned into ftones,

L'XXXV,
French. ;
Pafler Guenne, Langnedoc, & le Rhofne,
D’ Agen tenants, de Marmande & la Keble,
D'Ouvrir par foy parroy,Phocen tiendra fon Throne;


Confli& auprés Saint Pol dé Manfeole. |
: au
| Engli th. 1.
They fhall pafs over Gafcony; Languedoc, and the Rhofne, he
From Agen keeping Marmande, and the Reole, re
Te open the Wall by F aith,, Phocen fhall keep bis Throne ni
Z 1 . >
A Battle fball be by St.Paul of Manfeole. fi
AN NOT. À
The whole of this Prophecie fignifiech ‘no more, but that an Army (hall pafs
through all thele places, and chatat laft chere will bea Battle fought by that place,
| talled St, Pail de cManfeole,,
| LXXX VI.
ai French:
{ul Du Bourg la Reywe parviendront droitia Chartres;
Wa Bt feront pres du Pont: Aatony pole,
Be Sept pour la paix cauteleux comme Martres,
Nil Feront entréed’Armée a Paris claufe:
Englifh. |
From Bourg la Reyne they fball conte ffraight to Chartres;

ae And {ball make a ftand near Pont Antony,

a, Seven for Peace as crafty as Martres;
ji Lbey fhallenter in Patis befeged with.an Army. ver
ih / le JS
net T
ij ANNOT. | fr ra
Ht Bourg lat Reyne is a lictle town. within fix Miles of Paris, Chartresis the chief City he
tinh: of the Province BcawÎfe, Pont Antony is a little Town between them both, fothat the i

| fenfe of the whole is this, that feaveñ men, crafty like cAtartres ( which are thofe 1
ae Rusia Foxes that afford thericheft Futres, called Afarires ZibeHines ) {all go from bf
ae Bourg la Reyne to Chartres, making. litcle ftay at Pént, Antony, and then thall come We
quil with an Army into Paris, which fhall be befieged at that time, 1 believe this Pro- mal

i phécy is come to pafs already in the time of the Civil V Vars of France; but for want ue

pe à ot the Hiftory I could not quote the time, i


aL


French:


ln,


hall pat 1
At place,


nel Cy
otatte D
etal
goo
come
tis Pro"
for want


Of Michael Noftradamus,
LXXXVIL

À ROUTEUR a drench,

Par da Foreft du Touphon eflartée,

Par Hermitage fera pofé le Temple,

Le Duc d'Effampes par fa rufe inventée:

Du Montlebery Prelat donra exemple.


D WA er ou: Englith, »

By the Forreft. Touphon cur off;

By the Hermitage hail the Temple be fet,

The, Duke of Eftampes by bis invented trick,
Shall give example to the Prelat of Montlehery..


TE ie ANNOT. : Er
.. Hereisa fault in the Impreffion , forinftead of l ouphon, ic muft be written To ope
which isa Forreft fome 30 Miles from Paris towards Beau{fe, near which isfeated the
Town of Adontlebery, in the thefaid Forrett is feared an Hermitage, and not far from
thence the City of Eftampes, which carryeth the Title of Dutchys fo that the fenfe
oficis this, that this Forreft being cut off ( as itis now for the molt part) inthe place
where that Hermitage was, thall be builc a Church or Convent, 4s it is now Caleflins
friars, called Marconffy, and that the {aid Hermitage (hall be taken from the juri{di-
Ction of the Town of Mextlehery, under which it was before.
LXX XVII.
ie French.
Calais, Arras, fecouirs.a Theroanne:
Paix & femblant fimulera l’efcoute;


Soulde d’Allobrox defcendre par Roane:
Deftornay peuple qui defera la routte.
| Englifh.
Calais, Arras, fhall give fucconrstoT heroahne,
Peace or the like, fball.diffemble the hearing,
Souldiers of Allobrox fball defcend by Roane;
People perfwaded, foal fpoil tbe March:
This Prophecy did happen in the'thine of Hegry'the T1. King of France, about the
year 1559: : Cer ue ee + 0 ARE je thd
The Jaft Verfe faith, that ‘thofe two Towns Calais and Arras. gave {uccours te
Theroane,. chat is'to'th¢ Countrey where Theronenne was feated, which was deftroyed
by: Charles the V,Emperout!’ This Countrey was called Pontisen, of which The,
ronenne was the chief Town, ae .
The fecond Verfe doth determine the time whereabont th


is came to pafs, when


he faith, peace or the like [hall diffemble the hearing; becanfe in the year 1556. inthe


beginning of February there wasa Truce for five years between the two Crowns of
France and Spain, concerning the Low Countieys; and this Truce fignified not much,
nor was well cemented , fo thatthe Author faith, Peace or the like fall diff eme the
hearing ; that is, fhall fain notwtowhear ‘that che Cardinal Caraffa did endéavour in
France to have the Trice broken, |


The


398 The true Prophecies:


The third Verfe is obfcure, becaufe ofa faule inthe Impreffion, wherein they
have put Resane inftead of Noamne, that is Hannone by tranfpofition of letters, but
that being corrected, the Verfe is clear, fuppofing chat Philibertus Emanuel Duke of
Savoy was General of the Army, againft France in the Low-Countreis | and wandering
about to do fome notable exploit, he came down through the Province of Hainawlt,
called in Latine Haswonia, and.came to Mariembourg, as if he would have Belieged
it, but after fome light skirmifhes he laid Siege to Rocroy, and this is the meaning of
the third Verfe, when he faith, Souldiers of Allobrox fhall deféend by Noanne, that is,
Souldiers in che Army of the Duke of Savey, which in Latine is Afobrox, came down
to AMariemboure, and turned back againto Rocrey,

The fourth Verfe mentioneth what did happen at the Siege of Rocroys that place
being nor yet very well fortified ; the King was unwilling to put any of his beft Soul.
dierstherein, but the Duke of Wevers undertook the defence ofit ; which he did
really and glorioufly perform, info much, that the Dake ofSavey was compelled to


raile up the Siege, and going back towards St, Quentin, he took Vervins by ftorm,


and gave the booty of it to his Souldiers, who took heart uponit, having been much
difcduraged before by che refiftance of che Duke of Nevers, . This is chefenfe of the
fourth Verle, People perfuaded (ball {poil the march, thatis, the people of Resroy per-
fuaded ro hold our by the courage and prefence of the Dukeot Nevers, fpoiled the
march that the Dake of sazoy had propounded to himfelf, infomuch, that raifing
the Siege he went to Per vins, and from thence to St, Quentin,
LXX XTX.
French,
Sept ans Philip fortune profpere,
Rabaificra des Barbares l'effort.
Puis fon midy perp'ex rebours affaire,
Jeune Vesrion abyfmera fon fort.
Englifh.
Philip fhall have feven years of profperons fortune,
Shall beat down the attempt of the Barbarians,
Then in bis Noon. be fball be perplexed and have untoward bhfinefs
nc - . 7 F ® ÿ
Young Ogmion fhall pull down his ftrenath.
+t ANNOT,

This Stanza was made concerning Philip the TI, King of Spats , who for the firft
feven years that he came to his Crown, had profperous fortune , did brave exploits
againft the Barbarians, and chiefly in the perfon of his Brother Des Fran of Anfrria
who got the memorable Battle of Lepantho againft the Turks , but in the middle of
bis Noon, that is of his Age... fell into great perplexitiesand crofs bufinefles ; being
conitrained to put his onely fon Den Carla to death, and to poifon his wife, and after


thatnever profpered, when young Ogmien (thats Henry IV. King of France) came
vo the Crown.


X C.
French.
Un Capitaine de la grand Ger manie,
Se yiendra rendre par fimulé fecours,
Au Roy des Roys, aide de Pannonie,
Que fa révolte fera de fang grand cours.


Dy
I


meane


of Michael Noftradamus.


he Englifh,
y À A Captain of the great Germany, Sur
uk | Shall come to yield bimfelf with a fained belp,
eed | | Unto the King of Kings, help of Hungary,
af | Soha bis veoh hall caufe a great bibbdibed.
is | ANNOT. 4
i Pannonie in Latine is Hungary, there is nothing hard in this, nier it be what he
whe meaneth by the King of Kings, whether it be the great Turk or the Emperour.
Soul. : X Cl.
t did ; French.
kr | L’ Boobie pefte Peryuthe & Nicopole,
| Le Cherfonefe tiendra & Marceloine,
in | La Theffalie naiftera I’ A mpbipole, -
pre | Mal incogneu & le refus ‘d’ Antoine}
the | Englifh,
ny | The horrid peftilence foall feixe-upon Perynthe ba Ni icopolis
4 The Cherfonefe and Marceloine,
It fhall wafte Theflalia and Amphipolis, |
An unknown evil and the refufal of Antony.
ANNOT.
| There is feveral faults in che impreffion here , for inftead of Perynthe, it it muñt be
|| Corinthe, For Marceleine, it muft be Macedoine: the fubftanceof the whole is, that
| there fhall be a great plague i in all thefe Countries of Afia. The refufal of Antony is
D foifted here co makeup the rime with Macedony,
i : XCIT.
| French ‘
i Le Roy voudra dans Cité neufve entrer:
fy ij Par ennemis expugner l’on viendra,
| Captif libere, faulx dire & per petrer,
| Roy dehors eftre, loin d’ennemis tiendra.
chit | Englih. -
A } The King foal defire to entér into the new City,
bd | With foes they fall conte to overcome it,
beng The Prifoner being free, Jal peak and act cea
die | The King being gotten ont, [bail Keep far from enenites
bie ANNOT,


The fenfe of all chefe words fo ill jointed, isno more büt that a certain King (hall
defire to enter into a new City, and therethey fhall comeand Befiege him, where
he (hall both a& and {peak deceitfully to get his liberty , which he having obtai ned,
fhall keep faf from his foes.


ibe wue Prophecies
XCIII.
French.

Les ennemis du Fort bien efloignez, p'

Par Chariots conduits le Baftion,

Par fur les Murs de Bourges elgrongnez,

Quand Hercules battra ! Hemathion.

ai) 31 Englith.

The énemies being a good way from the Fort,

Shall upon Wagons be conducted to the Bulwark,

From the top of Bourges Walls they (ball be cut lefs,

When Hercules hall beat the Hemathion.


ANNOT.


Bourges is the chief City of a Province i France called Berry,

There is nothing difficult in this, butonely what he meaneth by Hercules beating
the < Æmathion , unlefs by Hercules he meaneth the French , and by -£mathion the
Spaniard.


XCIV.
French:


Foibles Galeres feront unis enfemble,
Ennemis faux, le plus fort en rempart,
Foible affailies Wratiflavie ttemble ;
Lubeck & My/ne tiendront Barbare patt.
Englith.
Weak Galleys shall be united together,
Falfe enemies, the flrongeft shall be fortified,
Weak affaults, and yet Breflaw quaketh for fear,
Lubeck avd Milne shall take the part of the Barbarians;
ANNOT.


Breflaw, Lubeck and Mifne, are three Cities of Germanys thereft is plain


x Cy,
French. à
Le nouveau fait conduira l’exercite,
Proche apame julque aupres du Rivage,
Tendant fecours de Melanoife eflite,
Duc yeux privé, a Milan fer de Cage.
Englifh.
The new man shall lead up the Army,
Near Apatne, till near the Bank ,
Carrying fuccours of choice Forces from Milan,


The Duke deprived of his eyes,and an Iron Cage at Milan.


ANNOT:


| bein
bien the


of Michael Noftradamus.


ANNOT.
Apamé is a barbarous word , at leaft I cannot tell what Janguageitis, the reft is
plain enough, and fignifiech chat a Duke fhall be deprived of his eyes,and fhall be put
in an Iron Cage at Milan.
XC VI,
French.
Dans Cité entrer exercite defnice,
Ducentrera par perfuafion,
Aux foibles portes clam Armee amenée,
Mettront feu, mort, de fang effufion.
Englifh.
The Army being denied the entrance of the City,
The Ditke fhall enter by perfuafion, |
To the weak Gates,clam the Army being brought,
Shall put all to fire and fword,
ANNOT.
Clam here is in Latine prepofition, fignifying fecretlys the reft is eafies
| | XCVII.
. French, |
De Mer Copies.en trois-parts divifées,
A la feconde les Vivres failliront,
Defefperez cherchant Champs Elifeées,
Premiers en breche entrez victoire auront.
Englifh.
A Fleet being divided into three parts,
The vitluals will fail the fecond part,
Being in defpaire they'l feek the Elyfian Fields,
And entring the breach firft,fball obtain viétory.
. ANNOT,

A Fleet being divided into three parts, the fecond divifion thall fall into want of
victuals, for which being defperate, they fhall attempt the Town of the enemy, and
fhalt enter it by the breach, and get the victory,

XC VIII.

e French.

Les affligez par faute d'un feul taint,
Contremenant a partie oppofite,
Aux Lygonois mandera que contraint,
Seront de rendre le‘grand chef de Molite.

Englifh.
The afflitted want of one only died,
Carrying againft the oppofite part, |
Shall fend word to thofe of Lyon,they fhall be compelled,


To furrender the great chief of Molice.
Fff ANNOT:


The true Prophecies
ANNOT.


This is the moft nonfenfical thing that isin all the Book, for neither the words not
the connexion is intelligible, therefore ic’ being fo much out of the common road of
our Author, Iamapt to believe thatit wasat firft very falfly printed, and chat thofe
that came after, were loth to alter it for the refpect of antiquity,


X CIX.

French.
Vent Aquilon fera partir le Siege,
Par murs jetter cendres, chaulx, & poufiiere,
Par pluye apres qui leur fera bien piege,
Dernier fecours encontre leur Frontie¢re.

Englifh. |

The North wind fball canfe the Siege to be raifed,
They [ball throw afbes, lime, and du,
By a rain after that fball be a trap to them,
It fhall be the laft Juccours againft their Frontiere.


ANNOT.


Here is defcribed a notable ftratagem of a Befieged Town", who againf rainy
weather caft fo much afhes, lime and duft, that therain coming chereupon, it made
fuch a mire, as the Befiegers were not abletoaffaultit, |


C.
French.


Navale pugne nuiét fera fuperce,
Le feu, aux Naves a l'Occident ruine,
Rubriche neuve, la grand néf colorée,
Ire a vaincu, & victoire en bruine.
Englifh.
In a Sea-fight, night fhall be overcome,
By fire, to the Ships of the Weft ruine fball happen,
A new ftratagem, tbe great Ship coloured,
Anger to the vanquifbed, and vittory in a Mift.


ANNOT.


He foretelleth ofa Sea-fightin the night, wherein by the light of the burning
Ships night fhall be overcome, the Ships chat came from the Weft fhall be worfted,
and by a ftratagem of a great Ship painted in colours , anger {hall remain to the van-
quifhed, and the victory fhall be got ina Mift, ¥


uring
fe,
eva


= Up \\ Lh Y
À) yi vy xy. LE ay Sart


Ss x S "s
Sy Sw SRE
4 ae LP fa

EL 6e


THE


PROP H LE CIES
Michael Né de


CENTURY X


I.
French;


i Enneity, l’ennemy foy profñl'é,

Ne fe tiendra, les captifs retenus,
Prins-preme mort & lerefte en cherie,
Donnant le refte pour eftre fecourus.


Englith.
To the enemy, the enemy faith promifed,
Shall not be kept the prifoners fball be detained,


The firft taken, put to death,and the ref ftripped,


Giving the remnant that they may be fuccoured.


ANNOT.


Thefe wordsare plain, though the fenfe be a little intricated , and thecontents
being of {mall conceraments, deferve no further explanation,


Fffa


French,


i}
|
|
|
{


T be true Prophecies


If.
French,


Voile Gallere Voile nef Cachera,

La grand Clafle viendra fortir la moindre,
Dix Naves proches le tourneront poulfer,
Grand vaincüe, unies a foy joindre.


Englith.
The Galley and the Ship fhall bide their Sails,
The great Fleet fball make the little one to come ont,
Tex Ships near band, fball turn and push at it,
The great being wanquifbed,they [ball unite together.
ANNOT.
Thefe are fome particularities of a Sea fight between a great Fleet and a {mall one,
wherein he faith, that fome had hid their Sails, belike they were unwilling to come
out of the Harbour and to fight; but he faich, chat che great Fleet will compel the


little one tocome out; bur ten great Ships will come to help the little Fleet; and
after the great one hath been overcome, will joyn themfelves to the little Fleet.


ETAT:
French.


En apres cinq troupeau ne mettra hors,
Un fuitif pour Pexelon lafchera,

Faux murmurer fecours venir par lors,
Le Chef le Siege lors abandonnera.


Englifh.
r that, five fhall not put out bis flock,
let loofe a runnaway for Penelon,
There fball be a falfe rumour, fuccours fhall conte then,
The Commander fhall forfake the Siege.
ANNOT.


This Stanza is either nonfenfical or falfely printed, and what he meaneth by Pe:
atlon, is utterly unknown, |


A
A


.


Ly
it
'

>


de


a AC


ot


fo]
v
j
L
L


I V.
French.


Sur la minuit conduéteur de I’Armée,
Se fauvera fubit efvanovy,

Sept ans apres la fame non blafmée,
A fon retour ne dira oncg ouy.


English.
About midnight the Jeader of the Army,
Shall fave bimfelf, vanifbing fuddenly,
Seven years after his fame fPall not be blamed
And at bis return be fall never fay yea.


NU


al ne,
0 come
pe the
ts and
ehh


of Michael Noftradamus.
ANN O'T.


This is plain ofa General ofan Army; who thall forfake his Army, and fave him!
felf, and yet feven years after when he cometh back, his reputation thallbe as clear;


as if he never had committed fuch an errowr,
Vi
French.
Albi &.Caftres feront nouvelle ligue,
Neuf Arriens, Lisbonne, & Portuguen,
Caréaf. Thonlouze,confumeront leur brigue
Quand-chef neuf monftre de Eanraguez.


Erglifh.
Albi and Caltres ball make a ner league,
Nine Arriens, Lisbonne, and Portuguez,
Carcal, Thouloule, (hall make.an end of their confeder
When the new chief foall come from Lautagais.
ANNOT. |
* Albi, Caftres, Carcaffonne, and Thenlonfe,are Cities of Langutdock,which our Au-
thor faith, will enter into a confederacy among themfelves, and joyn with Lishos


and the Portug»ez, and this fhall happen when the general of the Army; fhall be one
born in Lauragais, which is another of the fame Province, ;


VI.
French.
Gardon a Nifmes eaux fihaut desborderont,
Qu’on cuidera Deucalion renaiftre,
Dans le Coloffe la plufpare fuiront,


Vefta Sepulchre feu efteint apparoiltre,


aly


EFnolith.
Gardon at Nifmes, waters [ball overflow fo high,


That they think that Deucalion is bern asain
5 #, M 14 5
MoSt of them will run into the Colotlus,
Anda Sepulchre, and:fere exHagu bed, fi iE] appear,
ANNOT:
Near Nimes there is the River called Gardon, which cometh from St, Romans,


‘and difchargeth it felf into the Rho/me at Beaucaire, there isto be {een'in that City


abundance of Antiquitez, which the Goths had built 1150. years before; there is alio


many Rowman Antiquities, as an Amphitheater, (o well builded thatneither the Go:s'


nor the Saracens, nor Attila,nor Charles Martel, with all their power,could not utter-
ly demolifh ic, The Author aameth it Colofus , becau(e its building appeared like
a ColofSus for folidity, |

There is alfo an ancient Temple which is called the Fountain, builded as a Qua-
drangle, and fupported by two rows of great Pillars, which at prefent isa Church
of Nuns,

This being fuppofed, the River of Gardon did over flow fo much, thatits V Vaters
joyning with that of a Flood that happened there the ninth of September 455 7. evety
one thought that Descalion had been born again, The Author faith this ; becauie


1n


oe ee ER SE


een


¥ Bical sented oh deb ONE
eee:


Jr


406 T he trne Prophecies


in the fables of the ancients. Descalien isthought to be the Author of the Flood
which ovid mentioneth,! During this Flood which was like to overflow the ‘Lown,
as well as che Countrey, many did retire themfelves into chat Amphitheater,

And in thatancient Temple of the Fountacn, the V Vaters overthrowing a great
many old buildings did difeover abundanceot Antiquities, and amongft the reft one
of thofe Lamps that burneth alyays, inthe Sepulchre ofa veftal, which went out
as foon asit felc che frefh Air.

In confirmation of this, che Hiftory of Provence faith, that che ftorm began about
five of che Clock in the Morning, and lifted tll Eight of the Clock armight, and
chat thefe waters did uncover abundance of Antiquities chat were hidden L100. years
before, as Pillars, Portico’s, Meduls, Jafper ftones, and Serpentine; ftones, pieces of
broken Veffels, Epicaphs, lodging Rooms, and Caves, and all othet things that
ufe to be found in the ruines of a Palace.

There was alfo heard inthe Air Dogs barking, | Pillars of fire, Armed men fight-
ing,and were feen two Suns in the Clouds,of the Colour of Blood,all which were the
fad prefages of the Civil VVars of France prefently after. and chiefly that of Provence,

he ninth Gentury in the ninth Stanza, fpeakethalmoft the fame, and theweth
that Nifmes (hall perifh by V Vater,

VAL

French.
Le grand conflict qu'onapprefte a Nancy;
L'Æïnathien dira tout je toubmets,
L’Ifle Britane par Vin Selen folcy,
Hem, mi. deux Phi. long temps netiendra Mets.”

Englifh.
A great War is preparing at Nancy,
The Æmathien fhall fay I fubmit to all,
The Britifh Ifland [ball be put in care by Salt and Wine,
Hem. mi. two Phi. (bull not keep Mets long.

AN NOT.


Nancy is the chief City of Lorrain, and by the -Zmathien is underftood the French,
the Britifh Ifle is England, whichis faid here,fhall come into great diftrefs by Salt and
VVine, becaufe che Countrey aboundeth in thofe twoCommodities, The laft


Verte I do not underftand, fave that ets is a great City in Lorrain,

VIII
French.

Index & Pouife parfondera le front

De Senegalia le Comte a fon Fils propre,

La Myrzamze par plufieurs de plain front,

Trois dans fept jours bleflez more.
Englifh.

Index and Poulle fhall break the forehead,

Of the Son of the Earl of Senegalia, |

The Myrnamée by many at a full bout,

Threewithin feven days [hall be wounded to death,


ANNOT.


cl
(2074


wit


Who a
" fl
URL


Pri


dun D


helat


senegalia is a Townin zraly, all what can be gathered out of the obf.
Stanza, is, that the fon of the Earl-of thar Town thail have his


within feven days after; three more hall be wounded to death;


of Michael Noftradamus:
ANNOT,
carity of this
forehead broken, and
1X,
ae French.
De Caftilon fignieres jour de brune,


De femme infame naiftra Souverain Prince.
-‘Surnum de chiufles per hume luy pofthume,”
“Onc Roy’ he fut fi pire en fa Province,


| Englith.
Out of Caftilon figuieres #pon a mifty day,
From an infamous woman fhall be born a Soveraign Prince,
His furname [ball be from Breeches, himfelf a poftbume,


Never a King was worfe in bis Province.
ANNOT,.


Caftilon figuieres is a petty Townin Provence, in which he faith chat 4 Severaign
Prince fhall be born of an infamous VVoman, and fhall be a pofthume, which in La-
tine fignifiech one that is bornafterhis Fathers death; he faith alfo that his name
fhall be derived from Breeches, and that never aKing was worfe in his Countrey,
whether by worfe, he meanech in mañners or fortune, 1 know not,


Ke:
| PAL French,
Tafche.de murdre, enormes Adulteres,
Grand ennemy de tout le genre humain,
Que fera pire qu’ayeulx. Oncles ne Pere,


En fer, feu, eau, fanguin & inhumain.


| _ Englifh.
Endeavour of Murder, enormous Adulteries,
A great enenty of all-mankind, | à 3
That fhall be worfe then Grand-father, Uncle, or Father,


In Iron, fire, water, bloody and inhumane.
ANNOT,


This Stanza as well as the next hath relation to the precedent , making mention
what a wicked perfon fhall that Pofthume be of which he {poke before,


X Is
| French,
Defloubs Fonchere du dangereux paflage,
Fera pafler le pofthume fa bande,


Les Monts'Pyrens pafler hors fon bagage,
De Parpignan courira Duc a Tende.


The true Prophecies
Englifh.


Below Joncheres dangerous palfage,
The pofthume fball caufe. bis Army to go over,
And bis Baggage to go over the Pyrenean Mountains,
A Duke fhall run from Perpignan to Tende.
ANNOT,
This is ftill concerning the fame pofthume or Baftard , who fhall caufe his Army
to pals at Fonchere, and his Bagage to go over the Pyrenean Mountains , which parts
Spain from France , and that upon the fear of hima Duke fhall run from Perpignan,
which is the chief City of RowfiZon to Tende, which is a little Town in Provence:


XII.
French.
Efleu en Pape, d’Efleu fera mocque,
Subit foudain, efmeu prompt & timide,
Par trop bon doux a mourir provoqué,
Crainte eftainte la nuit de fa mort guide.


Englifh.


Elected for a Pope, from Eleëted [ball be baffled, |


Upon a fudden, moved quick and fearful,
By too much fwcetnefs provooked to die,
His fear being out in the night [ball be Leader to bis death.
ANNOT.
This Prophecy was fulfilled in the perfon of the Cardinal Saute Severina, who in
the Conclave of Cardinals after the death of Pope Innocent 1X.was Eleéted Pope,and


prefently after was baffled by the fame Cardinals, and Clement the VIII. chofen in
his place, for which the other a little while after died for grief.


XIII
French.
Soubs la pafture d'animaux ruminans,
Par eux conduits au ventre Herbi-polique,
Soldats cachez, les armes bruit menants,
Non loin tentez de Cité Aatipolique.
Englifh.
Under the pafture of Beafts chewing the cud,
Condutted by them to the Herbi-polique belly,
Souldiers hidden, the Weapons making a noife,
Shall be attempted not far from Antipolick City,
ANNOT.
The fenfe of thisis , that fome Souldiers difguifed like Herds-men , {hall lead
Oxeninto a place where were hidden before Weapons in the Grafs , but the Wea-
pons making a noife by their clafhing they fhall be difcovered , not far from a place


that he calleth here Aatipolique,purpo(ely to rime with Herbipolique in French, which
word Herbipolique fignifietha Town of Pafture:


French,


thithe


‘Arty |
ch ps |
Ten,
tn


th,

|
wo n |
Pope
cholenin |


na 4


nh D


D |
ai


hw Bl
k


of Michael Noftradamus.
XIV:
bi French.
©rnel, Vaucile: fans confeil de {oy mefines,
Hardy, timide par cratnte prins vaincu,
Accompagré de plufieurs-putains, blefme;:
À Barcelonne aux Chartreux convaineu:
| Enghfh:
Urnel, Vaucileÿwithoit advice of bis own,
Stout and fearful, by fear taken and overcome,
Pale, and in company of many Whores,
Shall be convitted atBarcelone by the Charterhoufe.
ANN OT: | ÿ
This Stanzais an Horofcopejwhich the Auchor made upon'thac Gentléman named


Urnel Vanciles and fignifieth thatthe faid man hould find himfelfin fuch iperplexicy™®


that he couldinot be able ro take advice what to do yand that fear fhouldmake hin
hide himfelf,to be apprehended, in a place where he fhould be taken.

When he was taken, he was prefently convicted of thofe crimes that he was accu-
fed of: therefore the Officers of Jufticé did.condu& him tothe Charter-houfe of
Barcelone, which is four miles from the taid Town, in a place called Campo alegre, for
the beauty and fituation of it, to that place many Whores did accompany him to ree
ceive the punifhment they had deferved', therefore thé: Author faich that'he wene
thither pale, as forefeeing the terrourof the punifhment he was to undergo.

HM gt
French: |

Pere Duc vieux d’ans & de foif charge,

Au jour extreme fils defniant l'efguiére,. .

Dedans le puis-vif, mort viendra plonge,

Senat au fil§ la mort longue & legere.

. . Englilh.

ARather, Duke aged and, very thirfty;

In bis extrentity, bis fon denying him the: Ewer ;

Alive into a Well, where be'shall be drowned,

F or which the Senate ball give the fon a long and eafte death.
ay Bast . ANN OT. : 2 |
It isa Duke very aged who fhall die of a Dropfie,or of fome other burning difeafe,

which will make him very thirfty,, the Phyfitians fhall forbid any water to be given
him, therefore this Duke fhall prefs his fon very much-to, give him the Ewer,that he


: gay drink his fill, but his fon refufing , the Father fhall fall into fuch a rage , that


being alone he will go and throw himfelf into a Well, where he hall be drowned.

This unhappy-death will be the caufe:ofmuch murmuring, and the Senate or Par-
liament of that place will makeenquiry. after it, by.which enquiry the fon will be
found guilty, therefore for his-punifhment, -he (half be condemned to 4 longand eafie
death, as to live all his day$in fome Monaftery,


à


AM À Ggg French.


=


Se ee eee


—————— Se


ea RÉ


X VP.
French,
Heureux au Regne de France heureux de vie;
Ignorant fang, mort, fureur, rapine,
Par non flatteurs:feras mis:en envie,
Roy defrobe, trop de foy en:cuifine.
Englifh.
Happy in the Kingdom of France, bappyiwbis Life,
Ignorant of blaod, death, fury, of taking by force,
By no flatterers shall be envied,
King robbed,too.much faith in Kitchin.
ANNO -T.
This.is aPrognofticationof a King ob France, who though happy in his Reiga


ang: Life, and being given tomo great vices ; as blood , fury , or taking by force,


yet {hall be much envied and robbed by his Subje@s, and chiefly by thofe he truftech
about his Kitchin,


XVIE
| French.
La Reyne Ergafte voiant fa fille blefne,
Par. un regret. dans l'eftomach.enclos,
Cris lamentables! feront lors d'Angolefme,
Ec au germain mariage forclos.
Englifh.
Queen Ergafte fecing ber. Daughter pale,
By 4 regret contained in her Breaff,
Then shall great cries come out of Angolefme,
And the Marriage shall be denyed to the Coufin German.


A NNOT.


Teis unknown what Queen he meaneth by the name of &rgafe ; the ref is eafie,
Angolefme is a City ofGafcong or Langnedec,


XVIII,
French.


Le rang Lorrain fera place a Vendofme,

Le haut mis bas; & Je basmis en haut,

Le fils d'Hamon {era efleu dans Rome,

Et les deux grands feront mis en defaut.

Englifh.

The Houfe of Lorrain ball give place to Vendofme,
3012 The biah pulled déwn, the low raifed up,
7 The fon of Hamon fball be EleSted into Rome,

And the two great ones fall not appear,


Reg
fre


te |


ee


of Michael Noftradamus.
ANNOT.


The two firft Verfes of this Prophecy were fulfilled in the time of, Heéxy the third
King of France, in whofe time the Duke of Guife, and Houle of Lorrain were grown
fo powerful in France, that they drove the King from Paris, and aflumed them(elves
araak and authority over.the Princes ofthe Blo |


od, fothatche King was'forced to
caufe them to be flain, after which Henry IV. who was King of Navarre and Duke
of endofme took his place again as firft Prince of the Blood,


The two laft Verfes are too obfcure to be interpreted
forced by our Author to make up his Rime,as he hath don


XIX:
Chk RE French, .

Jour que fera pour Roine faluée,

Le jour apres le falut, la Priere, .

Le compte fait, raifon & valbuée, >;

Par. avant humble oncques ne fut fi fiere.

Englifh, |

The day that fhe fhall be faluted Queen,

The next day after the Evening Prayer,

All accompts being fumuzoned and caft up,

She that was humble beforenever was one fo broud,
; AMEN CPR RO! Sk ee ty
Icisa woman (be like of afmall Fortune) who coming to be a Queen by her hu-


mility, the next day after Evening Prayer he (hall appeat fo proud, as the like was
never feen, ; :


AIT


» and I believe were onely
€ in feveral other places.


Lin Ses

French... *
Tous les amis qu’auront-tenu party,
Pour rude en lettres mis mort & faccage,
Biens publiez par fixe, grand neanty, _
Onc Romain peuple ne fut tant outrage. |

, PME EN à Englifh. Gi

All he friends thar fPall have taken the part
Of the Unlearned, put to death and robbed,


Goods fold publickly by proclamation, a great man feixed of then,


Never Roman people was fo much abufed.
ANNOT. |


The fenfe of chis is,that a great man that took pare with all chofe that were unlearned:


hall be put to death, and their goods praifed and fold-publickly, upon which goods
another great man fhall feize, and this is tobedonein Rome, . ji AE
 Thereis fault in the Impreffion of the third French Verfe, for inftead of fixe it mutt
be fic, and inftead of Neantyit mutt be Nancy,


Ggg 2


French,


that have been acknowledged fo fince,


The true Prophecies
X XI.

: ‘eM renen.: à |
Parle defpit du Roy fouftenant moindre,
Sera meurdry luy.prefentant les bagues,
Le Pere & Fils voulant Noblefle poindre,
Fait comme a Perfe jadis firent les Magues.

) 1.4. Englith, | \
To fpite the King, who took the part of the weaker,
He fhall be murdered, prefenting to him Fewels,
The Father and the Son going to vex the Nobility,
It foall be done to them as the Magi did in Perfia.
ANNOT. Mee
This is a King who with his fon taking the peoples part againft the Nobility thall
e


be killed, in prefenting to him Jewels , and heand his fon fhall be dealer with all as


the Afagi , that is che Grandees of Perfia ufed to do with their Kings, whom they
were wont to murder; or depofe,


X XTLI..

French.
Pour ne vouloir confentir au divorce,
Qui puis apres fera cogneu indigne,
Le Roy des Ifles fera chaflé par force,
Mis a {on lien qui de Roy n'aura figne:
. Englifh.
For not confenting to the divorce, |
Which afterwards [ball be acknowledged unworth
The King of the Ifland fball be expelled by force,
And another fubrogated who foal bave no mark of à King.

ANN OT.


Thisis plain concerning England and the late calamities thereof , when our gra-
cious King for not confenting to the wicked factions of the Parliament then > and


was expelled by force, andan Ufurpator thac
had not the leaft fign of a King fatin his place,


X- XIII,
French.


Au peuple ingrat faites les remonftrances,
Par lors l'Armée fe faifira d’Antibe,
Dans larc Monech feront les doleances,
Et a Freins l’un l’autre prendra ribe.

ja Lu © Englith, i
The remonftrances being made to the ungrateful people,
At that time the Army fhall ferxe upon Antibe,


In the River of Monaco they fball make their complaints,
And at Freius both of them fhall take their fhare.


2


ANNOT.


ty
balay
othe


Of Michael Noftradamus.
a RER ‘: ANNOT.

This fignifieth that at the fame

ungrateful people; the Army {hall feize upon the Town of Axtibe » which isa Sea


Town between Frawce and Italy ) and that chere thal! be great complaintsat Monacir,


which is another Sea. Town near it, and at the place called Freins, both parties fha!!
either agree, or divide their thares,


XXIV.
Tee os 4 French. 3
Le captif Prince aux [tales vaincu,
Paflera Gennes par Mer Jufque a Mar feille,
Par grand effort des forens furvaincu,,
Sauf coup de feu, barril liqueur d’Abeille.
ANTON Englifh.
The captive Prince vanquished in Ital hale
Shall pafs by Sea through Genoa to Marfeilles,
By great endeavours of forrain forces overconte, me,
But that a Barrel of Honey foall fave bim from the fire.
‘ RAS) MNNOT: 0" VAR Et
A Prince vanquifhed in Ztaly , and taken Prifoner thall come through Genes to
AMarfeilles | where he thall be once more overcome by ftrangers, buc that a Parrel of
Honey thall faye him from being burnt. . This isthe fenfe of the wotds as near as L
can judge,the judicious Reader may make what conftruGtion he pleafeth upon them.
XX V:
| | French.
Par Nebro ouvrit de Brifanie paflage,
Bien efloignez e/ taga farawueftra,
Dans Pelligou xe era commis Poutra etre
Dela grand Dame affife fur lOrcheftra.
; Englith, - Sif
By Nebro to open the paffage of Brifanne,
A great way off, el tago fara mueftra,
Ix Pelligouxe the wrong fhall be done, : :,
Of the great Lady fitting in the Orcheftra.
ee AN NOT,
. Here once more I loft my Spe&acles, and could ne
rather be filent then coin lies; I {hall only tell you, .ch
wherein noble Perfonages fic at the beholding of Sca
XXVL
| French.
Le fuccefleur vengera fon Beau frere, |
Occuper Regne foubs ombre de vengeänce,


fee chrough , therefore I had
at Orcheffra in Latine is the feat
ge-plays.


4


Occis obftacle fon fang mort vitupere,
Long temps Bretagne tiendra avec Ja France.


Eno! fs


time chat the remonftrances fhall be made to 2n


The true Prophecies
| Englifh. va
The Succeffour-fhall avenge his Brotherin: Law, |
Shall bald by force the Kingdom, upon pretence of revenge,
That hinderance [hall be billed bis dead blood afbamed,
A long time hall Brittany bold with France.
| ANNOT,
This is plain enough of it (elf, without any interpretation.
XX VII,
French.
Charle cinquiefme & un grand Hercules,
Viendront le Temple ouvrir de main bellique,
Ure Colonne, Jules & Afean reculez,
L'E'pagne,clef, Aigle neurent onc fi grand piqué,
Englith,
Charles the Fifth, and ene great Hercules,
Shall open the Temple with a Warlike band,
One Colonne, Julius and Afcan put back,
Spain, the Key, Eagle were never at {uch variance. |
| | ANNOT. ae
Charles the V. was the Emperour, and that great Hercules was Heary the IL. King
of Fragce, whom he calleth Merewles, becaufe he was King of France, and the Authot
nameth often in his Stanza’s the Kings of France Hercules or Ogmions , becaufe that
greac Captain of the Antiquity left hisname'glorious in the Gawles, whence the an-
cient Hiftorians have given him the name of Hercules Gallicas, Henry the IT. alfo
was not only an Hercules by being King of Frace, but alfo a great Hercules, becaule
of his Warlike humour, and for his great feats in Arms,

To open the Temple, fignifiethtomake War, becaufe the Romans in ‘ancient time
were wont to fhut the Temple of Fanus in time of Peace, and kept it open during the
War. Ca/ar Auguftus did fhut that Temple oncein his time, which was never done
before but twice, the firft under Numsa Pompilius , the (econd after the overcoming
of Charthage.

XXVITL
French.
Second & tiers qui font prime Mufique;
Sera par Roy en honneur fublimée,
Par grafle & maigre prefque a deny etique;
Rapport de Venus faux rendra deprimée.
3 | Ecglifh.
Second and third that make prime Mufick,,
Shall by the King be exaltedto honour, —
By a fat one, aud a lean one, one in con{umption,


A falfe report of Venus fball pull her down,
ANNOT.


ba
=


King
\uthot
fethat
he tne
ao
geule


time
ng the
done
ining Di


of Michael Noftradamus.


5 3 on AOE, | pany
Notwithftanding the obfcurity of this fenfe , and the bad connexion of the words;
we may perceive that by this Stanza is meanr,that a King having two Miftreffes fhall
exalt them in great honour, till by a report made by a fat woman and a lean one, that
isin a confumption, chat the faid Ladies prove unfaithful to che King;he will deprefg
them as low as they werebefore, |
XXIX,
7 French, |

De Pol Manfol dans Caverne caprine,

Cache & pris extrait hors par la barbe,

Captif mené comme befte maftine,

Par Begourdans amence pres de Tarbe.

Frow Pol Manfol.aa'4 Goats Den, |

Hidden aud taken, drawn ont by the beard

Prifoner, led as a Maftiff, |

By Begourdans ball be brought near to Tarbe.

x Dis ANNOT. .

_ Here and in fome other places of this work is to be obferved,that the Author doth
fometimes put two Towns inftead of one, char he may diftingüifh ic from others of
the famename , as here he callech Pes -Manfol to diftinguith the Town of St. Paul,
which is three Leagues from the Rhofne,over againft the Town of Pont st. E/prit,trom


that which is in the lower parts of Provence, |
_ Thefenfe therefore of this Stanzais, that this Becourdans (aproper nameof a matt)
fhall pull out another by the beard , that: washiddenina Goats Den, and fhail lead
him captive as far as Tarde, which is another. Town of Provence, a eae
XXX
: French, .
Nepveu & fang du St, nouveau venu, …
Par le furnom fouftient arcs &,couvert,
Seront chaflez mis a mort chaffez nu,
En rouge & noir convertiront leur vert.
-“Englit
Nephew and blood of the Saint newly come, ©
By the furname upboldeth Vaults and Covering, : |
They fhall be driven, put to death, and drives out naked.
They foall change their red and black into green.
ve 3 ANNOT. ...  ..
Here I confefs to be at a lofs,as may be a wrifer man then L.


Brenshi


The true Prophecies


XX Xf.
French.


Le Sainét Empire viendra en Gerizanie,

Tf{maelites trouveront lieux ouverts,

Afnes viendront aufly de la Caram anie;

Les fouftenans de Terre tous couverts.

Englith.

The Holy Empire fhall come into Germany,

The Wmaelites fball find open places,

Affes fball alfo come out of Caramania,

Taking their part, and covering thé Eärib.

ANNOT.
By the J/neaelites he meaneth the Turks, who brag to be defcénded from 1{mael,
Caramania isa Provincéof Turky, fo that the fenfe of this Stanza is, that there fhafi
be a great Invafion of the Twrks into Germany, and that thofe of Caramania with


their Affes fhallcometo their help, and fhall bein fuch numbers, as that che Earth
fhall be covered with them.


XXX I.
French:


Le grand-Empire chafcun.en devoit cftre,
Un fur lés autres le viendra obtenir,

Mais peu de temps fera fon Regne & eftre,
Deux ans-aux Naves fe pourra fouftenir.


Poe Englifh: :
The great Empire, every one would be of it,
One above the reft fball obtain at,
But his time and bis Reign fhall laft little,
He may maintain bimfelf two years in bis S hipping.
ANNOT.
This is plain enough without interpretation.
X XXIII,
French.
La faction cruelle a. Robe longue,
Viendra cacher foubs les pointus Poignards,
Saifir Florence, le Duc & le Dipblongue,
Sa difcouverte par Immeurs & Flagnards.
 Englifh:
The cruel faction of long Robe,
Shall come and hide under the fharp Daggers,
Seize upon Florence, the Duke and the Diphlongue,
The difcovery of it fball be by Countrey fellows.
ANNOT.


LL 4


VAIL


of Michael,.Nofteadamus.


A NINO:T,


This is the Prognoftication of a CRE again{k the Duke and, Gity of Flo:
rence , by thofe of the long Gown, which
thac live in places without Walls, 0


fall be difcovered by Countrey fellows,


SSOP,’ RATS se > Net ( 507 : gs
url borne do oS eee ed À

Gaulois qu Empire par. Gnérrérdccupera,

‘Pati fon’ Beait-frére mineur, fera -trahhno 2% hie


"Par Cheval rude Voltigednt trainera, 70":
. Da fait le frere long temps fera hays: 1,4)


A Frenchman who ball occupy-an Empire by War

Shall! be betrayed by bis Brother in Law a Pupil,

He fhall be drawn by a rude prancing Horfe,

For which faët bis brother [ball be long hated.
ANNOT.


This foretelleth of a Frenchman,who fhall by War obtainan Empire or Kingdom,
and fhall be betrayed by ‘his Brother in Law a Pupil; whom: afterwards he thall
treacheroufly caufe to mount a fierce;prancing Horfe , who fhall throw him down
and drag him, for which the faid King (hall be hated long after; )


x X. XV,
. © French,
Puifné Roial flagrant d’ardant libide,
Pour fe jouir de‘coufine Gerwraine,
Habit de femme au Temple d'Ariemide,


3%


Allant murdry:par incogneu. de Marae;
PAVIA ESO Pau


The K ingly youngeft fon beated with burning luff,


For to enjoy his Cofen Gexmañ,

Shall in womans apparrel ge tothe Temple of Artemis; :

Going, ball be murderod by nnknown du Marne.
ANNOT,


This is concerning the younger fon of'a King, who being extreamlyin love with
his Cofen German, (hall difguife himfelf in a womans apparel and (hall go fo difgaifed
tothe Temple of 4rtémide, (that is of fome Church Dedicated to the Virgin AZarg)
to meet her,but in going, fhall be murdered by an unknown man named d# Marne,


XXXVI.
French.


Aprés le:Roy: du Sud guerres parlant,
L'Ifle Harmotique le tiendra x mefpris,
Quelques ansbôñs 'rongeaftrun & pillarit;
Par tyrannie a PFfle changeant pris.


tea que * Englifh;


Le mm


=


wee ee


Tbe true Prophecies
After that the King of the South (hall have’ talked of Wars,
The Harmotick Ifland fhall defpife him, os faa
Some good years gnawing one-and plundering,
And by tyranny fall changerthé price of the Ifland,
! ANNOT.

The two firft Verfes are concetning Philip the IT, King of Spain, who is called here
the King of the South, whom after his vain and fruftrated Invafion of 88. the Harmo-
tique Ifland (that is England) fhall deride, and he after that fhall have {ome good
years, that is of Peace, ftill pillaging and plundering his Subjects , and fhall change


the price of Ezgland, that is, make it ofa higher value , and more flourifhing then
ever it was before, asit did prove in Queen Elizabeth’s time,


XXX VII.
French,
Grande aflemblee pres du Lac du Borget,
Se rallieront pres de Montmelian,
Paflants plus outre penfifsferont projet,
Chambray, Morienye, combat Saint Fulian,
Englifh.
A great affembly of people hear the Lake of Borget,
Will go and gather themfelves about Montmelian,
Going beyond,they fhall make. an enter prize, |
| | Lu Upor Chambery; Moriene,and ball fight at St. Julian.
wo ANNOT.
TRE This Lake of Borget is in Savoy, as allo cM ontmelian Chambery, Mortene , and St:
Pa Fulian ; the meaning of it then is , that a great Army fhall be gathered about that
He ae Lake, which fhall go through Chambery, Moriene, and Mentmelian, and thal] fight at
St, Fulian, |
XXXVIII,
French.
Amour alegre non loin pofe le Siege;
Au Saint Barbar feront les Garnifons,
bi ' Urfins, Hadrie pour Gaulois feront plaige,
By % Potir peur rendus de l'Armée, aux Grifons.
de “Englifh.
nl Cheerful love doth lay Siege not far,
Nae The Garrifons fhall be at Saint Barbar, °
ta Urfini, Hadria fball be fureties for the French,
And many for fear fhall. go from the Army to the Grifons.


ti ANNOT.

Li The firft two Verfesare inexplicable s#the two laft fignifie that there thall be an
PE Army of Frems, with whom Hadria (that is Venice) and the &rfind the noblefi Family
~ | LL in Italy fhall take part, infomuch, that many of the contrary party fhall run for fear

» tothe Grifons, which is a Nation dwelling in the pareline and other Countreis there

about, betweenthe Venetians and the Switzers,


French,


ands


ont that


fera


of Michael Noftradamus:


XXXIX.

French.
Premier fils veufve malheureux mariage,
Sans nuls enfans deux Ifles en difcord,
Avant dixhuit incompetant Aage,


De l’autre pres plus bas fera l'accord.


Englifh.
Of the firft fon a widow, an unbappy match,
Without any Children 101 lands at variance,
Before eighteen an incompetant: Age,
Of the other lower shall be the agreement.


ANNOT,

Although the words be intricate, neverthelefs the fenfei
eis the IT, King of France, who being
Age, to Mary Stuart Queen of Scotia
and alfo England and Scotland (which
themfelvess of the laft Verfe the fe
did happen afterwards to the faid


S plain, concerning Fray-
married young, and before he was 18. years of
nd , died prefently after, and left hera widow,
he calleth here two Iflands) at variance among
nfe is very obfcure, and hath relation to what
Mary Queen of Scots and Dowager of France.
XL

French,
Le jeune nay au Regne Britannique,
Qyraura le Pere mourant recommandé,
Iceluy mort Londre donta topique,


Et a fon fils le Regne demand.


Englith.
The young man born to the Kingdom of Britanny,
Whom bis Father dying fhall have recommended,
After his death London fhall give bim à topick ,
And fball ask the Kingdom from his fon,


ANNOT,


This Prophecy is plain, concerning his M ajefty King Charles II. now Reigning,
who having been recommended by his dying Father to his Subjes , prefently after
his death they turned tail, and took the Kingdom from him for a good while,


XLI,
French.
En la frontiere de Cauffade & Charlus,
Non gueres loing du fond de Ja valée.
De Ville Franche Mufique a fon de Luths,
Environnez Combouls & giand myrtée.


Hhh2 ©? Englith,


Saar ee See


—


a me


Ee SS ee 2


The true Prophecies
Englifh.

Upon the Frontiere of Cauflade and Charlus,

Not far from the bottom of the Valley,

Of Ville Franche there fball be Mufick of Lutes,


Great dancing and great company of people met together.


ANNOT. ti
Canffade, Charlus, and Vikefranche are little Towns in Provence , not far one from
another; the reftis eafie, | ;
X L I I. Man
French. Hatt
Le Regne humain d’Angelique geniture, pe


Fera fon Regne,paix, union tenir,
Captive guerre demy de {a clofture,
Long temps la paix leur fera maintenir.


Englith.
The humane Reign of an'Angelical brood,
Shall caufe his Reign to be in peace and union,
Shall make War, captive [butting it half up,
He fhall caufe them to keep peace a great while.
ANNOT.


Thisis only a foretelling of fome Gallant Prince , who fhall maintain his SubjeAs
in great peace and tranquility,


X LITI.
French ;
Le trop bon temps ,trop de bonté Roiale, ’ doch
Faits & desfaits prompt, fubit, negligence, ga
Leger croira faux, defpoule loiale, bw
Luy misa mort par fa benevolence. Mr
Englifh. mn
The time too good, too much of Royal bounty, ed
Made andunmade, nimble, quick; negligence, ew
Fickle fball believe falfe 0’ his loyal Spoufe, À
He shall be put to death for bis good will. | hie
a A NNOT. treed
This is concerning anôther King, who chrough his too much goodnefs, fimplicity Bal,
and nepligence,fhall make and unmake thofe about him,and being fickle, thall believe Th
falfe reports, made concerning his own witesand at laft by his to much goodnefs, fhal! De fy
be put to death. by a
X LIV; Le
French. thor)
Par lors qu’un Roy fera contre les fiens, | Fr
Natif de Bhis fubjuguera Ligneres, Vel
Marnmel, Cordube, & les Dalmatiens, à


Des fept puis l'ombre a Roy eftrennes & Lemures,
Englifh,


from


objets


Of Michael Noftradaniué:
UT ind 7 in à adh
At that time that à King fball be againft bis own,
One born at Blois fhall fubdue the Ligures,

Mammel. Cordua and'the Dalmatians, +


After that tbe fhadow of the feven fhall be to the K ing anews


years gift and Hog goblins,


; | ANNOT. aS vi
_ Bleis isa City in Frances Ligures are the Genoefes,in Latine called Ligures ; as for
Mammel I cannot tell what to make ofit; Cardwaisa City of Spain, and the Dalmde
tians is a Nation near the Adriatick Sea, and under the Venetians 5 I leave the inter:


pretation of the laft Verfeto the ingenious Reader,
X L V.
French.
Lombre du Regne de Navarre non vray,
Fera la vie de fort illegitime,
La veu promis incertain de Cambray,
Roy d’Orleans donra mut legitime
Englith.

The fbadow of the Reign of Navarre not true,
Shall make the life of illisitimate chance,
The uncertain allowance from Cambra ae
King of Orleans fhall give à lawfull Wall.


ns ANNOT. on |

The Reign or Kingdom of Navarre is called not truë , becaufe the King of Spats
doth one it, and not the King of France,who is the lawful King thereof , as alfo in
rare of the Kings of France , and befote of Fane of Aliret » and Antony of
Bourbon,

This Kingdom being wot ue in regard of the faid ones, the title and quality is cal-
led here /badow, The Author faith thar the quality of the King of Navarre fhall make
the life of illigitimate charce , becaufe after the death of Francis the II Catherine of
Medicis being not oppoled in the Regence by Anton} of Bourton King of Navarre,
the was willing to gratifie him in what the could.

And becaufe his Brother Lewis Prince of Condé had been condemned to death,and
not executed , it wasa fair occafion for her to fhew che King of Navarre how much
fhedid defer tohim. Therefore twelve days after the deathof King Francit he was
freed out of Prifon, and was admitted to juftifie himfelf under the King of Navarre's
Bail, :

Thus the fhadow of the Kingdom of Navarre not true, did caufe the life of a Prince to
be faved , but that life wasillegitimate, and that Kingdom not true by chance, that is,
by accident, becaufe of the death of King Francis,

Leaving offthe third Verfe to be explained after the fourth, Kéng (faith the Ad-
thor) /hafl give Orleans for legtimate, becale. Cha: les the IX: who during the lite of
Francis the 11, did bear the title of Duke of Orleans, did fucceed his Brother; thus the
Verfe faith thar Orleans fhall give a King for legitimate, 1 vein cnt a,

Now for the third Verfe, you muft fuppofe that by.the Treatyar Madrid 15 26,
and after this by that of Cambray,the King Francis the I-did part with the Sovereigns
ty of Flanders, and ofall the Léw-Connireis in favour of Charles the V. Emperour,

: it


422 T be true Prophecies


it is of that wncertaix allowance of Cambray, of which the Author talketh here; and
faith, chat in that time viz, of the death of Francés the II, that allowance fhall be uncer-
tain, becaule Francis theI, having no power of himfelf to renounce the rights and
dependance of the Crown of France, the Parliament that was affembled then, would
have made void that aowance without breaking the Peace, declaring that the Kings
of France ought to preferve che right they had upon the Low-Countreis , and to re-
quire them again upon any occafion, and upon chat Frauce did notrefufe the Ele@ion
which the Low-Courtreis made of the Duke of Alencon for their Sovereign Prince
and Duke of Brabant.


X'EVE
French.
Vif fort mort de l'or vilain indigne,
Sera de Saxe non nouveau Electeur,
De brunfvick mandra d'amour figne,
Faux Je rendant au peuple leducteur.
Englifh,
The living receives his death from Gold, infamous flut!
Shall be of Saxony rot the new EleStor,
From Brantwick /bal: come a fign of love,
Fall perfnadins ibe people that he is a fedu£tor.
ANNOT.
This Prophecy is concerning an old Elector of Saxony,who being in health before,


fhall die fuddenly , being poifoned in a golden Cup by awomaa, whom he calleth
here dsfamous flut. |


And that from Brunfwick (a Countrey adjacent to Saxony) fhall come a Meffenger,


ae pretence of Love , who fhall perfuade che. people that the faid Ele@or was a
Seducer,


XLVII.
French.


De Bourxe Ville a la Dame Guyrlande,
L'on mettra fus par la trahifon faite,
Le grand Prelat de Leon par Formande,
Faux Pellerins & Rauiffeurs deffaite.


Englifh.
From Bourze City belonging to the Lady Garlant,
They shall impofe by a fet treafor,
The great Prelate of Leon by Formande,
Falfe Pilgrims and Ravifbers deftroyed.
ANNOT,

I believe that there is a fault herein the impreffion, and that inftead of Boarze it
muft be Bourges, which is a famous City in France, and Capitol of the Province of
Berry , for | do not know any Town in Ewrope called Boarze,. What he meaneth by
the Lady Garlant isunknown, I believe alfo chat inftead of Leon it hould be Lyon,


which is another famous City, and che firft Archbithoprick of the faid Kingdom,
Formandeis 4 barbarous word, and believe put in only to make up the Rime, as he


hath


Band
inter. |
an M
WOuld |
Kings |
bre, |
ktm M
Price À


efore,
alleth


enger,
ws @


qu
sol
thoy |
Lys,
don,
ste
ty


|
|


of Michael Noftradämus: 423
hath dérie itv feveral othet places, asmuch then as can be gathered out of the fen is
this, that from chat City Bowrgess which ufually is aj Dowry fora Queen of
France whichis called here Garlanr; fhallatreafon be-hatched againft the Arch=
bifhop of Lien, which Tfuppofe came to pas in the timeof Henry the II. when: Peter
of Pisac Archbifhop of the faid Lion , being accufed by the Deputies of Bosrges for
fiding wich the League, efcaped narrowly to be killed; when the Duke of Gut/e-and
the Cardinal his brotherwere, Queen Catherine of Medicis the Kings Mother ha-
ving then thefaid Province and Townof Bourges for her jointure:
The laft Verfe hath notelation to the:three foremoft, and hath its interpretation
by it felf; which is plain enough,
XLVIIL
LT CP POTERIE
Du plus profond de l'Efpagne ancienné,
Sortants du bout & des.fins de l'Europe,
Trouble paflant aupres du Pont de Laigne,
Sera deffaits par bande fa grand troppe.
Englifh.
From the ninoff part of old Spain,
Going out of the extremities of Europe,
He that troubled the travellers by the Bridge of Laigne,
Shall bave bis great Troop defeated by another.


NOT.

Every Traveller knoweth that Caffille (which is taken here for Spain) is divided
into two parts viz, Caftilia la Vecchiasand Caftilia la Nuova , our Author then faich
thac out of Caftilia la Keechia , whichis fituated at the furcher end of Esrope on that
fide,’ fhall come a band of men, who fhall deftroy the Thieves that robbed and vexed
tlie Travellers by the Bridge of Zaigue , whicli it feemeth was an infamous place for
robbing,

*X LIX.
French,
Jardin du Monde auptes de Cité neufve,
Dans le chemin des Montagnes cavées,
Sera faifi & plonge dans la Cuve, :
Beuvant par force eaux Soulplire envenimées.
1 carte ph deh Englifh. 1
Garden of the World, near'the new City,
“Iyithe way of the digged Mountains, |
Shall be feixed on, and thrown into the Tub,
Being forced to drink Sulphurous poifoned waters.
ANNOT,


This word Garden of the World, doth fignifie a particular perfon , feeing that this
Garden of the World was, feized on and poifoned ina Tub of Sulphurous water , in
which he was thrown, .

The Hiftory may be this, that Nofradamus pañfing for à Prophet and a great Aftro-
Joger if his time, abundance of people came to him to know their Fortunes, and


chiefly


41a Fbetrue Prophecies


chiefty ‘the: Fachersto know tharof theit Children, as did) MraLafnier, ancbMt. Cot-
iva 3" Father of tharrenowned Jéfuic of thefamename, very hkethen thatMr.: dy
Pardin having ia fon did ask: Noftradamus what fhould become of him and becaufe
his (biwasndmed Cofmss, which in Greek fignifreth the, Wotld., he anfwered him
with het four Vertes: 1 yo bo: omsd 0% latslo vodiddrA
Logarden ofthe World, for Cofmns of the Garden; Im his travelsthalbbe takenihard: b
the New City; iniaway chat'hach beentdigged:between the: Mountainssnand the
fhall be chrowninto a Lob of poifoned» Sulphurous ivater torcaufehimitoidie;'being
fordéd to diink th av water whichirhoferogueshadsprepared for him

Thofe that have learned the truth of this Hiftory, may: obferve it here:!: This
ought to have come to pafs in the laft Age,feeing that the party mentioned was then
born when this Stanza was written, and.chisunhappy man being dead of a violent
death, there is great likelyhood, chat he was not above forty-years old.

There is another difficulty, to Know which is chat new City, there being many of
that name in Ewrope,neverchelefsthe more probable is, that there being matty Knights
of Maltha born in Provence (thé native Countrey of our Author) it may belbelieved
that by the new City he meaneth the new City of 44altha called /a galere hard by
which chere is paths and ways digged in the Mountains , which Mountains are as if it
were a Fenceand a Barricado againft the Sea, or elfethis Co/mus might have been
taken by Pyrats of A/giers, and there in thé new City ofthe Gowleste be putico death
in the manner aforefaid,


Li
French.
La Meufz au jour Terre de Luxembourg;
Defcouvrira Saturne & trois en Lurne,, °
Montaigne &.plaine, Ville,Cite & Bourg,
Lorrain Deluge, trahiton par grand bwines
| Englifh.
The Maes by day in the Land of Luxembourg.
Shall difcover Saturn, aad three in the Lurne,
Mountain and plain Town,City,and Countrey Town,


A Lorrain flood, treafon by a great hurne,


ANNOT.


The Ages isa River that runneth through a part of Lorrainand Luxembourg ; as
for the words Larne and hurse I do not underftand them , neither do I think they are
to be found in all the Fxench Language , both obfolete and modern; all what I can
gather out of this, is,chata great ovetflowing of the River eMees , fhall be both in
Luxembourg and Lorrais , infomuchthat three Leaden Mines (which is meant here
by Saturn ) {hall be difcovered, and after chat, a great Treafon fhall happen in the
faid Lorrain,

LI.
French.


Des lieux plus bas da Pais de Lorraine,
Seront dés baffles Allewragnes unis,

Par ceux du Siege Preards, Normans, du Maine,
Et aux. Cantons fe feront.reunis.


of Michack\Noftradamus.


ANN OT.


cau | The fenfe of this is, that the lower Lorain'and Germany being united togethers
thin M fhall have War with the otherthtee Nations, of Picard, Normans, and Manceasx,
| which having Befieged a Town, thall confttain the Lorrainers and) Low: germans, to
by D unite themfelves with the Cantons of Switzerland, 7 © Lun « | |
te | LIL. pe |
ue D French. 16 324 ll
whe À Au lieu ou Laye& SccldéTe marient, |
| Seront les Nopées delohg temps mamie,
CET | ‘Au lieu d’ Anvers ou ta stappe chariëne,
ve Jeune vieilleffe conforte intimmec.
ally OÙ | % a.
nights M Englifh.
lun | 3 ria :
ss th ed Utthbsplacermbher Rayoand Seeldeart united;
: fl | SballibeNaprals bé tbarapere long a doine. |
eben D “8-17 the place of Antwerp where they draw the crapes ™
death A The young unfpotted will comfort the old Age i
| 3 » v LA
ANN:OT.,
There is faulc in the Impreffton, fordoftead of Layéitmuft be Lis, which iis a Ri- iy
ver thacrunneththrough Flagders, and difchargeth, it felfinro the Sce/de , which is [il
the River that paffech at Antwerp, the fenfe therefore of this Prophecy is, chat in the |
place where the Kiver of Lis joygeth withthe scelde, there thal! the Nuptials be i
confummated that were long a doing, and the place of c4¢ntwerp, where they unload |
the Wines, there thal] a young unfpotted Lady Marry,and comfort an old man, il
| LE. il |
. «French. Wi
Les trois Pellices detoing s'entrebattront, tii
La plus grand moindrédemeuréerd'a ecoute, ii
Le grand Sel:z n'en fera "plus patton,
be hommnvera feu,-pelte) blanche, route! il
à n «| Englith, ott VI a
JE aft SR ‘ F2 a ; a ss i
heat 01 Phe three Concubines ball fight ene with another à far of, ul
rlan “The greateft lefs fpall remain watching,
a || » Lhelereat Selin,fhall be na more: their. Patron, |
Ase | . ses cj F. k 2 ey À
"i hndofball call:it fire, pelte white, rite,
ANNOT, |


This Prophecy is concerning theT#rkif Empire , where three of the great Turks
Concubines,which in Latine are called Pedlices, hall make War one againft another,
the great Turk himfel f favouring neitMer party. KE


ee


lii | French,


Thetrue Prophecies


LIV.
French.
Née ence Monde pir Concubine furtive,
A deux hault mife par les triftes nouvelles,
Entre Ennemis fera prinfe Captive,
Et amenée a Malines & Bruxelles.


Born in this world from a ftollen Concubine, Hon

Sct up at two heights by the fad news, | Kio

Shall be taken Prifoner among the Enemies, Pin

And brought to Malines and Bruxelles. lay
ANNOT,


This is concerning fome Lady of quality; born ofa Concubine, who fhall be fee
up by reafon of fome fad néwsthatfhall.be brought, and afterwards fhall be taken
Prifoner, and carryed to Malines and Bruxelles, two Cities of the Low-Coun-
treys, 3


LV.
French.
Les malheureufes Nopces celebreront
En grande joye mais la fin malheureufe,
Mary & Mere Nore defdaigneront,
Le Phibe mort, & Nore plus piteule.
| Englith.

ah The unhappy Nuptials fhall be celebrated,

ed With great joy, but the end foall be unhappy,
a a Husband and Mother [ball fcorn Nore ri
| | The Phybe dead, and Nore more pitifull. id
Ba ay ANNOT,
A ae If by Phybe we underftand the Admiral of Chaftillos, and by Nore, Queen Mer-
i garet of Valeit, the reft will beeafie, For in the year 1572: a Match was made be-
| | tween Heary the IV. then King of Navarre, chief of the Proteftant party, and Mar-
tt garet of Valois, Sifter to Charles. the IX. to this Wedding were the chief of the Pro-
di teftant party invited, who were there Maffacred, and among che reft Gafpard of
Ws Coligny, Lord of Chaftillon, and Admiral of France, whom he calleth here Phybe,

WN à And when he faith, that Husband and Mother hall [cors Nore, he fheweth the flighe


Me Opinion and regard that the Queen Mother had for her Danghter, and Hewry the
aah IV. for his Wife, whom he after repudiated.


=>
=


rae LVI:

ae | | French.

a -Prelat Rotal foy baiffant trop tiré,

Grand Flux de Sang fortira par fa bouche,

Le Regne Anglicque par Regne relpire,

Long temps mort vif en Tunis comme fouche.


of Michael Noftradamius.


: | | Englifh.

1 Royal Prelate bowing bimfelf too much, ;
1 A great flood of Blood fall ceme out of bis mouth, ie

The Englifh Reign by Keign refpited, |
A great while dead, alive in Tunis like à Log. |
ea: AR ANNOT. : |
| Prelate, is aman Ofeminent dignity inthe Church, the Royal Prelate muft be Hi |
| a Churchmanof the Royal Blood, who bowing himfelf too Anh: fhali fall into an hf
 Hæmorhagie or Flux of Bloodat his Mouth, The third Verfefignifieth, that the i


Kingdom of Englend thall he relieved from fome diftg@(s by another Kingdom or
Prince that had been a Slavea great while at Tenis, and byen there, dead alive like 4


Log of Wood, ; al
LVII (LL
Ii D French. |
sty D Le fublevé ne cognoiftra fon Sceptre, | i
Coan Les enfans jeunes des plus grands honnira, Mi
Oncques ne fut un plus ord cruel eftre, il
Pour leur Efpoufes a mort noir bannera. | Hi
Englifh. A
Ti (ll
The exalted fhall'uot know his Scepter | il |
He fhall put to fhame the young Children of the greateft il
Never was one more dirty and cruel, LU
He fhall banifh to Black death their Spoxfes. il]
it
ANN OT. | il
This is concerning a great Tyrant, who being exalted to the dignity ofa King, i
fhall not know how to governs but fhall flight and put to (hame the Children of My
the greateft Nobility, and fhall banith their Wives out of the Lands this hath 4 ih
relation tothe late Tyrant Cromwell, |
L'ILE |
ue U French,
ih 1 Au terps du dueil que le Selin Monarque,
ra | Cuerrotera le jeune Æyathien, |
ut | Gaule branfler, pericliter la barque,
D Tenter Phocens au ponant entretien. 7 |
gt | Englifh.
ni D


In the time of mourning, when the Monarch Selin,

Shall make War againft the young Æmathien,

] France ball quake, the Ship fhall be in danger, oh

| Phocens fhall be attempted.the bafinefs foall be in the Weft.


A aa ET Ra a


lia


428 The true Prophecies


ANNOT,

You muft obferve here, that by -£mathien the Author meaneth the King of
France, as he doth in many other places; and by Sen, he meaneth the great Turk,
becaufe fuch was, thename of him that lived in his time, this being prefuppofed the
meaning of this is, that the great T#rk fhall fight againft the King of France, and fhalt
atcempt Phocens, which is Marfeilles, as being a Colony of the old Phocenfes in


Grecia, which fhall cau‘e all France to quake, and the Ship tobe in danger, which
is Paris, who bearetha Ship for its Arms,


Lax

Freach,
Dedans Lion vingt & cing d uiae haleine,
Cing Ciroyens Germans, Breffans, Latines.

« J >” ç .

Par deflous NoBle condurrort longue traine,
Et defcouvers par abboy de Maftins.

Enolifh
In Lyons five andtwenty of a bresdih
Five Citizens Germans, Breflans, Latines,
Onder Nobleimen hall condn& a long Train,
And jhall be difcovered by the barking of Ma Liffs.

ANNOT.

The Marthal of se. eAndr?, Governour of Lyon being abfent, the Proteftants
undertook che taking of it, at the follicitation of fome principal Lords at Court,
among whom were named the Prince of Code, and the Vidame of Chartres, Francis
ot Vendofmes Knight of the Order. The Abbot of Savigny, who did fupply the
place of the Governour, and was named Antony of Albon, fince that Archbifho of
Arles, having difcovered this Confpiracy, went to furprife the undertakers, butas
he was going upon the night of the 5 of September, he met with fome of the con-
feceratcs upon the Bridge of Saone, which made him retreat with fome lols,

The next day having gathered moreForces,he took three of them that were ftran-
gers and young, thereft efcaping, thofe three were hanged the next Saturday, which
was the7 of that Month.

The Marfhal being come to Town, thereiwvas Execution mad

nhabitants,to the number of 4 that were hanged,

After thac chere were informations made concerning the Authors andA bettors of
the faid cosfpiracy, and many other Citizens and ftrangers were put to Prifon, and
befides them the Widame of Chartres, who was catryed to Paris, and put into the

affitle, and atter thatin the Teurnelles, where he died before his procefs was ended,
the 23 December 1560. |

It is what our Auchor faith inchis stanzas in che fitft Verfe he faith, that there
were five and twenty of a breadih, of whofe fiveand twenty there was five (Citizens of
the Town, and the reft were Germans, Bréffans and Italians, of thefe Citizens 4. were
hanged, and three of the ftrangers,

Thofe 25 undertakers, of which the Author faith, thatmnder Noblemen they fhal!
condnét a long Train; thatis, that under the fupport and favour of many Noblemen,
they would undertake athing thar fhould not end fo foon 4s it proved afterwardssfor


although this enterptife did fail, yet was the beginning of horrid combuftions chac
followed afterwards.


This enterprife it feemeth was difcovered by barking of Maftiffs.


The Apology forthe City of Lyon treateth ar large of this, and namethall chofe
confpirators,who for che moft part wete of Germany and Geneva,


€ upon fome of the


French.


osof Di
l, and |


othe Di


ended, |


there
wi]
A Were


of Michael Noftradamus.


L'X
French.
Je pleuré Nice, Monaco, Pife, Genes,
Savone, Sienne, Capone, Modene, Malthe,
Le deffus fang & glaive par eftrenes,
Feu,trembler Térre,eau,malheureufe zolte.

Englifh.

I bewail Nice, Monaco, Pifa, Genoa,
Savona, Stenna, Capoua, Modena, Maltha,
Upon them blood and fword for a new years-giff,
Fire, Earth-quake, water, unhappy nolte.
ANNOT;


Allthefe Cities ate fituated by the catedsterranean Sea, and moft of them upon
that pare of it, which is called the River of Genoa, and are threatned here by all che


plagues above mentioned, ; as for the word ae it is a barbarous one, forced here to
make up the Rime.in French,


L X 13

French.
Betta, Vienne, Comorre, Sacarbance,
Voudront livrer aux Barbares Parnone.
Par picque et feu, énorme violence;
Les conjurez d'efcouverts par Matrone.

Englifh.
Betta, Vienna, Comorre, Sacarbance,
Shall endeavour to deliver Pannone to the Barbarians
By Pike, and fire, extraordinary viol-nce ! ;
The Con{piraïors difcovered by a Matrox,

ANNOT.


Ic feemeth that there will be a confpiracy of fome men out of all the above men-
tioned Cities, to farrender Hungary (which in Latine is called Pansonia) to the great
Turk, but that confpiracy fhall be difcovered bya Matron, that is, a grave ancient
Woman.


DOES.
French,


Pres de: Sorbin pour aflallir Hongrie,
L'Héraut-dé Bade le viendra advertiry .
Chef Bixantin, Sallon de Sclavonie,

A Loy d’ Arabes les viendra convertir,


Englifh.
Near Sorbin,to.invade Hungary,
The Herald of Buda /hall come to give them notice of it,
Chief Bizantin, Sallon of Sclavonia,


Shall come to turn them to the Arabian Religion.


ANNOT.


re «


430 The true Propbectes


ANNOT.
This feemeth to have a relation to the precedent , and that near that place he cal-
leth Serbin, preparations fhall be made to Invade Hungary , but they fhall have


notice of it by fome body of Bada. on Be
He that is called here Chief Bizantin, is the great Turk or his grand Vizir , who


hath his abode in Cerffantineple, anciently called Bizantinm,
LATTE
French.
Cydron, Ragufa, la Cité au Sainc Hieron,
Reverdira Je medicant fecours,
Mort fils de Roy part mort de deux Heron,
L' Arabe Hongrie, feront un meime cours,
| Englith.
Cydron, Ragule, the City of Saint Hieron,
Shall make orcen again the Phyfical help,
The Kings Son dead, by the death of two:Herons,
Arabia and Hungary /ball go the fame way.
ANN OT.

The meaning of this is, that when thofe three Cities.named in the firft Verfe
fhall have need of fuccours, and that a Kings Son {hall die in lying two Herons, then
thall eArabia and Hangary be under the fame Matter,

LXIV.

French.
Pleure Milan, pleure Lucques, Florence,
Que ton grand Duc fur le Char montera,
Changer le Siege pres de Venife s'advance,
Lors que Colonne a Rome changera.

Englifh.
Weep Milan, weep Lucques, and Florence,
When the great Duke [ball go upon the Chariot,
To change the Siege near Venice he goeth about,
When Colonne fhall change at Rome.

ANNOT.

This Prophecy feemeth to portend the change of the See of Rosse in fome place
near to Venice, and this is to happen when the great Duke of T#/cany fhall afcend up-
ona Triumphant Chariot, and that the Houfe of Colomne (which is the mote power-
full in Rome) fhall take his part,


4


LX ¥.
French.


O vafte Rome ta ruine s'aproche,
Non de tes Murs, de ton fang,& fubftance,
L’afpre par lettres fera fi horrible coche,


Fer pointu mis a tous jufques au manche.
| Roglifh,


=> A


of Michael ‘Noftradamitis,
3 Englifh.
1 O great Rome thyruine draweth near,
rl 1 Not of thy Walls. of thy blood and fubftance,
hi The flarp by Letters fhall:make fo borrid anotch,
Sharp Iron thruft ia all totbe haft.
oid ANINOT: |
This is a confirmation of the foregoing Prophecy, by which it is faid that the de-


ftruGion of Rome thall not be in her Walls, blood or [abftance 5. buc onely by Letters or
Doétrine that fhall put quite down the Ronan Religion,


LX VI.
French.
Le Chef de Londres par Regne l'Americk,
L'Ifle d'Efcoffe tempieræpar gelee,
Roy, Reb. auront un fi faux Antechrift,
Qué les mettra tretous dans la meflée.
Enghfh.
| The Chief of London by Reign of America, -
Verle Fl The Ifland of Scotland fhall catch thee by à frost,
then 1 King and Reb. fall bave fofalfe an Antichrift,
|| As will put them altogether by the ears. |
| 7 ANNOT,
| I conceive this Prophecy can be appropriated to no body better then Oli, Crow:
wel, whoiscalled here the Chief of London.ty Reign of America , that is,by Reign of
confufion, whofe projects and treafons wete all brought to nought, by the vidorious
Mars of the ever renowned General cHonck, who came wich his A rmy from Scotlaud
to Lexdon in the V Vinter time , he is called alfoafalfe Antichrift, becaufe he was an
enemy to King and Reb, that is Refpublica or Common- wealth,
LXVIL
| | | French, |
| _ Le tremblement fi fort au, mois de May,
1 Saturne, Caper, Fupiter, Mercure au Bocuf:
| Venus aully, Cancer, Mars’en Nonnay,
Tombera grefle lors grefle qu’un œuf.
ne place à


ad D Englith. LR
po | The Earth-quake foall be fo great inthe month of May,
| Saturn, Caper, Jupiter, Mercury ia the Bull,
| Venus alfo, Cancer, Mars in Nonnay,
Then fhall fall Hail bigger then an Eg ge,


ANNOT.


The meaning is, that when all chefe Coœleftial bodies hall be fo difpofed, that
there will be a fearful Earth-quake.and Hail,


French.


The true Prophecies
LXVITE

: French;
L’Armée de Mer.devane Cire\tiendra, .
Puis partira‘fans faire longuerallée,
Citoyens grande proye en Terre prendra,
Retourner clafle reprendre grand emblée.

sel Bish at ai doit Eng.

The F leet foall ffand bcfore tbe City,
Then fball go away for a little while,


And then fball take a great troop, of Citizens on Land,


Fleet fball come back and recover.a great deal.
ANNO!T,


It feemeth here he fpeaketh of two Fleets oneof. which thall ftand a little while
beforea Town, and carry a great many Citizens away, buc. chat the other Fleet fhall


come in the mean time, and rédeem them, |

LXIX.
French.

Le fait luyfant. dé neuf vieux eflevé;

Seront fi grands par Midy: Aquilon,

De fa (œur propre grandes alles levé,

Fuyant meurdry au buiflomd!Ambellon.

10 ris | Englifh,
The bright: aGions. of new old exalted,
Shall be fo great through the Seuth and North,


Byshis, oma Sifler great:forces ball be raifed,


Running awayhe fall be hnidered near the bufb of Ambellon. :\ |


AN NOT.


The queftion here is, whether this #é/ vie#x in French or new oldin Epglifb be the |


proper name of a man , or bea Metaphor’, to exprefs à young man ofan ancient Fa-
mily, when the Reader hath fatisfied himfelf upon that, the reft is eafie enough,


L'AX:
French.
L'œil par objet fera telle excroiffance,
Tant & ardente que tombera Ia Neige,
Chañp'arroufé viendra en decroiffance,
Que le Primat fuccombera a Rhege,


Englifh.
The eye by the objet [ball make uch an excreffency,


Becaufe fo much, and. fo burning [hall fall the Snow,


The Field watered fall come to decays
Infomuch that the Primat fhall fall down at Rhége.


ANNOT.


of Michael Noftradainus.


ANNOT.
All this is nothing but an extraordinary great Snow that hall fall about Rhegio a
City of Italy, whereby the Fields thall be drowned and fall to decays, infomuch, that
the chief men,called here Primate {hall fall to poverty,


LXXL
French.


| La Terre & l’Air geleront fi grand eau,
| Lors qu’on viendta pour Feady venérer,
Ce qui fera jamais ne fut fi beau,
| Des quatire parts le viendront honorer.
Englifh.
The Earth and the Air fhall freexe with fo much water,
me -. When they [ball come to worfbip Thurlday,


tle M That which fball be never, was fo fair,
tal | From the four parts they fball come to-honour hit,
ANNOT.


| This fignifieth an exceeding great froft , which (hall happen on a Holy Thar(day,
where the ground and sky fhall be fo clear, that men may come from the four parts
(viz, of the Earth) without trouble for to worlhip,
K LXXIL
| French,

L'an mil neuf. cent nonarite neuf, fept mois,

Du Ciel viendra un grand Roy d'effrayeur,

Refufciter le grand Roy d'Angouniois,


4 Awant apres, Mars Regner,par bonheur.
_ Englifh.
ell, In the year a thoufand nine hundred ninety nine and feven months,
Frem Heaven a great terrible King,
bethe M To raie again tbe great King of Angoulefme,
eat Ee | Before and afier, Mars foall Reign luckily.
h à ANNOT.


He that is called here King of Aagoulefme was Francis theÏ, as gallant a Prince as
ever Erance had, who before he was King went by the title of Dake of 4sgew/efrme,


M  chereftisealie,
A LYS ne,
French.
| Le temps prefent avecque le pafié,
| Sera jugé par grand Fomalifte,
Le Monde tard de luy fera lafé,
Et defloial par le Clergé jurifte.


Kkk Engli(b;


Tie time prefent, tosetber with the paft,


T betrue Prophecies


Englifh.


Shall be judged by a great Jovialifte,
The World fhall at last be weary of bint,


And he [hall be thought unfaithful by the Canon-Law Clergy.


This Prophecy concerneth meer
that is, Merry-man that ever was , and did fo lath and cen
profeffion, and chiefly of the Clergy, that to this ver
an Atheift, and a Prophaner of Sacred and Civil things.


ANNOT.


LX XIV.
French.


ly Francis Rabelais,who was the greateft Fovialif,


An revolu du grand nombre feptiefme,
Apparoifira au temps jeux d'Hecatombe,
Non efloignez du grand age milliefme,
Que les entrez fortiront de leur Tombe.


Englfh.


The year of the great number feven being paft,
Shall be feen at that time the [ports of Hecatombe,
Not far from the great age thoufand,

That the Buried [ball come ot of their Graves.


Hecatombe fignifieth a Sacrifice, wherein a hu


The fenfe therefore is this, that when the
that fuch (port of Hecatombe (hall be feen a
when che day fhall rife, for ic
Created the V Vorld in fix d
lafted fix thoufand years, for


is acommon op


LXXY.
French.


ndred beafts were killed.


year athoufand feven hundred is paft,
Gain, not far from the fixth Millenary,
inion among the Learned, that as God
ays, andrefted the feventh, fowhen the VVorld hath
a thoufand years before God are as one d
be an Eternal Sakbath anda Refurreétion, both of the juft and unjuft


Fant attendu ne reviendra jamais,


l'Europe, en Afia apparoïftra,


Dedans


Un de Ja ligne yflu.du grand Hermes,


Et fur tous Rois de Orient croiftra.


Englifh.


So long expected fhall never come
Into Europe, ir Afia fball appear,


forth of the line of the great Hermes,
And fball grow above all the Kings in the Eaft.


One come


Allis plain, but only this, whet
the Father of the Hermetick Philofophers,


ANNOT,


her he taketh 4


fure the abufes of ev®ry
y day he goeth among them for


ay, there fhall


crmes as a King of Egypt, oras


of Michaël Noftradamus:


LXXVI.
| French.
| Le grand Senat decernera la Pompe
| A un qu'apres fera vaincu chaflé,
| Des adhærans feront a fon de trompe,
a a Biens publiez, ennemy dechaife.
fol Englifh
erty | . Engith,
entr À The great Senate will decree a Pomp. |
To one who after [ball be vanquished and expelled;
É , 5

The goods of his partners shall be
| Publickly fold,and the enemy shall be driven away.
| ad pohsa: ANNOT. |

| What Senate and particular man he meaneth, is the only difficuley in this;
| LXXVII
|
|
|


i)


French.

Trente adhetans de l'Ordre des Ouirettes,
| Bannis, leurs biens donnez fes adverfaires,
| Tous leurs bienfaits feront pour demerites,
Claffe efpargie, delivrez aux corfaires. —

= Enghfh,

Thirty affociated of the Order of Quirettes,
| Banifbed,their goods fball be given to their adverfaries,
isa * Alltheir good deeds fhall be imputed to them as crimes;
ay | The Fleet [cattered,they fall fall into the bands of Pyratés:
Gd À )
i | . Bt NN io wate: eo)
hil À I could not find any man or Author that knew what is meant here by Quiréstes,
~~ || — which is only che difficulty of this Stanza,


| LXXVIIL
| French.
| Subite joye en fubite trifteflé,
| Sera a Rome aux graces embraffées,
| Duell, cris, pleurs, larin, fang, excellent lieffe;
1 Contraires bandes furprifes & troulfées,
| Englifh.
Sudden joy fhall turn into a fudden fadnefs,
At Rome to the embraced graces,
pl Mourning, cries, wee ping, tears blood excellent joy;
{ Contrary Troops furprized and carryed away.
| ANNOT.


7 There is nothing difficule here, but what he meaneth by Esiérared grates, for my

, || pare I believe them fome new merried Couples, who in the middle of their jollity
fhall fall into chefe difafters, |

LE À ees Kkk 2 French,


a


a a —


see sre


LX XIX,
French.


The tre Prophecies


Les vieux chemins feront tous embellis,
L'on paffera a Memphis fomentrées,

Le grand Mercure d’Hereule fleur de lys,
Faifant trembler Terre, Mer,& Contrées.


Englith.


The old ways foall be made all fair,
There fhall be a paffage to Memphis Somientrées,
The great Mercury of Hercules F lower de luce,


Making the Earth,theSea,and theCountreys to quake,


This word Sementrees, being altogether barbarous, is the r


ANNOT,


not conftruétion can be made of all thee words.


LXXX
French.


Au Regne grand, du grand Regne Regnant,


Par force d'armes les grands Portes d’airain,
Fera ouvrir le Roy & Duc joignant,
Port demoly, nef a fonds jour {erain.


Englifh.


SF


In the great Reign, of the great Reign Reigning,
By force of Aris the great Brafs Gates,

He fhall caufe to be open, the King being joyned with the Duke,
Haven demolifb'd, Ship Junk on a fair day.


The words and the fenfe are plain, though the parties be unknown.


ANNOT.


LXXX I;
French.


Mis Trefor Temple, Citadins He/periques,
Dans iceluy retire en fecret lieu,
Le Temple ouvrir, les liens fameliques,
Repris, ravis proye horrible au milieu.


A Treafare put in a Temple by Hefperian Citizens,


Englith.


In the fame hid in a fecrer place,


The hungry bonds fball caufe the Temple to be open,


And take again andravifb, a fearful prey in the middle.


This is concerning a Treafure hid by Spamiards ( called bere Hefperian Citizens ) in
a Church, which the people of a Town being poor, and almoft ftarved; caufed co be
open, and did ranfack it, but ia the middle of it che


it was God knows.


ANNOT.


y found a frange: prey; but whac


eafon thatneither feñfe


French.


at


» =
en —


Of Michael Noftradamus,
LXXXIL

| French,

Cris, pleurs, lärmés viendront avec cOuteaux;

Semblant faux donront dernier aflaut,

L’entour parques planter profons plateaux,

Vifs repouflez & meurdris de plain faut.

Englifh

Cries, weeping, tears, [ball come with dag gers,

With a falfe feeming they fball give the laft affault,

Set round about they foall plant deep,

Beaten back alive, and murdered upon a fidden.

| ANNOT.


This feemeth to have a relation to the Scalado of Geneve, of which you fhall have


a full account in the 69 Stanza, of the twelfth Century,

LXXXIIL

_ French.
De batailler ne fera donne figne,
Du Parc feront contraints de fortir hors,
De Gafp. l'entour fera cogneu l'enfeigné,
Qui fera mettre de tous les fiens a mort.

Englith.

There fhall no fign of battle be given, |
They fball be compelled to come out of the Park,
Round about Galp. fhall be known the Enfiga,
That fhall caufe all bis own to be put to death,


| ANNOT.

This Prophecie was fulfilled in the year 1556. by the Marfhal of Brifkat in Pientont,
when he took the Town of /ignal by affault, where 1200. Neapolitans were put to
the Sword, who were called the braves of Naples; becaufe they were all very gal-
Jantly habited, and the Governour being wounded, caft himfelf defperately into a
Well, whence the Marfhal caufed him to be taken up, and to be cured of his wounds;

In chis conflict there was no fign of Battle given : becaufe it was done by the rafh+
nefs ofa Souldier, Baftard ofa Baftard of the houfe of Bei/%y, who without expecting
the command of the General, went alone upon the breche, and after he had fl ot
againft the Enemies, drew his Sword, and did fight a great while hand to hand with-
out being wounded.

Some of his Companions feeing his valour, did follow him, and others came to
to their help, and thefe carryed along with chem all chofe that wereappointed to give
the affault; infomuchthat by a kind! Warlike emulation, all did cairy themfelves
fo valliantly, that after a long and {tout refiftance, they routed the Enemies, and put
all the Garrifons to the Sword, |

Je is what the Author faith inthe firft and fecond Verfe, feeing chat chofe char
were appointed to give Battle, every one in his Regiment or Squadron » were
compelled by emulation to come out of their Parks that is, from the Precin@ of
place wherein they were, The third Verfe addech, chat round about the Enfien of


Galp,


ee


43 The true Prophecies
Galp, fall be known 3 thatis, in the affaule the Captain of that place, named Ga/par
Pagan, was remarked to fight valliantly every where the French did affaule, which the
Marfhal of Briffac feeing, as alfo the forwardnefs of his men commanded the general
affaulr to be given. The Captain feeing theTown taken,though he had above twenty
wounds, for marks of his Valour, yet by that defpair chrew himfelf into a Well

near which the Marfhal paffing, heard his voice, and cau fed him to be drawn out, and


cured of his wounds, | |
This Captain being refolved to perifhin this affault, did canfe all his own to be put


todeath, as the fourth Verfe faith. The Hiftory of this Town was famous, for which
the Marthal of Briffise did prefent Gifts to the moft Valiant, and among the reft to
this Baftard, after he had put him in jeopardy of his life, for having violated the
Military Orders in a matter of fuch concernment, That Town of Pfg#sl is fituated
upon a Mountain of the Countrey of Aontferrat, of a difficult accefs, where no
pieces of Ordinance can be brought up, but by the help of Mens Arms; after the
taking of it, the Marfhal did caufe it to be'raifed even to the ground, becaufe it could
not be ufeful to the Frenchsthat had many other places.to keep,and might have been


very beneficial tothe S paniards
LXXXIV.


French.
Le Naturel a fi haut, haut non bas,
Le tard retour fera marris contens,
Le Recloing ne fera fans debats,
En emploiant & perdant tout fon temps
Englifh.
The Natural to fo high, high not low,
The late return foall make the fad contented,
The Recloing foall not be without ftrife,
En entploying and loofing all bis time.


ANNOT: .
being a forged word, without fignification, and being the Key. of


The Recloing,
all this Stanza, no body can tell what co make of it.
LXX XV. a
French.


Le vieil Tribun au point de la Trebemide,
Sera prefle Captif ne delivrer,
Le vueil non vueil, le mal parlant timide,
Par legitime a fes amis livrer.
| Englifh.
The old Tribun, at the point of the Trehemide,
Shall be much intreated not to deliver the Captain,
They will not will, the ill peaking fearful,
By legitimate fhall deliver to his friends.


ANNOT;


Koval


{of |


of Michael Noftradamus.


| ANNOT,

The old Treban is an old Captain or Govéinour ofa Towa, who fhall be much
entreated not to deliver at the end of the Trehemede( that is, three Months ÿ one that
he kept priioner, but will they or not, he fhall lawfully deliver him to his friends,

LXXXVI,
French, |
Commeun Gryphon viendra le Roy d'Exrope
-Accoinpagne de ceux d'Aquilon,
De rouges &blancs conduira grande Troupe,
Ft front contre le Roy de Babylon.


à Englith.

As a Griffin fball come the King of Europe,

Accompanied wiilrthofe of the North,

Of red and white fball condu& a great Troo ),

And they fall go againft theKing of Babylon.

| ANN OT,
This is concérning the King of Swedeland, Guftavus Adolphus, whois called hère

the King of Europes becaufe he lived in a part of it, and becaufe he was one, if not
the moft gallant Prince of his time, who witha great Army of his Subjeéts, named


here thofe of eAqwilo#, invaded Germany, and made War againft che Emperour,;


whom he calleth here the King of Babylon, either becanfe he is 2 great favourer of


the Reman Church, or becaufe the Empire, by reafon of fo many Sovereign Princes
in icis like a Babel and confufion.


The great Troop of Red and Wbite, wheré his own Souldiers, whom he diftinguithed °


by their feveral habits, Clothing them with feveral C Olours, to breed an emulation


among them, there being the Red Regiment, the White, the Blew,the Yellow,the
Green, G'c,


LXXXVII
French.
Grand Roy viendra prendre port pres de Nice,
Le grand Empire de la mort ff en fera,
Aux Antipodes polera fon génifle,
Par Mer la Pille tout efvanouira.
Englifh.
A great King fall land by Nice,
The great Empire of death fhall interpofée with it.
He fall put his Mare inthe Antipodes,
By Sea all the Pillage shall vanish,


| , ANNOT,
A great King {hall land hard by Avice, which is a Sea Town in Savoy, but he thall


have a great lofs of his men by death, and the Sea fhall fwallow all his plunder,


French,


~


sete ees er


Se


Panera =


The true Prophecies


LXXXVIIL
French.


Pieds & Cheval a la feconde veille,
Feront entrée vaftiant tout par Mer,
Dedans le Port entrera de Marfeille,
Pleurs, cris & fang, onc nul temps fi amer.
Englifh.
Foot and Horfe upon the fecond Watch,
Shall come in deftroying all by Sea,
They fhall come into the Harbour of Marfeilkes,
Tears, cryes and blood, never was fo bitter a time.
ANNOT!
This is fo clear that ic needeth no interpretation,
LXXXIX: ly or
French. pon
De Bricque en Marbre feront les Murs reduits,
Sept & cinquante années pacifiques,
Joye aux humains renevé l’aquedu@,
Sante, grands fruits, joye & temps mellifique,
Englifh.
The Walls fhall be turned from Brickinto Marble,
There shall be peace for [even and fifty years,
Foy to mankind, the Aqueduct shall be built again,
Health, abundance of fruit, joy and mellifluous time.


ANNOT.


un | After fo many calamities Prognofticated by the Author, he promifeth here feven


and fifty year of a golden Age, but whea ¢ he maketh no mention, "
» 4 OO ae
French. Rah
Cent fois mourra le Tyran inhumain, The
Misa fon lieu fcavant & debonnaire,
Tout le Senat fera deffoubs fa main;
Fafche fera par malin tcmeraire.
Englifh.. _
The inhumane tyrant fball die a hundred times,
In his place fball be put a Learned and mild man,
Allthe Senate fhall be at his command,
Fe (ball be made angry by a rafb malicious perfon.
ANNOT.


This Prognoftication is eafie to be underftood, only it is indeterminate;and fpeci: |
fieth neither time nor perfons.


Frenéhi


(ere


of Michael Noftradatius,

X CI

French.
Clergé Romain l'an mil fix cens & neuf,
Au chef de l’an fera Eledion,
D'un gris & noir de la Campagne yflu,
Qui oncques ne fut fi malin.
Englifh.

The Roman Clergy in the year 4 tho
In the beginning of the year fhall make choice
Of a gray and black, come out of the Conutrey,


Such a one as never a worfe was.


ANNOT.
Wanting the Chronology of the Popes, I have not fet down who that Pope was;
then whom our Author faith there never wasa worfe,but the time being fo pundtual-
ly prefixed , it will be an eafie matter for the Reader to find out {atisfaction in this
i X CII.
French.
Devant le Pere l'Enfant fera tué,
Le Pere apres entre cordesde jonc,
Genevois peuple fera efvertué,
Gifant le Chef au milien comme un troné.
Englifh,
The Child shall be killed before the Fathers eyes,
The Father after shall enter into ropes of rushes,
The people of Geneva shall notably ftir themfelves,
The Chief lying inthe middle like a log.
NNOT.


This Prophecy is twofold, the two firft Verfes foretel ofa man that fhall have his


fon killed before his eyes, and himfelf afterward hall be firangled by a rope made of
Rufhes.


The two laft Verfes are concerning the people of Geweva , who (as he faith) {hall


luftily beftir themfelves, while their Captain, Chief , or Commander fhall carelefly
lie like a log,


XCIrr;

French.

La Barque neuve recevra les Voiages,

La & aupres transfereront l'Empire,

Beaucaire, Arles, retiendront les Hoftagés,

Pres'deux Colomnes trouvées de Porphyre.
Englifh.

The new Ship shall make journeys

Into the place, aud thereby where they shall tranflate the Empire,

Beaucaire, Arles, shall keep the Hoftages,

Near them shall be found two Columas of Porphyry.


Lit ANNOT


ufand fix bundréd and nine,


——— ——~ ners aS ideas wes xs =


RE re 2 =


2 Tes, =


ie)


=


—


ro we eee en


a ee ee


iq
|
i)
4
4


143 The true Fropbecies


AN NOT.
This Prophecy is concerning threethings , the firft is ofa confiderable new Ship,


hat {hall fail feveral times into a place where the Empire hall be tranflated.
The fecond is concerning two Towns of Langwedur, Beancaire,and Arles,who fhall


not furrender the Hoftages that they had.
The third is concerning two Columns of Porphiry that fhall be found there about,


X CIV.
French.
De Nifmes, d'Arles, & Vienne contémner;
Nobeyront a ledict Hefperique,
Au Labouriex pour le grand condamner,
Six efchapez en habit Seraphique.
à Englith.
From Nifmes, d’Arles and Vienna contempt, hac
They fball not obey the Spanith Proclamation,
To the Labouriez for to condemn the great one,
Six efcaped in a Seraphical babit.
ANNOT.


It feemeth that thofe three aforenamed Towns will refufe to obey a Spanifh Pro-
clamation, that would compel them to condemna great man; as for Labowriez it is


a barbarous and non-fenfical word.

The laft Verfe fignifieth, chat fix thallefcape, cloathed in Francifcan habits , cal-
led here Seraphical, becaufe the Francifcans believe that a Seraphin did appear to St.
Francis their Patron, from whence their Order is called by many the Seraphical


Order,


X C V.
French.
Dans les Efpagnes viendra Roy trefpuiflant, ie
Par Mer & Terre fubjugant au Midy, ei
Ce mal fera rabaiffant le croiflant,
Baifler les aifles a ceux de Vendredy,
Englifh.
A moft potent King fhall come into Spain,
Who by Sea and Land fhall make great Conquefts towards the South,
This evil fball beat down the horns of the new Moon,
And flack the Wings of thofe of F riday.
| AN NOT.
A great and potent King [ball come out of Spain; who by Sea and Land [hall make great
Conqueft towards the Sonth, that is Barbary » which fhall be a great prejudice to the
Turkifh Empire, who hath for his Arms à new Moon ; And flack the wings of thole of
Friday, that is, of che Turks, becaufe they keep the Friday for their Sabbath, This


Prophecy was fulfilled by Philip the II. King of Spain, who drove away allthe Moores
out of che South part of it, and took a great many places in the Coatts of Barbary. r


Freneb,


Pro


Aa


Ae
to St,


lie


|


of Michael Noftradamus:


XCV-E.
French,


Religion du nom des Mers viendra,

Contre la See fils Adaluncatif,

Sete obftinée deploree craindra,

Des deux bleffez par Aleph & Aleph.

Englifh.

Religion of the name of the Seas fball comes

Againft the Sect fon Adaluncatif,

Obftinate Seët deplorate fball be afraid,

Of the two wounded by Aleph and Aleph.
ANNOT.


Iconfels my ignorance in the intelligence of this Stanza.


XCVII,
French.


Triremes pleines tout aage captifs,
Tempsbon a mal,le doux pour amertume,
Proye a Barbare trop toft feront haftifs,
Cupide de voir plaindre au vent la plume.


Englifh.
Triremes full of Captives of all Age.


. Fime good for evil, the {weet for bitter,


Pray to the Barbarian, they fhall be too hafty,
Defirous to fee the feather complain in the wind.
ANNOT.


Triremes ate Galléys with three benches of Oares, the reft is much of the nature
of the former, |


French.


La‘{plendetr charte Pucelle Joreufe, :


Ne luira plus, long temps féra fans Sel,
Avec Marchans, Ruffiens, Loups, odteute;
Tous pefle mefle monftre univertel.


Fonelith.


The clear fplendour of the merry Maid,


Shall fbine no more, fe fball be a great while without Salt:

With Merchants, Ruffans, Wolves, oaious,

All promifcuonfly, fhe shall be an nniverfal Monfler:
ANNOT.


This is concerning a famous beauty , who in her latter age fhall proftitute het felf
to all comers;


L I | a Eren hh


T hé true Prophecies


XCIX
French.


A la fin le Loup, le Lion, Bœuf & l'Afne,

Timide dama-feront avec Maftins,

Plus ne cherra a eux la douce Manne,

Plus vigilance & cuftode aux Maftins.
Englifh,

At laft the Wolf, the Lion, Oxe and Affe,

Fearful Doe, fball be with the Maftiffs,

The fweet Manna fhall no niore fall to them,

There fball be no more watching and keeping of Maftiffs.
AN NOT,


This isa Prognoftication’of a general peace all Esrope over, :

The [weet Manna hal no more fall tothe, fignifieth chat the Ewropeans fhall be
fed no more with Manna, as the Jews were inthe Defert, but fhall pafs to the Land
of Promife, that is of peace and quietnefs,


GE
French,


Le grand Empire {era par |’ Angleterre,
Le Pempotan des ans plus de trois cens,
Grandes Copies pafler par Mer & Terre,
Les Lufitains n’en féront pas contens.

Englifh.
The great Empire fhall be in England,
Tbe Pempotan for more then three hundred years,
Great Armies hall pafs through Sea and Land,
The Portugueles fhall not be contented therewith.


ANNOT.


This is a favourable one for England, for by it the Empire, or the greateft Domi:
nion of Ewrepe is promifed to it, for the fpace of above three hundred years, at which
the Portugweles or Spaniards fhall much repine,


PROPHECIES


ile oils 11 LOS erg ra NN
Li M ‘Ke h | ae {} 3 morte
| Michael. Noftradamus.
k CENTURY XI. Bowie
| IX
* French.
DP Eyfinier, Manthi, & le tiers qui viendra,
ALE Pefte & nouveau infult, enclos troubler.
Aix & les lieux fureur dedans mordra,
Puis les Phocens viendront leur mal doublets
i | BOS Ad Englifh.
? Meyfinier, Manthi, aad the third that fball come,
Plague and new attempt fall trouble them enclofed,
“The fury of it shall bite in Aix and the places there about ;
Then they of Phocens shall come and double their mifery.


| Thefeate names of particular perfons that are herethreatnéd of the Plague, as al-
| fo the City of 4ix Capital of Provence, and the Countrey about it, and after chat the


City of marfeslles named here Phocens , becaufe they are a Colony of the old Po:


cenfes in Greeste


French,


The true Propbecies


XCVIL
French.
Par Ville Franche, Mafcon en defarroy,
Dans les Fagots feront Sol dats cachez,
Changer de temps en prime pour le Roy,
Par de Chalon & Moulins tous hachez.
Englifh.
By Ville Franche, Mafcon shall be put in diforder,
Inthe Faggots shall Souldiers be hidden,


The time shall change in prime for the King,


By-Ghalon and-Moulins they shall be all hewed to pieces.


ANNOT.

Ville Franche is a Town five Leagues from Lion, and A¢a{con another about the
fame diftance from Ville Franche, and Chalon from Mafcog, and Moulins from Chalon.

The meaning of it is this.y»that therethall be an attempt from Ville Francheupon
Mafcon, by Souldiers hidden in Faggots, that fall be cut off by the fuccours of thofe
Chaions and Moulins ; which like did happen in the time of the Civil Wars in
France, between the King and the League, when the Towns ftood one againft ano-
ther, but becaufe I can find nothing of icin the Hiftory, Ifufpend my further judge-
ment therein,


Mth
Lalo,
‘Up OD
thole
ts 10
40»


(fe.


THÉ


EA

É { — > SS N } (y SES
ce ES" floes EN
RRQ RES À


ENS NY EN LENS ASSIA) 7
\


N


|


PLAY NS


PROPHECIES
Michael Noftradamus.


CENTURY XII.


V,
French.
D 9 Eu, flamme, faim, furt, farouche fumée,
. Fera faillir, froiffant fort, foy faucher,
Fils de Deité! toute Provence humee,
Chaffe de Regne,enragé fans crocher.


| Englifh.
Fire,flame, bunger, theft, wild fmoak ,
Shall caufe to fail, brufing bard, to move F ait,
Son of God ! all Provence fwallowed up ? |
. Driven from the Kingdom, raging mad without fpitting.
| ANNOT. SOE Bio,
The curiofity of the Author in ftriving to begin all his words,in the two firft Verfes
hath made the fenfe of this Stanza fo obfcure , that I believe no body ever did or
fhall truely underftand it , all what can be gathered outofit, isgreat threatning of
{everal calamities, that were to happen upon Provence his native Countrey, as it did
alittle while after his death, by the Civil Wars for Religion,


Frinck,


Seen


ee


se :


1 be true Prophecies


X XIV.
French.

Le grand fecours venu de la Guyenne,
S‘arreftera tout aupres de Poitiers,
Lion rendu par Montluel-en Vienne,


Et faccagez par tous gens de Meftiers.
Englifh,

The great fuccours that came from Gafcony,

Shall.ffop hard-by Poitiers,

Lion furrendred by Montluel-and Vienna

And ranfacked by all kinds of Tradefiren.


ANNOT.
The words and fenfe of this are plain,
XXXVI
> French. |


Aflault farouche en Cypre {€ prépare,

La Jarme à l'œil de ta ruine proche,
Bizance Clafle Morifque figrand taré,
Deux differens le grand vaft par la Roche,


Englifh.
A cruel affault is preparing ik Cyprus,
Tears in nay eye, thou art near thy ruine,
The Fleet of Conftantinople and the, Morick fo great damage.
Iwo differents the great waft foall be by the Rock.
ANNOT,

A cruel Affault is preparing ; fignifies the fhortnefs of the time in which it was toa
happen, for our Author Prophecied 1555, and Cyprus was taken by the Tarks inthe
Month of Aaguff 1571. Selymus thell..fifth Emperour of the Turks, where the
perfidioufnefs of the Bafla etu/tapha that Befieged it is remarkable, for having the
Town delivered him upon Articles’) Fitft; thar the Inhabitants of the City yet alive
fhould enjoy their lives, liberty, and goods, with free exercife of Chriftian Religion,
that the Governour Bragadisus with the reft of the Captains and Souldiers might in
fafty depart with Bag and Bageage , and at their departure take with them five pie-
ces of Ordinance, and three Horfes , which foever it fhould pleafe them to make
choife of , and that the Tarks fhould fafelÿfconduét them into Crete, finding them
both Viétual and Shippings, yetallthefé matters agreed upon, dnd comencedin-
to Writting,, as,alfo by folemn Oaths on-both fide confirmed’; the prefidious Bafla
neverthelels caufed Bragadinns to have his Bars:cut off; then caufed him to be fet in à
Chair, and his skinto be fain off from him quick ; hisheadtobe cut from his dead
body, and upon the point of a Spearito be fet upona highplace, his skin.alfo ftuffed
with Chaff, he caufed to be hanged up at the Yards Arm, and fo to be carried about,


>


French,


of Michael Noftradamus,


LY.
- French; ..
| Deux corpsun chef, champs divilez en deux,
Et puis refpondre a quattre non ouys,
Petits pour grands a pertius mal pour eux,
Tour d'Aigues foudre, pire pour Euffovis.
a Engtith. JL
Two bodies? one hexd, fields divide itto #0,
And then anfwer to four unheard ones,
Small for great ones, open evil for them,
The Tower of Aigues beaten by Lightning, worfe for Euflovis.
ANNOT. de eon |
Out of this crabbid Stanza we fhill pick what we can, and leave the reft to the
| judgment of the judicious Reader. Firft; | et
The two bodies, one head - may be underftood either a Monfter that was fo; as it did
happen once in Italy, as Parews witneffech ; or of theunion of the two Kingdoms of
France and Navarre, under Henry che dV. or of England and Sco:land under King
F ames.


The Tower of eAiguemortes was ftrucken withthe Lightning, a while after our
| Author had put out his Prophecies, :


Y,
+ French.
Triftes Confeils, defloiaux, cauteleux,
Aduis mefchant, la loy fera ¢rahie,


mit Le peuple elmeu, farouche,.querelleux,
Tant Bourg que Ville toutele paix haie,

Enghih.

pa A . “es

fé Sad Councels, unfaithful, mclicions,

nine ‘ 1 \

te M Ill advice the Law fall be betrayed,

the The people fall be moved, wild quarrelfome,

dire Both in Counirey and City the peace fhallbe hated,

de ANNOT

tin a. ph ‘

Ae This isplaia.

ir ae | VI.

hen Fresch.

‘i Royicomre.Roy,& le Duc:contre.Prince,

bt M Haine entre iceux diflenfion, horrible,

Mp Rage & fureur féra toute Province,

(ad ts Le + ; Hi :

i ; France grand guerre & changement terrible:


“Mimnim : Fneliih,


T be rib Prophecies


Englifh.
King againft King, and Duke againft a Prince,
Hatred between them, borrid diffenfion,
Rage and fury {ball be in every Province,
Great War in France, and horrid changes.
ANNOT "07
This is a trae piéture of the miferies of the Civil Wars in France, when Charles the
1X. King of France,wasagaintt Henry King of Nevarre,and the Duke of Gar/e againft
the Prince of Condé.
Vil
French.
L'accord & pache fera du tout rompu,
Les amitiez pollues par difeorde,
L’haine euvieille, toute foy corrompue,
Et l’efperance,,Marfeilles, fans concorde.
Englifh
The agreement and contrat [ball be broken in picces,
The friendfbips polluted by.difcord,
The hatred fall be old, all faith corrupted,
And hope alfo, Marfeilles without concord.
ANNOT. e
This isa fecond part of the foregoing,
VIII
French.
Guerre & debats, a Blois guerre & tumulte,
Divers aguets, adveux inopinables,
Entrer dedans Chafteau Trompette, inlulte,
Cbaftean du Ha qui en feront coulpables.
Englifh. |
War and ftrifes, at Blois war and tumult,
Several lying in wait, acknowledgment unexpected,
They fball get into the Chafteau Trompette by affaulr,
And into the Chafteau du Ha,who fhall be guilty of it.
| | ANNOT.
tee is concerning the Civil Wars of France between the King andthe
e
Hefaith, at Blois War and tumult ; becaufe the Duke of Gwife, and the Cardinal


his Brother were both killed chere, ac the convention of Eftates by the Kings com-


jaar eee he callech here acknowledgesent snexpected, becaufe the Kingdom did


The laft two Werfes are concerning the two Caftles or Fortreffes of Bourdeausx
who in thofe days were fometimes by one party, aad fometimes by another,


French,


The two, laft Verfes feemto have arelationto the foregoing Stanza, and to im-
port, that the Governour of Bowrdeaux {hall
Langon, 2 Town 20 or 30 Miles diftant from Hi
and did annoy fometimes thofe of Bourdeaux; wat
kicks for one. HAY

Gironde and Garenpe are the two Rivers of Bourdeawx:


Eiovas wear ; yetsfeenzerh to be far from the Luke Leman;


This is a notable one;) directly forerelling the-Ente:
Dukeof of Savoy,. upon Gexéva: for the better Intel
give the fenle, word for.word, and then fer dow
Cabiner,, thac,che Reader-atrer fo much tedious
fome fieldco fpatiate and recruit it:felf,

Eiovas near, Biovas by Anagram, is Savoy, or the Duke of it;
was near Geneva ; yet feemethyar from the Lake Leman, which is the Lake th
{ech, through, Geneva, -caltedsin Latiné Lacus Lemanans,
becaule at that time he made great preparations to'Scal
becaufe he was forced toretire,
Certaking.,. Far from. the Neveu
unworthy, the. Kindred of Aen


of Michael Noftradamus:
LXV:
| French.
À tenir fort par fureur contraihdra, |
Tout cœur trembler, Lazçon advent terrible,
Le,coup, de pied. mille pieds te rendra, | pi |
Girond::Garon. né furent plushorribles. LU
dar + _Englih,. it |
He fall by fury compel thens to hold out,


Every beart hall semble, Langon fhall have a terrible event,


The kick hall return to thee a thoufand kicks,


Girond., Garon. ‘are x0 more horrid,
ANNOT.
compel them to hold ont, and becaufe


Bourdeanx, was of the contrary party,
it is threatned here to havea thoufand


LXIX.
French:


. NW
Eiovas proche, efloigner Lac Lenran, |
Fort grand apprefts, retour Confulion, i
Loin des Nepucux, dufea grand Supelman, ll
Tous de leur fuyte.


Foglith.


Very great prebaralives return confitfion.

Far from the Néveux
eae . j

All of their trai.


of the date great. Supelman,


AN NOT.


prife or Scalado made by thé
ligence of which, we thalt firft
a the whole Hiftory as apiece of
and crabbid reading; “may have 1]


whoatthot time
at pañ-
Very great preparatites à
etheWalls oftGeneva. Returns
Confafiow s becaule he was confounded in his wre
x of the great Süpelinan.s that is,” an aétion much
ry the] Vircalled here ereat Sapélman, towhom hé

Mmm 2


Wes


492 T Se true Prophecies


was Allied, All of their Trains thatis, all that were wich him in that undertaking,
did partake of hisreturnand confufion, Now the Hiftory is thus,

About the latter end of the year 1600, the Duke of Savoy having done before all
his endeavours to take the City of Geneva by force, did refolveat laft to have it by
craft, and ftratagem. He did frame a defign full of Courage, Underftandiag, and
Conduct, as well as of misfortune ; it was long a hatching without being difcover-
ed, and although it was known that he caufed Laddersto be made, and that he
bought every where men of courage and refolution, and had a great number of them
alreadv at Chambery, well payed and maintained, waicing for the ripenefs of the de-
fign, though Ignorant of it, No body could believe chat ic was againft chofe of
Geneva, becaule at that time he did treat with them of the manner of living friendly,
and of the liberty of Trade, having feat to them for this purpofe a few days before
the Prefident Rochette, to treat and advife of a manner of livinz friendly together,
tor the eafe of the people. They did fo much hearten and relifh his propofitions
and promi(es, chat alchough Cittes of (uch condition, do not lightly believe them
that have been their Enemies, neverthelefsthey crufted to chat, and grew carele(s
ot their own prefervation, thinking chac there was nothing more powerfull for cheir
fecurity’ thay the treaties ot peace between France, Spain, and Savoy, in-whichthey
thought themfelves inciuded, under che nameof the confederate with the Cantons
of Switzerland: infomuch that the Dukes Subjects went thither fo familiarly, chat
the day before this Execution fome Gentlemen that knew fomething of the defign,
being come into the Town to buy fome Horfes, faid they would come again the next
day to conclude the Bargain, and others had kept’ the fame Language for other
Wares, fo fully perfwaded were they ot a fuccefs, though Heaven, wholaugheth
atthe thoughts of che proud, had refolved to humble and abafe them,

The Governour of Lion had prefently notice that che Duke of Savoy was coming
on the fide of che Mountain, and carryed with him fcaling Ladders, of which he
(ent notice to the King, and provided what was neceffary for the defence of Lio»,
although the fame Advice {aid it was not for Frances yet all this could not hinder
the Execution which was in the meantimeadoing, D’ Adbigay Lieutenant General
of the Duke in thofe Countreys he had on this fide of the Mountains, had made the
Troops to pais, and for that purpofe had affigned them of their Quarters in the
Towns ot Geneva, in feveral places, that they might not be fo foondifcovered.
The Randezvous was at a place called Chambery, the time of the Execution was re-
ferved ro the prudence of the Leader, The time was not according to the precepe
of the Parthians, whoeverfought by night, nor of the Lacedemoniaus, whe under-
took nothing but in the time of thefull Moon; for it was one of the darkeft and
Jongeft nights of all che year, the Troops began their March about fix of the Clock,
Brignolet Governour of Bones, a (mall Town in Fofsigny, diftant three Leagues
from Geneva, was the man that had contributed moft of his own for the performance
of this defiga,, whom he thought fo certain, that he. faid he would die to the
world, if he did not live inGeneva. D Albigny had fer up Watches uponall the
paffes, toftop all Travellers, for fear notice fhould be givenof their coming ; and
of that of the Duke of Savey, to whom the Execution had been reprefented fo fure
and certain, in that he fhould be there himfelf to reap the Honour and profit of ie,
and to end the Triumph that his Grandfather had begun, He came over the
Mountains with five Gentlemen only inhisCompany, and the fameday came to
Tremblures, a Village diftant from Geneve about three Miles; and for all that they
could not hinder, but an unknown Trooper did ride as far as che New-gate, and
asked to fpeak to him that commanded there, bidding him look to themfelves,
becaufe the duke of Save, wifhedthem no good, and foretreated galloping. This
Mews was brought to Blondel, the fourth Syndic of che Town, and who had the
charge


; “ YH: À
of Michael Noftradamus. 453
charge ofehe Guard that year; heanfwerd, he would provide fot chat, Another
came afterwards , and told him that the Dakes Forces were about the Town,
but knew not upon whatdefign, andchat,himfelfwasat Bonne 5 heanfwered, that
they were not Birds, and could not fly, Miftruft is not always to be commended;
but too much confideiice in fuch. bufinefs, is exceedingly dangerous,

Thofe that were to do the Execution, and to get up firftupon the Ladders,
went along by the River of 46e, that the noifeof the Waters might hinder the
Senzinals to hear them, Two things did happen, that were an ill Omen for them,
they faw in the Skies unufual fires, a Hare did many times cro(s their way, and gave
them a falfe Alarm, ands many things being confidered in the night time, do trou-
ble the imagination, and, chat fear maketh one think that Buthes are Squadrons; and
Thiftles Pikes,as ic did happen once at the Siege of Paris by che Eargundians. They
did difcover about Eleven of the Clock fome Pofts, to whom the Cloth- workers of
Geneva ule to nail their Stuffs to dry them. Thofe that went formoft would have
Charged them, thinking they had been an Ambufcado; from thence they went
all along the Rhofne to the Meadow of Plain Palais. Brignolet, and chofe that were
ordained for the Scalado followed @ albigny, who led them down into the Town-
Ditch, on the fide of the Corraterie, without being difcovered by the Sentinals,
although the Ducks. that were in che Ditch, did ( forto awake thofe of Geneva)
what the Geefe did at Rowse againft the Fresch, They went over the Ditch upon
Hurdles for fear co fink: inthe Miré, and did fer up three Ladders of a wonderful in-
vention; becaufe they could be eafily carryed upon Mules, and they could be folded
into fo many pieces, chat chey could reach the higheft wall chaeis ; and befides that,
fo ftrong and firm, chat no Ladder of one piece could be more ; they had befides
that provided Hatchets, Hammers; Pincers, and other fuch Tools, to cut Iron
Chains, break Locks, draw Nailsand Bars, they had befides {everal-Petardoes and
Petardo-Mafters, Fortune, who hatha orear power in fuch undertakings, did'fail
them in their need, after {he had brought them to the middle. of che City, and made
them mafters ot the ftreers for above two hours.

By one of thofe Ladders went up about two handred men, Brignolésivas the firft)
followed by 2’ Attagnae and Sonas, and did carry himfelf more valliantly and prudent.
ly; having got over the Wall, hefu prized the Sentinal, and drew from him the
Watch-word, and his Lite, then threw him over into che Ditch, and ftood in hig
place to ftay for the Round, chic hemighr do as much ro him, as hedid whenit
came new him to give himthe Warch-word, : D Albigny, antone Father Alex
ander a Scotchman, anda Jefuice, were ar che Ladders foor, incouraging thofe that
went up, The Boy chat carryed the Lanthorn faved himfelf, and gave notice to the
Court de Garde of what had betallen his Matter, at which che Conrt de Garde was not
much moved. ‘This was a doing between One and Two of the Clock; expecting
chat of four, at che which they had propofed to make their greater attempt, andin
che mean while to give time to.the fuccour to draw near, and to the day tobreak
becaufe all Warlike Executions done by night, carry always fome confufion with
them. No body had goneto bed in the Town witha thousht to be awakened fo
foon, they refled upon the affurance of the Peace, : The undertakers hada whole
hours time to getup, andas much before thy met with any oppofition, + a’ albigny
had been Within to husband thac time better than did Sonas, Brignolet, and d Atrig-
nac, they mighthave cried, the Town is won, Aboar half an hour pafttwo of the
Clock, a Sentinal, chat, was in the Mints Tower, having heard fome noe in the
Ditch, thot off his Guntogivethe Alarm, which compelled Brignolet to difcover
himfelf, charging all that was in the Cowrtde Garde of the Ne w- gate, that he might
Plant the Petard, andmake way for the main Body that was in Plaiw: Palais. The
got very well the Court de Garde, but againit the Ruleof War, which comtm:nder


EQ


454 T be true Prophecies
to kill all, they let one efcape that had fo much wit astoget up, and tolecdown
the Port=Cullis, + to fruftrate the effec of che Petard, The Town was achat time
full’ of Griest and: ‘horrid’ Houlings, of which the Savoiards fhouldthave:made
theiriprofit, andoincteafedi ‘their courage, as it did weaken that ofthe Townfmen,
thac knew not where to run, 1fomecrying'one way, fome another, © The under-
rakers loft themfelves in the appearance of fo'happy a fuccefs, thofe that were with-
out thould have: given the ‘Alarm acfome other Gate; to divide the Forces of the
Towa; tho’ e: that were within made no ule of their Hatchers, Hammers and Pin-
cers; they forgot Lofer fome Houles oh fire ; the fpiritofaftonifhmentifeizeg up-
omthem,* having intheir thoughts the Sack and Plunderof the Town, “more than
che perfection of their Conqueft, they made only ufe’ ofa certain croaking like
Frogs, asthe Twrks nfeche Bref, Bret, coranimace and rally themfelves.  Brignolet
being compelled to difcover himfelf, marched:towards the New Gate, ‘diftant trom
that place-abouti200: Paces,° and there was wounded, and died a littleafter; the
Fighcebegantin'the dark, and the GC srtde Garde was difperfed, one Souldier hear-
ingthem ‘call forthe Perard, gotuponthe Gate, and cat the Rope that held the
PortéCulis; ‘aad fhuc up the Petard berween the Port-Culis, and the Gace which
they went about to break: open, wich their Hatchets and Hammers, at the firft
refiftance the Petards Mafter was killed.’ The Order is‘fuch at Genews, cha in
all extraordinary acciden:s, every Citizen knoweth the place of his Randezvous, and
there goethy with his Arms, ‘and the Town Houle-is'never deftitute of Soal-
jets.

Ja the meantime the Magiftrate cryeth, He that loveth me let him follow me,
Some Countréy Fellows of the Neighbouring Towns, who kept their Watch by
turns; being led by (ome-Captains and) Citizens, did prefene themfelves ac the
News Gare 'ivhere they were *ftoutly réceived,*and!beaten back, and yet chefirft
thot of cheirsckilled the PerardMafter,; who was much troubled with his Tools,
This fi: t Charge would not haveidriven them back, if the body of the Citizens had
not come, and Charged them fo furiowfly, that chey loft all their Courage; Ne-
céfliry-i hich ftreng thens even-thofe that wane Courage} did fo'animate che Citizens
torthcirdefencey that the undertakers were fained co give back,” The more nimble
wentagain tovtherr Ladders, which proved ufelels ; Vbecaute the Canosa thar was
Plantedin’ the Fort Of Loye, near the Ditch; had broken them ; fo chat they lefe
four and fitey’dead-upon theplace, andtupon the Curtain of che Corraterie, and
tlurzeenithat were cakem alive, It che Town-had had Souldiets inreadinefs to mike
a Sallyoin that Andibicifm, che night being fometiaies'favourableto (uch expe-
ditions, chofevthac were at: Plain Palais, would not havetetreated in fo good an
Order:

There were thirteen taken alive, among whom were the Baron of Attignac, the
Lord Sovasy othe ord Chaffardon, upon promifeof chtir Lives, and to -be Prifoners
of VV ars venelfe they had preferved an Honourable death to all the promifes; to be


4


{pavedoim ‘aying do sntheir' Arms § among them twas 2’ Attignac, who tought vali-


antly, and gaveihis Order of St. Mawrice co his man}: bidding him fave himfelf,


being réiolvedto die with his Sword iavhis hand, :
ThéesLordseof) Gesevaiwould notufe them as Prifonets of War's’ but as Thieves
and: Robbersxcome intosthe Cityoverthe Walls. ° They (aid chat che Duke was


stooogenerOus awPrince for:(o“wicked:and: perfidious anaction: there was feveral


Opinions:concerning their Sentence of Death, the moré moderate would have them
besput 401Ranfom, others:would have them’ be kept’Prifoners, ‘that they might


sdenve tor:éxchange; if fome of che: Kowa were taken in the continttion of the


War; but thermore violent didftir theipeople, inreprefenting unto’them the lofs
oftheir Keligion;; the ravifhing of their Wives and-Maids» the Mañacré! the’Sack
and


of Michael Nofträdamus,
and Plunder of the Town, and their perpetual flavery, andthe complaints of the
Widows and Children of thofe thac had been killed, were fo much confideted; that
the more moderate Opinions did not appear injuft, but in how much they iended
to Death. They were Condemned to be Hanged, whichis thought the moft Ig-
nominious Death : they defired to have their Heads cut off as Gentlemen, whicli
was granted, but it was after they were Hanged, Fitty nine were found killed and
wounded, who had all their Headscut off, In the Ditch there were fome Arme
found, thirty dead, and four wounded, all their Heads were cut off, and fet with
the reft. upon the Gallows, Of the Citizens of the Town there were feventeén found
dead, moft of them killed by their Companionsin the dark, Their Names were
Fohn Canal, one of the Lords of the Councel, Lewis Baudiere, Tobnÿ andel, Lewis
Galatin, Peter Cabriol, Mark Cambiagua, Nicolas Baugueret, Lames Mercier, Abrabans
de Baptifia, Daniel Humbert, Martin de Bolo, Michael Monard, Philip Potier, Francis
Bouzelel, Fobn Buignet, Fames* Perit, Gerrard Mazy, and about twenty wounded.
The Sunday after Dinner, about two of the Clock, 67 Heads, aswellof chofe that
were killed, ‘as of thofe that were Hanged, were faftened upon the Gallows, and
the Bodies thrown into the Rhofze. Thenext Twe/day chere wasa folemn Fafting
day kept, and they began to publifh every where the wondersof this Délivérince,


A Sige eo oN Oran


BR eae


Tbetrue P rophecies


nie ay act ip) hy i

Chae, 2e Bb bo $ a ® es © es st $ Ne oxo bid 5
ECD OE ge) A OPA RD Nees EE CD Aur 1 Abs SEA ES

0 À à ED à © a FA 4 D Oy 2 ae Ses À &

Sremer sy An SF ECE OS TS


Here. followeth, the Copy of their Letter, to: the
Governour of Lion. ris


My Lord;


7 OV have known before this by many of your Letters, how his Hichne/s of Savoy ¢

Y notwithftanding he knew, and had.confeffed that we were included inthe Peace
made in the year 1620. between bi Royal Adajesty of France, and him ; hath meverthea
léfs divers times oppref[ed as, by detaining our Rents, prohibiting of Trade; other vio=
lences and extortions, refufing to hearkeu tothe juft and prefsing rémonfirances, which
bis Majefty hath made bim feveral times in our bebalf ; but hath allo contrived many de>
figns tofurpri[e us in time of Peace, Now it is fo, that for the encompsfiing his pernicious,
defign, the Lordd Albigny, Saturday /aft, the Eleventh of this Month, did bring bes,
fore our Town, on the fide of Plain Palais, about two Thou[and men, Horle and Foot,
all chcice nen, and hath canfed to pafs about 200. of them over our Ditch, by the Corra-
terie, and having [et up Ladders one within another, hath caufed them tocome into our
Town, about three of the Clock in the Morning, upon Sunday the Twelfth of this Month,
encouraging them umfelf, bciag in the Ditch 3 [othat being come down intothe Town,
fome went towards our New Gate'to force tt open, and give entrance to their Companions,
‘wo were in the plain of Plain Palais, others went towards the Mint Gate, that they right
by this means come intothe middle‘of the Town, But it hath pleafed God to look upenus
with his favourable Eye, and to give [uch a Heart to the Citizens, tht they beat them back,
and killed the beft part of them taken upon the place, the rest hath been taken, and fince
that Hanged by our Order, the reft threw themfelves down fromthe wall ; fothat we hear,
many of them are either dead or grievoufly wounded. It is a wonderfall deliverance of our
God, for which we are particularly bound to Praife him, But as it is probable, that the
faid Lord d'Albigny will continue his ill defigns, by fo much the more that we hear his
Highnefs is mot far from us, we do intreat and requef} by all our affection, that you would
be pleafed to confider what prejudice the taking of this place mould be to his Majefly, and
to continue us your favour, and afsift us with your wife and prudent advife, Scc.

Many did judge of the [uceefs of this enterprife by the beginning, amd were more for-
ward to write, than to perform well, The King had notice that the Duke was Malter of the
Town, and the manner of doing was reprefented with [o much felicity and facility, that
there was lefs reafon to doubt of it, thanbelieveit. The Truth was not known, but by the
advife of the Governour of Lion, which came before any difcour{e that the Town did pub-
lifh after its deliverance:

The Duke went Poft back again over the Mountains, and left bis T: roops within three
miles of Geneva in three places, at Tournon, Foffiony, asd Ternier, be caufed his
Embafadours to [ay to the Lords of Berne, that he bad not made that enterprife to trouble
the Peace of the-Cantons ; bat to prevent VEfdigumeres to feize upon it for the K ing of
of France, who fhould have been [o powerfull a Neighbour ,as would have given them great
eccafion of fears and jealoufies,

The fuccefs of this undertaking made it appear, that God will not have thofe Treaties to
the affurance of which bis name hath been called for a Witne/s, to be violated, what[osver
appeararance or pretext of Religion there be.

Thus Gentle Reader thou fecft by all thefe Circwmpances the Truth of enr Authors
Prognoftication,

French,


SF oa À


TT
Ju,
ince
hea,
af on
til
mi
wild


4h


Hest
putt


of Michael Noftradamus.


LXXI.
French.
Fleuves, Rivieres, de mal feront obftacles,
La vielle flame d’ire non appaifée,
Courir en France, cecy come d'Oracles,
Maifons, Manoirs, Palais, feéte rafée.
Englifh.
Brooks and Rivers fhall be a flopping to evil,
The old flame of anger being not yet ceafed,
Shall run through France, take this as an Oracle,
Houfes, Mannors, Palaces, SeG [ball be raced.
ANNOT.
This hath a perfect telation to the miferies chat followed the general Maffacre of
the Proteftants in France in the year 1372. when the Rivers werea ftop to the cruei-
ty of the Perfecutors, and when {o many Houfes, Mannors and Palaces belonging to


thofeof the reformed Religion were demolifhed,and to fignifie the certainty thereof,
he faith inthe third Verfe, take shis as an Oracle,


nomme Lie mt dureté re SL


Non Te


PS a a ak Nees 7
aD’ GP Gp me
ar FE ; = \ | =| a
jo GX NOÉ
t wee © wz: © Ne) = = Ef à


To the Curious


REA


--Gentle Reader; |

pe Hi on (halt takenotice, that an this placethe cove-
R96 toufne/s of Boolféllers and Prénters, hathin
the modern Copies vented new P rophectes,
which they call Prognoftications, drawn out of
tbofe of Michael Noftradamus, which are fo
abfurd and nonfenfical, that they have been rejetted, both by
bis Son, and the beft Wits of this age; therefore I would not foil
the Paper with them, for fear to put fuch a courfe Lift upon fo
a fine a Cloth, but fhall proceed on to give you the reft of thofe Pro-
pl phecies, which truly and undoubtedly belong to our Author,


Wonderful


Ph


À
=

Ce

QA


E 20 PAPN CHO exes

6 LE AT SA Mer D ©

ZEN ) 3A ng A, | whe : 04

A TR = y Sy 4 Ÿ AN

SRP ns LE | kame Be

mA Pt POND ald HE aa
SNS za € ; pe mais: {6 2 WE 2 tee 279. 244
c4 PTT BSS Bi ’ i 5
S ED 2 i


N Es (ie


Wonderful Prognoftications for the Age 1600.


Gathered out of the Notes of Mr.


Michael Noftradamus,


Phyfitian toKing CHARLES the IX, and oneof the


mott excellent Aftronomers that ever were.
PRESENTED
To the Moft Vi&orious and Merciful PRINCE


HENR Y¥ “the IV.


King of FRANCE and NAVARRE, at Chan-
silly the Conftable of Adontmarency’s Houle the 16th
of March 1605.


By Vincent Seve of the Town of Beducaire in Languedoc.
J; «


To the King.


S death, and which I have kept focret 15ll now , that t

faw they treated of the affairs of your Eftate, and par-

ticularly of your Perfon and S ucceffors,as your Jelf may fee if yon pleafe
to take the pains to look upon, and wherein you fhall find things woril j
of admiration, Ihave taken the boldnefs ( though unworthy) to pri-
Non 2 fent


460 T be true Prophecies


fent thens to you, tranfcribed ix this little Book, no kefs nds then
the other two which he made , for in it be hath treated of what [ball
happen in this Age 1600, not fo obfcurely as he hath done formerly bur
by enigmes, fpecifying fo clearly the things he fpeaketh of that one may
certainly judge of them’, as of things that are already come to pafs.
Being therefore defirous that your Mayjefy fbould bave the ferft notice
thereof, [thought to difcharge my duty:in this as;one of your mofbobe-
dient and faithful Subjects, which I intreat your Majefty would be plea-
fed to agree , obliging fo not onely the body of one.of your faithful Sub-
jects already yours, but alfo the Soul who fhall continue to pray for the
health and profperity of your Mayefty 5 and of pee that bave relas


tign to it, as one that ts,and [hall ewer be,


STR),


Your moft humble,.moft obedient and
faith‘ul Servant and Subje&,


SEVE,


From your Town of Beaucaire
in Languedoc.


|


k


Ww)


fom <= NCS = AY


(spy
(£ Fo KE Le


TRE A A,


PROP ee


OF


Michael Noftradamus.


For the Years of this Age 160 0.


14
F rench.


Un Tn, NRARHLR mis sean! la Nivel é.

A qui plus fort des deux Pentsorter À:
D'un Duc, d'in Roy Gallerede F PS
Port de Marcille: Piidelle dans Ja
De Catherine Fort Chef ‘on rafera.


Englith,
New’ Age, new Alliance |
A Markdom put into a Boot
Who fball be the ftrongeft of the. troto-earr Pyl
Ofa Dukcorof a King, Galley of Florence.
In the Port of Matleilles. à Maid in Franc,
Of the Fort Catherine be Head Jball be deniolif Bed.

ANNOT,


By New Age is meant the Age 1600, to the end of the Centaur
taining a hundred years,


The new Alliance was the match between Heary the IV. and Catherine of Medici


F rane C5


u


ry, each age’ cone


made and gelebratéd that year.


A Markdom put into 4 Boat, was the Markdom OF Salucesi im Italy, which the Duke
of Savoy had fyrrepticioufly taketi from the Crown of Franée..


in the time of the
Civil Wars, and would not reftore it, for which there was gre


at We is bétw ‘een the


King of France and the Duke of Savoy,till at laft they dgieed that the Duke pf Saves


4], ould


e;


~~


A p
ve BB —
Fe


462 T be true Prophecies


fhould give in exchange of it the Countrey of Brefcias and this is the fenfe of the
fecond, third, and half the fourth Verfe. ;

Galley of Florence in the Port of Marfeilles, « Maid in France , fignifieth the arri-
val of Mary of Medicis in the Galleys of France, and her Landing in the Port of
Marfeilles.

Ofthe Fort Catherine the head fhall be demolifbed ; the Duke of Savoy to plague
and bridle thofe ot Geweva, upon whom he hath had always pretentions , had builta
ftrong Fort cwo leagues from Geneva, called the Fore St Cathérine , which did fo
annoy the Town, chat they made their addrefles to Henry the IV. who was then in
War with the Duke of Savoy, reprefenting to him that they were not able tore-
lieve his Army with Viduals,becaufe of che {aid Fort,whereupon Henry the 1V,took
it, and demolifhed it to the ground. , |

II

French.
Que d’or, d’argent fera de pendre,
Quand Comte voudra Ville prendre,
Tanc.de mille & mille Soldats
Tuez, noiez, fans y rien faire,
Dans plus forte mettra pied terre,
Pigmee aide des Con/narts.

Englith.
How wuch Gold and Silver fhall be fpent,
When Earl fhall go about to take a Town,
So many thoufands and thoufands of Soldiers,
Killed, drowied , without doing any thing,
In a jtronger be fLall put his foot on ground,
A Pyemie helped by the Cenfuarts.


ANNOT.

This Stanza and the nextare concerning the Town of offend, which was Befieged
by the Arch-duke, and defended by the States of Ho#and, under the conduc of Earl
Maurice of Naffaw,

In 4 ftronger he [hall put his foot on ground , fignifiech that Earl Masrice during the
faid Siege, took the S/uys another Town of the Spaniards, thought ftronger then
Oftend, A Pycmic helpeld bythe Cenfuarts, fignifieth that Prince Maurice whom he
calleth herea Pygmie in comparifon of the Arch-duke, was helped by the French and
Englifh, whom he calleth here Ceafwarts , to rime with the word Soldats in the fore-
going Verfe,

Vif.
French,


La Ville fans deflus deffoubs,
Renverfée de mille coups,

De Canons, & forts deflous Terre,
Cinq ams tiendra, le tout remis,
Et laché a fes ennemis,


L'eau leur fera aprés la guerre.
Englith,


!. This Stanza is a$ wellas che former concernin
three years Siege inftead of five (which is falfly printed here) was {i
Arch- Duke, and prefently after like to be drowned by the Sea.


__ This Prophecy was concerning Lewis the XIII. King of France,


IV. whowas born under the Sign of Libra, andtheretore called th
is eafie,


Of Michael Noftradimus;


| Enehifh,
The Town fhall be upfide down,
Overthrown by a thoufands fbor
Of Canons, and Forté under ground,
Shall hold five years, all fhall be retubned,
And furrendred to the enemies
Water after that Jhall make War again}? then,

ANNOT,

g the Town of Oftend >» Which after
trendred to the


IV.

French.
Du rond d’un Lis naiftra un fi grand Prince,
Bien toft & tard venu dans. fa Province,
Saturne en Libra en exaltation,
Mailon de Venus en defcroiflante force,
Dame én apres mafculin foubs l’Efcorce,
Pour maintenir l’heureux fang de Bourbon:


Enelith,
From the round of a Lilly fball be born a great Prince;
Soon and late conte into his P rovince,
Saturn zz Libra being in exaltation,
The Houfe of Venus in a decreafing ftrength,
A Woman afterwards and a Male under the Bark ;
To maintain the happy blood of Bourbon:
ANNOT.
fon of Henry the
eFuf, thereft
V.
| French,
Celuy qui la Principaute,
Tiendra par grande cruanté,
A Ja fin verra grand Phalange,
Par coup de few trefdangereux,
Par accord pourroit faire mieux,
Autrement boira fuc d’Orenge,


[Sa


Sa ree


The true Prophecies


Englifh.
He that the Principality,
Shall keep by great cruelty,
At laft fhall fee a great Army,
By a fire blow moft dangerous,
He fbould do better by agreement.
Otherways be [ball drink jnyce of Orenge.
ANN OT:

This is concerning a Governour of the Principality of Orerge, under the authority
of a Prince ; which Governour having been long in poffeffion of that Government,
and the Prince being bufiein the Wars of the Netherlands, the {aid Governour plaid
Rexin hisabfence, fo chat che Prince was forced to have him made away privately.

| VL

French.

Quand de Robin Ja traiftreufe entreprile,
Mettra Seigneurs & en peine un grandPrince,
Sceu par /a Fiz, chef on luy tranchera,
La Plume au vent, amye dans Efpague,
Pofte attrapé eftant en la Campagne,
Et!’ Efcrivain dans l’eau fe jettera.


: Englith.
When the treacherous plot of Robin,
Shall put many Lords and a greatPrinceintrouble,
Being known byla Fin, bis head fhall be cut off,
The Feather ir the Wind, friend to Spain,
Poft overtaken inthe Countrey,
And the Scrivener foall caft bimfelf into the Water.

ANNO.


Two notable Hiftoriés are contained in this Stanza , the firft is of the Marfhial-of
Biron; the fecond is of Nicolas , High Secretary to the Lord Villerey, who himfelf
was chief Secretary of State to Henry che IV. ‘and becaufe they ate curious ones, and
not to be met every where, we fhall fer them down:

The firft four Verfes are concerning the Duke of Biron , who by tranfpofition of
lettersis called here Robé#s this man by his Military Valour‘ and expérience, had
from a private Gentleman afcended to the higheft degrees of honour and prefer-
meat, that his condition was capable of, for though he were hot forty, yearsiold, he
had attained unto the greateft dignities of the Kingdom ;, being fourteen years old,
he was made Colonel of the Switzers in Flanders s alittle while after he was made
Marfhal of Camp , andafter Marfhal General: ‘he was'admitred Admital of France
in the Parliament of Tours, and then Marefhal of France in that of Paris ; at the Siege
of Amiens he was fole Lieutenant of his Majefty, though there were many Princes
of the Blood inthe Army , and to compleat his greatnefs , he was made Peer of
France, and the Barony of Biron ereéted into a Dukedom ,. not contented with all
that, he faid, he would not go to the retaking of the reft of che Towns in Picardy, un-
lefs his Stacue were erected in Brafs before the Zowvre ; and in conclufion , es

ad


= C0. —


—


—


—_ —


of Michael N oftradamus,
bad rather die upon a Scaffold, undertaking fome gieat matters » then to live idle in
his own Houfe, and always among chèfe Bravadoes, he did mix fomie bold and dange-
fous words; which hé would have every body to approve of. 7
When he faw that after the Siege of Amiens the War was at an end , that Britany
was reduced, and that all the Swords were fheathéd for a good while, he thought chat
having no moré occafion to exerci(e his valout , he thould grow out of credit > and
that he fhould have no more that power, by which he plaifed theKing and do without
feat all what he did without Juftice. The fireof that great courage finding no work
without, began to work within; that burniñe defire of being always the firft, did fill
his head with flames and fmoak of 2 great defign, he complained fthe King, and of
the unequal reward of his deferts and fervices ; did publith his difcontents , adding
threatnings to his complaints, and {poke of the King withlictle re(pect, that his moft
intimate friends did judge his words infolent and dangerous.

It is crue ic was the vi there were alfo fome of Fortune, for
hat a moderate man mighe with for in
es by too much happinels. He began

then to lend his Ears unto flatterers and when they told him that hé was the greareft
Captain in France, he anfwered that he would die upon a fcaffold, or he would go
beyond the condition ofa fingle Gentleman > that the goodnels of his fword thould
give him what Fortune had denied; and the Aftrologers to whom he gave great
credit, had foretold him in ambiguous terms, that nothing could hinder him from
being a Sore » but the blow of a {word given bya Bargundian , and though all
his lifetime he had thewed but little Devotion and Zeal to Religion, yet from chat


time that he prepared his foul to the motionof his ambition, he fained himfelf very
devout and zealous, and began to wear Beads » that the Baron of Lux had given
him in a Tennis-Court, and to declare himfelf an irreconciffable enemy to the Pro:


teftants, feeking every where fome difcontented Spirits, whom he did encourage
with the hopes ofa profitable change.

La Nocle Lord of /4 Fix was then for the troubles of Provence, and for the quarrel
he had with | Efdiguieres , retired into his Houfe, chreatned of il] ufage by the King,
enemy to fome great ones, loaded with debts and Sutesin Law, Thedifeontented
meet always, either by defign or by chance. The Duke of Biron who knew that
he had been deeply engaged in the bufine(s of the late Duke of Alencon, that he had
Negotiated with the Minifters of the King of Spain, and of the Duke of Savoy, du-
ring the Siege of Amiens, chat he was full of difcontents,thought that fuch a one was
feeking foraMafter, They {poke together and mixed their grievances, propound-
ing to feek out of the Kingdom what they could not find within » and to contract an
intelligence with che Duke of Savoy; thus after fo many examples of unavoidable
dangers , the Duke of Biren did venture upona Journey full of Rocks and Shelves,
under the condu& of one who was yet wet with the Shipwrack he had Jarelÿ made.

The Duke went into Flanders, for the execution ot the Treaty of Mervmms, where
one Piceté of Orleans {poketo him, and in{pired into him ftrange defires of raifi ng his
Fortune, with thofe chat knew and admired his deferts. The Duke of Firen did
hearken to him , and told him he would be glad to hear him fome other time upon
that fubje. From chat time forwards the Spaniards thought chemfelves fure of
him, and grew confident, either ro have him, orto dcftroy him : a French Gentle-
man, who becaufe of the Civil Wars was retired into Flanders, and had forme imploy-
ment in the Arch-Dukes Court, gave the firft intelligence of it to the King , who
cook ic kindly, but fent him wordchat the Duke of Biron had too much courageand
honefty to harbour fuch a wickednefs, being come back again from Flanders the
King wifhed him to Marry, but he fhewed that his inclinations tended to fomie other
parry, then that which was offered unto him, and though he made thew tocourt tlie

Ooo Daug! ter


466 The true Prophecies


Daughter of my Lady Luce, he neverthelefs intended ce have thenatural Sifter of
the Duke of Savoy, of which the Knight Breton had fpokentohim. . La Fishad ia
charge from the Duke of Biron, to do all what he could for hisfatisfaction, Picoré
had made a Journey into Spaiz, only to know and receive the propofitions, Farges
a Monk of the Order of Fiffsaux, wentinto Savoy, and from thence to 4ilan to re-
ceive Orders how to pluck of chis Plant out of France, Things went, very flowly;
for the Spaniards, do not eafily believe the words of the French, unlefs they be with
great effects of rebellion and change ; but che Duke.of Sevay being at Paris,
did: wholly put.out the Flower de Luces hehadin his Heart, and did difpo‘e him to
difturb the King:fo much at home, chat he {hould have but litrle tume,to.difpute him
che Markdom ot Saluces, upon,that hope che Duke of Savoy negleGted the Executi-
on of the treaty of Peacemadeat Paris, the NVar was proclaimed, andthe Duke of
Biron took the chief places in Breffe. , Being at Prerre Chaftet inthe beginning of
September, La Fin came to him, and by. his order made two Journeys to St. Claude,
woete Rencas was. . The King-had notice of it, but though it bettertodiffemble it
than to furprife a man he loved.in hisinfdelity,.he thought enough:to bid him come
into Savoy, and torid himfelt of La Fin, He did believe that what the King {aid to
him out of his affection, p:oceeded from fear, and kept company {til with La Fin,
and never went to fee the King, bat with greatymany attendants, tefufing to take
his.lodging, near his, chat he might have more liberty ; he periwaded the King
being at dunefy, that he did defire to difcover (ome paflages, and therefore defired
co have fome guides of the. Countrey, but ic was to fend fafely Reraze, La Fins
Secretary ta the Duke of Savoy; to give him intellizence inwhat ftate the Kings
Army was, andso bid a Albigay retreat, who otherwife had been defeated. This
was about the time chat che Due of Biron did intreat the King to beftow the Go-
verament .of the Citadel of Bowrg on him, whom he fhouldname,  Icis the Na-
ture of the greac ones that ferve Princes to believe they deferve all, and to become
more dangerous than Enemies if they are refufed what they ask for. The King did
declare, that he would beftow che place upon de Boiffes, This denial did fo trouble
the mind of the Dukeof 87rev, and put him upon fuch a ftrange and diabolical refo,
lutions, that he refolved one Morning, being yet in his Bed at Chamont, to kill che
King, as ic is expreffed an the depofitions of La Fin and Remazé, but this took no
effect. himfelf atrerwards did abhor che thoughe of it, : La Fin allo went from the
Army to conclude the Bargain with the Dake of Savoy, andthe Earl of Fuentes,
he treated firft with the Duke of the Spanifh Embaffador at Yurée, afterwards at
Thuris with Roncas, where alfo came Prcot?, bringing the an(wers of the Councel
of Spain, upon the propolitions of the Duke of Biron, with order toconfer with La
Fin, and co perfwade him to make a Journey into Spain. He faid plainly, thatthe
King of Spain was refolved to have the Duke of Biro at any rate. The Duke of
savoy and che Earl of Fuentes appointed a day to be at Some with La Fin and Picots
there the minds of every one were clearly exprefled and underftood.
La Fis, who was acquainted wich all his fecret Councels, told the King, that che
“Marriage of the third Daughter of the Duke of Savoy, was the fodder and cement
of all the treaty, witha promife of five hundred thoufand Crowns, and all the rights
of Soveraignty in Bargundy.
While La Fin created. in Italy the capitulation of the Duke of Biren, the treaty
of Peace was concluded at Lyons,
The Duke of Biron had been always againft this Peace; when he fawthac it was
concluded, and chat the King had heard fomeching of his dealings with Le Fin, he
fained ro be very penitent of it, and asked the King forgivenels in the Cloifter of the
Francifcan Friersat Lyoms, and intreated him moft humbly to forgive the evilinten-


rions thac che denial of the Citadel of Bowrg-had putinto his mind. The King did
forgive


of Michael Noftradamus. 467


forgive him,-and toid'him, that he was glad he had trufted to his clemency, and in
the affection;he bore to him, of which he would always give him {uch tokens, that he
fhould never have occafion to doubt of it.» Leaving the King, he met with the Duke
of &fpernon, and told him, that he would impartunto him as unto his beft friend,
the beit fortune that ever he had in his.life, which was, thathe had difcharged his
Confcience to the King, and that he had: forgiven him all what was paft. The
Duke of Efpernon told him, that he was glad of it, buvthacit was neceffary he fhould
have: his pardon in writings for fuch faults could'not be fo eafily blotted our,
What, {aid he, upon what:can Irely better than upon che Kings word; ifthe Duke
of Biron wanteth an abolition, what fhallothersdo’ Sothey parted, one thinking
that his Lyons Courage ought not tobeufed fo meanlys, the other wifer, remem-
bring that a Lyon is never {fo well tamed, but onetime or another he will prove ftill
a Lyon, and at daft biteth the-hand of him that hath wronged him fo fiercely, that he
is for ever.avenged of him, ::The Duke of Efpernonhad reafon to advife him to take
an abolition in writing; and) the ‘Duke of Biroz was not too blame to truft tothe
Kings Word, who certainly would have forgiven that faule, if he had done nothing
fince to renew the Memory ofit. : But hereis once more to be obferved a paflage
thar containeth all che figns of animplacable Spirit’: The Duke of Biron being (ent
for by the King to receive his commands; and the effects of his clemency, went from
Bourg, and came to lie at Vimy, ‘From thence: he wrotea Letter to La Fin chat
wasat Alan, and then'went to Lyons, where he was.received by the King as the pro-
digal son, he ftayed ome time at Lyons, and went to Vimy again, from whence he
wrote another Letter to L4 Fis by Farges, As foon as he cameto Bowrg, he fent to
Bafco, coufin of Rencas to advance'the bufinefs, © This negotiation did continue at
Some between the Duke of Savoy, the Earl of Faentes, and La Fin, The Ear) of
Fuentes carryed La Fin to Milan, and being defirous to be better informed, upon
fome points, and finding: Le Fin not fofirm inhisian(wers, he thought it nor.good
to truft him wholly with the fectet, and réfolved to rid himfelf of him, therefore he
fent him back, and intreated him toféethe Duke of Savoy in his way. Hehadthe
good’ fortune to go by ithe way of theGrifons, and fothrough Bafle, Poreniru, and
Befancon; {or Renazé his Sectetary; thar»went through Savoy, was there Arrefted:and
made Prifoner, > The work neverthelefs:went ons. eAlphen{us, Cafal, and Roncas,
did continue it with the Baron) of Lx, and in the mean time the Duke of Biron
plaid his pair, having fentan exprefsihto Spain, though he were then with the King,


avho lothoto ldofe him; kepthimnear;icarryed him to fee che Frontier Towns, and
fent hiov Emba(ladorinto England, wherehe faw the head of the Barl of Effex, a lace


example ‘of! juttice upon thofe whowwill be feared by their Mafters, and abufe their


favours 0 Ar his reunmbe made a Journey ittto Gafcony, where he was vifitedand ho-


nourediby tHe Nobility@f che Oountrey, as a Prince ; and being come to Dijon, he
wenvinto Switzarland, tomake anénd of the renewing of the Alliance betweeen the


King) andahe Switsers, where be continued ftill his practifes with the Earl of Fuen-
tes, todwhoih hefenwbisfecrerary, under pretence'to fend his Pages into the Garri-


fons ofuPalma, forthe: Venetians. Being comeback from Switzerland, he came not


to thedd mato give an account of hisnegotiation, lexcufing himfelf upon the convo-


cation of the Eftates in the Province. The King, that had fome notice of thefe


‘proils by -Combdlles, wastinfinitely defirous to fpeak with La Fix to know the truth


obit,’ Da Pin} who was highly incenfed; that the Baron of Lax would have all the
fruit ofichisnegotiationsandithat Rewazceis kept Prifoner in Savoy, fent Cerezat to
the Duke of Bron to let him know that he could be no longer his Servant, if his See


ectetary»was not fet at liberty; and that fie could nolonger defer to go tothe King,


defiring:alfo'to:know what he fhould fay wponthe things thac were paft. He flight-
ed the firft of chefespropofitions, land fpokeof RewaZee as of one that was not tobe
| Ooo 2 reckoned


= 2


—— ns


468 The true Prophecies


reckoned among the living ; concerning the other, he told Cerezas that he was of
opinion he might go to the Court witha {mall train, and that he fhould prepare him-


felfat the firft to receive ill language and contempt from the King, whichhe fhould ©


fweeren by intreating him to believe, that the Journey he had made into italy had no
other defign thin to vifit our Lady of Loretta: And that paffing through c%ilan
and Tharin he had been charged to propound the Marriage between him and the
third Daughter of Savoy, towhich he would nothearken, becaufe the King would
take care to provide for him. He did intreat and adjure Cerezat to tell La Fin,
that he fhould rid himfelf ofall chofethat travailed with him, and chiefly of a Cu-
rate, and that he fhould fecure his Papers, if he had not rather toburn them, Ina
word, to confider, his life, his fortune, his honour, were in his Hands,

La Fis came to Court ac the end of Lent, and faw the King at the Wine-prefs of
Fountainblean, and after that at the mid way. Hefpake firft co the King, afterto
Villeroy, and after to the Chancellor in his houfeat Fontainbleas, and with Rhofny in
the Forreft, and with Sifery in the Wine-prefs; all with horror {aw the writings,
and heard bis defigns. The King could hardly believe fucha wickednefs ; for who
could: have believed that he, who had driven the Spaniard from the Frontiers of
Picardy, would let him in again by chat of Burgundy? that he who hada hundred
times beaten and defeated them, could contiaé a friendfhip with them, aud confpire
with them againft the ferviceofhis Prince, and the loveof his Countrey ¢ that he
who hated them to death, would have trufted his life intheir Hands ? He had thew-
ed himfclf fomuch their Enemy, thac{{eeing his Father would not
Prince of Parma in an advantagious place, faid aloud, thar if h
hours, he would caufe the head of the Marfhall of Biro
pronounced againft his Father. che Sentence chac was to b
him.

La Fin fhewed the King fo many true and undeniabletokens of this con({piracy,

that he was fained to believe more than he defired. He told him all what did pafs in
his Journeys to the Duke of Savey, and the Eart of Eestes concerning the Duke of
Biron, faying chat for his part he would have been glad that the War had continued,
that he might have benifitted himfelf therein ; but finding that-his facred verfon
was not excepted,and that there were cruel defigns made againft ir, either to kill him,
orto Carry him prifoner into Spain, he was refolved to give him notice of it,choofing
rather to difoblige the Servant-than the Mafter: » The King full of clemency and
goodnefs, was extreamly forry to fee fuch an unnatural confpiracy: Neverthelefs he
faid, that ifthe Con ‘pirators did their duty; and gave him means to prevent the de-
figns of his Enemies, he would forgive them. If they remember what they owe
me, I will not forget what I owethem; they thall find meas full of clemency, as
they are void of affedion : I would not have the Dukeof Bivoz to be the firftexam-
ple of my Juftice, and to be the caule that. my Reign, which hitherto hath been like
an Air, calm and pure, fhould upon a fudden be difturbed with Clouds and Lighe-
ning, and fo made arefolution, that if the Duke of Birex (hould tell him the truth,
he would forgive him, his Councel was of the fame advice, provided he:wauld thew
himfelf thenceforth as forward for his fervice againft his Enemies, as he had been
earneft to do mifchief, }

Outof many, Papers that 4a Fiz put into the Kings hands, there were {even and
twenty pickt out , which onely {poke of him: the King being unwilling to difcover
che reft of the Confpirators, and intending that the punifhment of one fhould ferve
for example to all thereft,

The Chancellor kept thofe Papers with fuch care, that he caufed them to be
fowed in his Doublet, that no body might havea fight of them tillit was time, The
Baron of Lux was yet at Fowatainbleas, when la: Fin came thither:


charge the
e were King for 24
# to be cut-off, He
€ executed once upon


The


aa =.


 _


—,


>


-


of Michael Noftradamus.


The King told him that he was very well pleafed, thar /4 Fin had fpoken to him fo
honourably and wifely ofthe Duke of Biron , and that he was confident now > thae
the intentions of the Duke of Biron were righteous and fincere. The Baron of Lux
did not perceive the Kings anger, fo much the more dangerous that it was hidden: he
went back again to Dijon very well pleafed , that the things were always in the fame
fate. La Fin did write to the Duke of Biron that he had fatisfied che King concern-
ing his actions, and had told him onely what might ferve for hisjuftification, The
King did manage this bufinefs fo prudently, that the fuccefs of it was fortunate , he
was well informed of all the Dukes defigns , and defired to hear them out ot his own
mouth, that he might have occafion to forgivehim, for that purpofe he-fent to
him the Lord d'Efcures , bidding him to come , becaufe he hada mind to truft him
with the Army that he was raifing upon the Frontiers , heexcufed him(elf, and {aid
that theenemy being fo near, it would bea fhame to him ro turn his back , and thac
the States of the Province were convented at Dijoz, and therefore could not forfake
neither the Frontiers nor the States, . The Fidame of Chartres madea Journey to
him, and affured him that his Uncle /a Fi had faid nothing to his prejudice.

The perfuafions of che Prefident Fania, were more power‘tl for flattering the
Duke in his humour, he alfo made him fenfibleof the Kings power and anger in cafe
of refufal ; his friends gave him contrary advices, and defired him not to ftir , and to
make his peace afar off ; the Baffille is a repaitingdaid they , and the common talk
is, that itis for {uch one as lefs thinketh uponit: the King hath been heard fay, shat
they cut heads in England, and that fome fhall compel him upon that example to
change his wonted Clemency intoa juft feverity: in conclufien, they advife him to
miftruft all things , and to beware of thofe that perfuaded him to come ; others did
affure bim of the contrary, and that his coming fhould diffipate all miftrufts, fafpicions
and jealoufies,

The Duke of Béren holdeth here the Wolf by the ears , for lethim come cr nor,
there is dangers by not coming he accufeth himfelf , and the King {wore he would
fetch him himfelf ; and.ia coming, his con{cience was-a witnefs again{t him, that the
fame fault. can hardly be forgiven twice, He feeth Ja Fin retired into his Hovfe and

living in peace , and hath fo good an opinion of his own Valour , that he thinkech
no body fo bold as to feize upon him. The difcourfes of reafon, the difcerning of the
truth, ferve no more to a wicked and paffionate man, then the Wings ferve to 2
Bird,when they are clogged with Bird-lime, But now we talk of Birds there were fe-
yeral ill Omens. of bis journey,one Bird of Prey called a Duck was found in his Clofet,
ho body knowing which way it was come in; he commanded it to be carefully kepr
and lookt to, but afloonas the Duke was upon his journey the Bird died. Prefently
after the Horfe that. the Arch-Duke had given him, called the Paffreve, became
mad,and killed himfelf,fo.did, another that was given him by the Duke of Florence,
another thatthe Duke of Lorrain had given him, fell into a confumption. He came
to Fountainbleaw when he was no more expected , and. the King was refolved to get
on Horfeback and to ferch him. :, As his Majefty went about fix of the Clock into
the great Garden, he was heard,to.fay unto the.Lord of Seavray, he will not come, he
had no foonet ended the words, but the, Duke appeared among feven or eight , he
drew near, and being yet a.pretty way off , hemade three gteat Congies , the King
did embrace him, and the firft words he fpoketo the King, were about the delaying
ofthis coming. : The King heard but. fewwords of:t ,:.and took him by the hand to
walk, and tofhew him his buildings; as.he paffed from one Garden into another,the
Duke of £/person took occafion to falute him., and to whifper him in the ear , thac


‘ in his coming,he: had believed his courage more, then the Councel of his friends,


Inall che difcourfe he had with the King , there was: obferved a great Coldnefs in
the Kings face, aad a greatideal of fire in che Dukes words, The King told him af
the


470 The true Prophecies


the evil way which he had taken, the end of which could Be tiothing but ruine, de-
fpair and confufion, ~The Duke anfweréd that he was not come to ask forgivenefs,
nor to juftifie himfelf, with many other frivolous and impudent words; which the
Kings prefence and his own duty ought to have'teftrained, The time of dinner be-
ing come , he asked the Duke of E/pernozto dine with him, becaufe his Train was
notyercome; this was the firft fault of his carriage , for he ought to dine at‘the
Table of the great Mafter, and to harbout inno other Houfe chen that of the King,
feeing his own was not open.

Atter dinner they came to fee the King who having walked oné turn or two about
the dinning-room, entered into his Clofet , bidding two or three to goin with him,
and faying nothing to the Duke of Biroz , who'was at the corner of the Bed near the
Chair, taking notice that he was not looked upon as formerly,

The Marquefs of Rhof»y went into the Clofer, paffing by the Dukeof Bios with:
out taking notice of him, and after he had ftayéd there abote halfan hour, he came
and faluted the Duke of Brroz , and told’ him the King asked for him’: there he was
exhorted not to ‘conceal what time would'ére long difcover , and of what he was fo
well informed, that the defire he had to know it from himfelf ; was meerly because
no body elfe fhould take notice of it: The Duke of Biron who thought that /4 Fin
had revealed nothing , ftood ftill upon the proteftations of his own innocen¢y , be-
feeching the King to do him juftice ; of thofe who went about to opprefs him with
un‘ufferable calumnies , or to permit hi to-do himfélf feafon, The King cariied
km to the Tennis-court, where the Duke took upon'him to order the match , and
faid chat the Duke of E/permon and hinifelf would hold it againft the King and the
Earl of Scion, the Duke of E/pernon anlwered prefently : you play well, bur you do
hot make your matches wells ‘which was oblerved by the King and the ftdnders by,
Supper time being come, he did fupat the Table of the great Matter, to répare the
fault he Fad’ dénein the morning, Everyone did perceive that he was not content-
éd! tôt he eat Tittle or nothing ; ‘and no bddy fpoke ro him, every one holding “him
already fora caft-away, THe King in’thé mean while was walking ia his Ghamber,
meditating fore great tefdlution, and he was heard to fay thele words, be muftlctber
bow or break. -. | rit | ¢ vi

That evening palt away fo quietly that many thought it would be a Thunder with
much hoifé ald litcle htirt.’) « The King comimanded the Earl of sofffon to go to the
Duke Of Bivom’ and to do his beft to break the hardnefs of his heart, and to draw the
ciuth out ofhim's he went and intreatéd him to fatisfie thé King in whathe defiréd
to know from him , and to'be afraid of the Kings difpleafure and indie nation, The
Dake of Biron for anfwer cold bim; that the King could riot complain bur of the good
fetvices he had done to him, : and that he himfelf’ had’ great o¢cafion'to complain’ of
che King who'miftrufted him after fo many trials ‘and experiments of his faichfalnefs,
and that he fivéuld never have more of hit then he‘had achis firft coming ; the Earl
‘oF saiffens, feeing his obftnacy,teft him. 1 LE

The next day early the King walking inthe little Garden , fenc for the Dake Of
Biron, and {pdke to him à great while’, thinking to overcome his obftinacy | and'to
Give him thedns to efcape the danger he'wastunning into; he was feen‘agreat while
“with his Hat off, his eyes fifred up to Heaven, fniting His bteaft ; and taking erede
“protéftatiohs to uphold his inhocency ¥'there appeared then in the Kings face & great
“deal of anger, and if thac ofthe Duke of Biron à great deal of fire and vivlence,all/his
“words were nothing bat threatnings, lightnings, ruines, and Hell againft chofe'that
“Had (poken ill’ of ‘him’; flom chence'he went to dinner, and met ‘with'a man who
brought him a Letter, toadvife him to look to himfelf, ‘he thewed it'to the Captain
‘OP His Güards, and made flight of it, and faid; he would be beholding to his valoar for
HiPtife;“aad hôt to a flight ; all the afternoon the King ftayed inthe Gallery : JS
pti] poke


WNL


j ‘ a ‘

of Michael Noftradamus. 47
fpoke four houjs to the Lord of la Curée ; the Queen being prefent and fpeaking
neverawords the King was ina great perplexity of mind} before he could refolve
himfelf, . The Lords of vileroy, sillery andGewre were {een often to go to and tro,
which made fome fufpe@, that it wastobeoin by the execution in fo great a crime
but the King was againft that, fuch proceedings had been blamed in his Predeceffor ;
he would have every body to know that hé had authority and power enough to ex-
terminate his enemiess according to the Laws,

_ The refolution was taken to have him arréfted; anid al(o the Earl of Atvergne,the
King would not have them to be taken in che Caftle , butin their dwn Lodgings ;
the Duke of Biron, who was in (ome fufpicion of it, and had prepared himfelf to what
he could, neither prevent nor hinder, did imagine that there was no fear of any thing
in the Kings Chamber, andthat all the danger fhould be at the going out,and there:
fore by time had provided himfelf with athort Sword , with which he promifed to
make himfelfroom through all dangers,’ They repréfented to the King, that ifhe
were Artefted any where but in the Caftle, it could not be done without bloodfhed;
and that ic was no matter where the Lyon was taken; fo that profit might arife of his

rize, )
: Ic was perceived thar in the fame Gallery the King (ent for Fitryand Pralin , two
Captains of his Guards, and gave them the order he would have to be obferved for
the execution ofhis commands, and then called for his Supper, The Duke of Biron
was at fapper in the Lord cMontignys Lodging , where he fpoke more highly and
bravely then ever of his Deferts, and of the friends he had made lately in Switzerland;
then began to fall upon the praifes of the late King of Spain, extolling his Piety, fu:
ftice and liberality 5  %entigny ftop him, faying, that the greateft commendation
that could, bggiven to his memory, was, that he had put his own Son to death, for
endeavouring to trouble his Eftare; this word ftopt thofe of the Duke of Biren who
an{wered only with his eyes, and thought upon icwithfomeamazement, After fup-
per the Earl of smvergneand the Duke of Bsror camé to the Kiag,who was walking
in the Garden, the King: making an end ofh’s walk didinvite the Duke of Biron to
play at Cards, chey went into che Queens Chamb. rs. ‘the Earl of Auvergne paffing
by the Duke.of Biron cold'him (oftly,we are wndones the Game begun at the primara,
the Queen was one of the Gamfters, the Dake of Brow another, and two more.
The King went into his Clofer, divided between two contrary paffions $ the love he
had tormerly for the Duke of Biroz, the knowledge he had of his valour, and the re-
membrance of his fervices , excluded all thoughts of his Juftice: onthe other fide,
the fear of troubles in his Eftate, che hor:id effeéts of fo unnatural a confpiracy did
accufe his Clemency of cruclcy, if he went about to prefer the particular good to the
publick; he prayedco God co affift him w th his Holy Spirie,to appeafe the troubles
of his foul,and to ftrengthten him witis a Holy refolution,that he might do what ws
for the good of his people, upon whom he Reigned by h's only Grace; his prayer
being ended, all the difficulties that troubled his foul-vanifhed away, there remained
on'y à firm relolution , to put the Duke into the hands of Juftice, if he could for
draw the truth ont of him; the Game went on ftill, the King took fomerimes thé
Queens Cards, expecting the appointed time, The Eat! of Asverene was gone to
his Lodging,’ the King fenc for him, and walked in the Chamber, while the Duke
thought upon nothing but his play... De Varennes Lieutenant of his Troop faining to
take up his Cloak, whifpered him foftly that he was undone; this word did trouble
him fo. much, that he neglected his play, ‘and overfaw himfelf, che Queén gave hint
notice ofic; the King didbid them to give over playing, and commanded every gue
toretire, he went into his Clofer, and took the Duke ot Bird with him,whofe good
and bad fortune depended from an anfwer pleafing his Majefty , who bid' him onéé
for all to tell whatthe had done with the Duke of Sévo and the Ear! of Fuenter}


LRU
afinring


perenne =e : = Es DS eee


—


= oo Se a ee


antoo-gueqnnennt ots


472  Thetrne P ropbecies


affuring him, that his clemency fhoufd be greatér chan his faule.
Biron anfwered the King more proudly than ever, that
too much, thar he never had any other defign, but what he had told him
Would to God it were fo, {aid the King. You will not tell me :
night.

ye he went out of the Clofer, and had pafled the Chamber do
Who with his right hand feized upon the Hile of his Sword, andy
his right Arm, {aying, The King bath commanded me to give him an dccount of your Per-
fou, give wp your Sword. . You jeer, {aid the Duke. No my Lord, he hath fo com-
manded me. The Duke of Biron an{wered, 7 pray thee let me [peak tothe King.
No my Lord, the King is gone to Bed. He faw the Duke of Monbaton, and de-
fired him to intreat the King, that he might furrender it into his own Hands, The
King {ent word ta Viry to obey hiscommands. The Duke was faied to fuffer his
Sword to be taken from him ; laying. CHy Sword that hath done [o many good [er-
vices! Yes my. Lord, give me your Sword, faidVitry, Tome, faidthe Duke,
that have ferved the King fo well, that my Sword fhould be taken from me, my
Sword that hath made an end of the War, and given Peace to France, thatmy
Sword; which could not.be taken by my Enemies, fhould be taken away by my
Friends, All thefe complaints availed nothing ; he ungirted his Sword with his
left hand, and gave it to Vitry,, looking about if he could feize upon any other, but
care was taken for thar.

When he faw all the Guards in order in the Gallery, he thought he fhould have
been Mañlacred upon the place, and cryed to them, fellow Souldiers give mealittle
time to pray to God, and let me have fome Firebrand or Candleftick in my hand,
that I may have the Honour to die de ending my felf. He was agfwered, that
no Body would offend him, chat his beft defence was to obey the King, who com-
manded to lead him to Bed, you feefaid he, how the good Catholicks are ufed.
He was carryed into the Arms Clofet, where he neither flept nor lay down, but
paft the nighr in blafphemies againft God, and reviling words againft the King,

Pralin was ftaying forthe Earl of Auvergne at the Caftle Gate,and when he offer-
ed to go out to hislodgings ftay my Lord, you are the Kings Prifoner. The Earl
aftonithed, anfwered I, le and Pratin anfwered, yes my Lord, you, I Atreft you
by the King, and make you his Prifoner, give up your Sword, take it faid the Earl
it never killed any thing but Boars, if you had given me notice of this, I thonld
have been in Bed and afleep two hours ago,

The next day about dinner time the Duke of Biron fent word tothe King, thar if
he did not take care of the Province of Burgundy, it would be loft, becaufe the Ba-
ron of Lex would let in che Spaniards as foonas he fhould have notice of his detenti-
on, The King was very much offendéd at this meflage, and faid, fee the impu-
dence and boldnefs of the Duke of Bires, who fendeth me word that Bur and
is lott, if I do not look toit. His obftinacy hath undone him, if he would have
confeffed the truth of a thing that I have under his hand, he fhould not be where he
is, I with I had paid 200000. Crowns, and he had given me the means to forgive
him. I never loved any man fo much, I would have trufted him with my Son and

my Kingdom. °Tis true, he hath ferved me well, buche cannot deny but thar I
have faved his life three times ; I refcued him once from the hands of the Enemy ac
Fontain Francoife, fo wounded and aftonifhed with blows, that as 1 plaid the part of
a Souldier to fave him, I was alfo fained tomake that of a Captain to make the re-
treat; for he told me he was not in a cafe to doir.
The Saturday next the prifoners were catryed to Paris by water, and put in-
to the Baftille in feveral Chambers. The Duke of Biron was put into that $
called of the Saints famous, for the Prifon of the Conftable of Saint Pas},


execured


The Duke of
it Was to prefs an honeft man


already,
Farewell, good


or; he met Viry,
vith his left upon


ns. ~~ ee pd


youve
and
thr
ny at


noi D


eee


tit
at,
hal
cued


of Michael Noftradamus. 73

ae in the time of Lewis the XI, and the Earl in the Chamber above
im,

The care, the order and vigilancy, with which he was guarded, did put him
in fome amazement ; for his Guards waited on him without Arms, and ferved him
with a Knife without a point, which made him fay, that it was the way to the Grave
(che place of Execution, ) But when he knew chat the Hangman of Paris was a Psr-
gundian, he remembred that La Broffean Aftrologer had foretold him fometimes
feeing his Horofcope, which he fained to be that of one of his friends, that he fhould
be beheaded, and Cæfar a Magician, that a blow of à Burgéndian given behind;
fhould hinder him to attain the Kingdom

The Arch-Bithop of Boarges went to fee him, and endeavoured to fetcle his Con-
fcience, and to diffwade him from fome Atheiftical opinions that he had: pr.
grand Sillery went allo to fee him, and by the Kings Command, and at his re-

ueft.

: Few days after, the King being ac St. asourder Fofez, the Lords /s Force, the
Earl of Rowfj, Brother in Law to the Duke of Biron, Saint Blancard his Brother ;
Chaflean neuf, Themines, Salignac, St. Angel, Longuac, Friends and Kinfmen of
the Duke of Béyea, went and caft themfelves at the Kings feet, toimplore his
Mercy, and that he would be pleafed to moderate the feverity of his Juftice, re:
quefting that the fame clemency which he had thewed to many others that had as
grievoufly offended him, would ac leaft fave his life, and confine him into fuch 4
place, where he might do no harm, thac their wholeKindred might not be branded
with Infamy, and have a regard to his Fathers ferviceand his, which though they
were not equal to his offence, yec ac leaft to confider, thathe was only guiley for
his intention.

The King bid them rife, and toldthem, that their requefts were not difpleafing
tohim, That he would not be like his Predeceffors, who would not fuffer any body
to intercede for thofe that were guiltyo high Treafon, The King Francis JL. would
never give a hearing to che Wile of the Prince ot Cond! my Uncle. Concerning
the clemency you would have me fhew to the Dake of Biron s it chould
not be clemency but cruelty, if 1c were only my particulirInrereft, I would for:
give him, as I donow with all my heart, butmy Kingdom and my Children, to
whom I owe'much, areconcernedinit; ortiey mighe reproach me hence forwards;
that | have collerated an evil which J might have prevented ; my Life, that of my
Children, and the prefervat'on oimy Kingdom, areconcernedinit, I willleave
it to the courfe of Juftice, you thall fee what Judgement fhall be given’: Iwill con-
tribute what Ican to his Innocency, { give youleave to dothe fame till he be foun?
guilty of high Treason; for then the Father cannot intercede for che Soa, nor the
Son for the Father; che Wife forthe Husband, northe Brother for the Brother,
Do not become odious to me for the love you bear him: As for thenote of Infamy;
there isnone but him(elf, Have the Conftable of St, Pan, from whom I derive my
Pedigree, andthe Duke of Nemours, of whol am Heir (both beheaded ) lefc any
note of Jafamy upon their Pofterity, fhould not the Prince of Condé my Uncle have
been beheaded the next day, if King Francis the IT. had notdyed # Therefore ye
that are Kinfinen to the Duke of Biron, cannot be noted with Infamy, if you con:
tinue in your faichfulnels, as ( Taffuremy felf) youwill. And Tam fo tar from
depriving you of your Offices, that if any new one fhould fall, I would beftow
them upon you: I am more forry for his fault chan you canbe ; but to confpire 4:
ganft me chäcam his King and Benefactor, is a crime that I cannot forgive, wicha
out lofing my felf, my Wite, my Son, and my Eftate, | know you to be fo good
French men, that you would not have thelaft, and thall take Patience for the fift.
Thus the King difmifled him, and fent hisCommiffion ro the Court of Parliament,


10


Ppp ec


474 The true Propbec:es


to decide the bufinefs. The Procefs was framed inthe Faffille, by the Lords of
Achilles de Harlay, firft Prefident in che Court of Parliament of Pais, Nicolas Potier
fecond Prefident, Steplen Fleury, and Philibert of Thariz, Councellors in the fame
Court. They asked him if he did not writein Cyphers, he denyedit, then were
fhewed unco him feveral Letters, written and fealed with hisown hand, which did
wienefs his Intelligences with che Spansardand the Dukeof Savey, and contained
advices that he gave of the wants chat were in the Kings Army ; How little Money
he had to maintain the War, and co fatisfie che Swétzers of the difcontent of the
French Nobility, and how feveral French Vroops might eafily be defeated, and that
to divert the Kings forces it was neceflary to invade Provence, and did much prefs
upon the 50000. Crowns, and the 4000 men promifed. orelfe faid, all is loft,
Some of chefe things he con'effed, and did fo intangle and contradiét himfelf, char
the Commiffioners had pity on his indifcretion,

He was asked what opinion he had of La Fin; he faid he took him for an honeft
Gentleman, his Friend and Kintman, his Evidnces being read to him, and himfelf
brought face to face, he did with the moft horrid Imprecations and Blafphemies in
the World deny them, anc charged La Fix with the moft horrid Crimes that can
be Imagined, calling ftill God for a Witnefs of his Innocency: La Fin ftood firm
in che confirming of his Evidence , and did more particularly declare the whole con-
(piracy. The Dukeanfweres, thatif Revaze were there he would tell the contrae
ry, Renaze, who hada little while before efcaped his Prifonin Piement, was brought
betorehun, and confirmed all what La Fin had faid.

Next to that was brought one ot the Kings waiting men, whowitneffed, that
having lyen in bis Chamber by the Kings command, the firft night of his Imprifon-
ment he had adjured him, by feveral offers and promifes of rewards, to give notice
to his Secretaries to be out of the way for fome days, and to tell che Earl of Rouf]y
his Brother in Law, that he fhould fend prefently to Dijon, to give the fame advice
to chofe that were left chere, aud above all, chat if they were examined; they
fhould al! conttantly deny that ever he did write in Cyphers,

Thus che bufinets having been thorowly examined, it remained only to proceed
unto Judgments but the Prifoner being a Peer of Fræ#ée, ( the King having ere@ted
the Barony of Biron into a Dukedom ) by the Laws the Prifoner could not be judg-
ed, but by his Peers, which being fummoned, and not appearing, the Court
of Palament being authorifed by the Kings Commiffion, proceeded to Judg-
ment, ;

The 23 of Fuly 1602, the Chancellor, wich the Maiffes and Pontcarré, Privy
Councellors, wenc to the Parliament, where all che Chambers were affembled to-
gether. here he made known the Kings intention, ina bufinefs, wherein the
good of the Kingdom was fo much concerned, and reprefented on one patt the qua-
lity of a Perfon, commendable for bis fervices; but on the other, the fouinefs of
the Crime, forthe Judgment of which the King did rely upon theintegrity and pru-
dence of the Court. The Kings Attorney, and Soliciter, having reprefented to

che Court, chat the Peers fummoned, gave no appearance, andthatthe Prifoners
petition ( Who asked {or Councel, was not to be received, . The Court proceeded
to examine the Evidences, whereupon they fat three times, after which the Pri-
foner was brought from the Bafille, by Montigny Governour of Paris, and Vitry,
(Captain of the Kings Guards, in a clofe Barge, covered with Tapiftry, and fol-
lowed by two other Barges full of Souldiers, and switZers, He entred into the
Palace, through che Garden of the firft Prefident, and refted himfelf in one of the
Chambers, where he was offered a Break faft.

The time being come, he was to be heard, the Recorder went and called him
into the Guild-hall, where when he faw one Hundred and twelve Judges before his


face,


of Michael Noftradamus. 478


face , he was fome thing daunted, and was made tofitwithin the Bar upon 2 joint
ftool ; where hefatin fuch a pofture, as ftretching forth his right foot , and having
his Cloak under hisarm, and his left hand uponhis.fide, he kept the right one free,
eicher to ftretch it forth to Heaven,or to {mite his breft, when occafion ferved. The
Chancellor did fo frame his difcourfe, thar he never named him by his name,nor that
of his qualities. |

Of many evidences there was five chiefly urged againft him.

The firft to.have been converfant with one Picerée, born in Orleans , and refugied
in Flanders, to keep intelligence with the Arch-duke, and to have give him 150.
Crowns for two journeys to that end.

The fecond:to have treated with the Duke of Savoy, three days after hisarrival to
Paris without the Kings-leave,and to have offered him.all affiftance and fervice againft
any perfon what{oever, upon the hope orpromifs of marrying his third daughter,

The third to have kept intelligence with the faid Duke in taking of the City of
Bosrg and other places, giving him advice how he might defeat the Kings Army,and
deftroy his perfon, with many other circumftances to char purpote.

The fourth to have fent by Renazée a note to the Governour of the Fort of Sainc
Catherine, promifing to bring the King before the faid Fort, fo near that he mighe
be either killed or taken, telling what clochs he himfelf would wear,and what Horfe
he would ride; chat he might be diftinguifhed,

To have fent feveral times /s Fin to treat with the Dake of Savoy, and the Earl of
Fyentes againft che Kings {ervice, |

Thefeare the firft confeffions and acknowledgements that the Prifoner made be-
fore the Commiffioners in the Baftille, but now hethinketh, he may as lightly deny
them, as-he had unadvifedly before confeffed them.

Upon the firft Article he anfwered, that Picoté being once his Prifoner, had offer.
ed his fervice for the reduction of the Town of Seurrein Burgandy, and that the King
hadapproved of it, that it is true he had given him the faid (um, but it was as a re-
ward for his pains and charges in this negotiation , which fum he hath charged upon
the Kings account , with fome other {mall cnes, laid out by him for the King ; that
fince the redu@ion of the faid Town he hadnot feen Picoté butin Flanders, when he
went thither Embaffadour for the confirmation of the Peace, where the {aid Picot Ze
came to him with many others. intreating bim he would be pleafed to mediate with
the King, for the liberty of recurning into their Countrey,and enjoying their. Eftates,
and that he did with them to gotothe Lords Belseure and Séllery, who would pre-
{cribe them what orders they were to follow.iaithis bufinefs, and nevet had any other
converfation with Picoté,

Upon the fecond, That he could not have treated with the Duke of Savoy three
days after hisarrival at Paris , feeing that himfelf did not come there buta tortnizh-
after, and that /a Fin came but after him, thar all his difcourfes with him were in pub-
lick and before wieneffes, and therefore could not be fufpected; that Rozcas had
fometimes mentioned to him che Marriage of thethird daughter ofthe Duke, and
that he did impaitit to the King ; that his Majefty having fent him word by la Farce
his Brother in Law, thac he did not approve of it, he never thoughg of it fince ;
that the intelligence he isaccufed to have kepr with the Duke of Savoy , is contuted
enough by.whathe did , for when the King had commanded, him to wait and keep
tothe Dukein his return from France, and to fhewhim the ftrongeft places
upon the Frontiers of Burgundy , he did humbly excufe himfelf to the King of ir,
faying, that heiforefaw well enough that the Duke would not keep the Treaty of
Peace, and that it would be a great grief to him to make War, againft a Prince, wich
whom: he fhould have kept company, and made good cheers and chat he did advile
the Baron of Lux to let him fee enly theweaker places, that he mightnat know the


ftrength of the Countrey. Ppp 2 Upon


company


> Teale etna oh} 20 nay HER D Le a phare PO TONER
ae AE NT ERNST 1° Pré RS 4 »


476 The true Propbecies


Upon the third, That if he had kept correfpondence with the Duke Of Savoy, he

would not have unJercaken the taking of Bourg, almoft againft the Kings will, with-
out any other help then of thofe that were ordinarily with him ; that of fourty Con-
voys that were brought to relieve the Town, he had routed thirty feven, and the
other three entered in his ablence ; thatthe King knowerh very well he was offered
2c0000, Crowns to let the fuccours enter into the Citadel of Bourg, that although
his Majefty had commanded him inthe time ofa Trace made with thé Duke of 54-
voy, colet chofe of the Citadel of Bowrg have every day 400, Loafsot Bread, 50,
bottles of Wine, half an Oxe, and fix Sheep, he did only lec them have fifty bottles
ot Wine and one Sheep, by which means the Town was furrendred within the time
promifed’, that if he had had any evil defign againit the King and Kingdom, he
would not fo freely and willingly put the Town into the hands of him that is now
Governour of it; thatthe Governours of Places chat were in che Duke's fervice; and
are now in that of the King, can witne($ whether he fhewed them any favours that
for his giving advice to the Duke to defeat the Regiment of Chambaald , hé will
prove that Chambauld did not come into the Army’, but) one Month after the
time mentioned in his Calunny ; béfides thar, this advice was without appearance of
teafon, for from Cham/aula s quarters to his there was at leaft fix days journey, and as
much to goto che Duke, and as much to come back’, befides the time required for
the marching of the Forces ; there‘ore al! that wasa meer invention of la Fin,

Upon the fourth, That heintreared his Majefty tocall to memory’, that he was
theonely man who diffuaded him to go and view the Fort, ‘reprefenting unto him
thar chere was in it cxtraordinary good Gunners,and that he could not view it with.
out great dañger, anduponthat he offered the King to bring him the next day the
Plat-form ofic, and to take it with 500, Mufquectiers, and that himfelf would bein
the Head of chem. ;

Upon the fifth, That it wastrue all the evil he had done was in two Months time
that a Fis bad been withhin , during which, hedid hearken and write more then
he ought: but that with the fame he had written , he had fo long ferved the King,
that it was enough to prove che fincerity of his intentions; thatthe refufal of the
Citadel of Boarg, which he thought the King had promifed him , had put him into
fuch adifcontent, chat he found himfelt ina capacity to hearken to any thing, and to
do any things chat if he had been a Proteftant, it may be the place fhould havebeen
refufed him no more then it was to de Bouiffe, who was fuchan one, as he told the
King himfelfat Lyon; chat sa Fin had alfo-once told him, that the King {peaking of
him, and of his Father, faid, chat God had done well for to take him out of this world
when he was killed, for he was a very chargeable and unprofitable fervant; and for
the Son, it was not all Gold that thined; chat thele words had fo much incenfed
him that he could have tcund in his heart to be all covered with blood’ Upon that
the Chancellor asked him of what blood ke meaned ? he anfwered, of my own: de-
firing noc tg live any longer, after he had heard fuch reproches, as blemifhed the fer-
vices of his Father and his own 3 that neverthele(s his anger and difcontent went ne-
ver Lo far, as Coattempt upon the King; that his fault was only in words, and it may
be lictle in Writting ; thac his Majefty feeing with how much ingenuity he did ac-
knowledge his fault, had forgiven him all what was patt, in the prefence of the Lords
Villeroy and Sillery, and that if fince that time he wes found to have done any thing
amifs , he would blame his Judges of Injuftice , if they did not condemn him to
death , thatif he had done nothing amifs fince , he thought the Kings pardonto be
{ufficient for what was , and if chere was need to ask for it again, his knees were as
fupple and plyable as ever,

Baca Letter, which'he had written to /4 Fin fince the pardon of ‘Lyow, andthe
Birth of the Dolphin, did {poilall, forit was a manifeft evidence of the continuati-


on


of Michael Noftradarus. 477
on of his il! defigns, and che Chancellor having produced it; he anf wered, he would
never deny his hand,but chat Imbert and Renazée Domeftick Servants to /é Fin could


countétfeitics that though he might have had fome ill thoughts, he had always well


done; thar'although the King would not totgive him this fable , it was notin the
power of men to condemn him juftly for fingle words; which were contradi@ed by
the effets; that his confolation was in his misfortune, his Judges were not ignorant
of the fervices he had done to the Kingdom , which he had Sealed with five and
thirty wounds; thac his body whofe life and death was in the difpofition of their Ju-
ftice, hadinota vain but had bleeded jor their fervice, and to reftore them into their
places, from whence the League had driven them ; that the hand which had written
the Letters produced againft him, was che fame that had done contrary to wbac it did
write; chat he had writtenand{poke more then he ought, buc that it could not be
proved he had ever ill done; that there was no Law that punifhèd with death the
lightnefs of a fingle word or motion of therhoughts that anger and difcontent had
made him capable of faying and doing any thing , but that his reafon bad not given
Jeave to fay or co do, ought but what deferveth to be commended; which words
wereas carefully confidered , as he repeated them often with feveral Oaths and Im-
precations,

Upon that the Chancellor having asked him why then he did not open himfelf
more to the King , who defired him with great affection to do it at Fountain-blean,
feeing he knew in his confcience to have done nothing againft his duty fince his par-
don. There he cut himfelf in his anfwer , and faid he thought /4 Fix had revealed
nothing of what was between them, and that he had lately affured him fo with Oaths
and fearful imprecations , that he would never have thought /a Fin had been fuch 4
damnable man, as toreveal that which with fo many deep Oaths and Imprecations
they had promifed to keep fecret between themfelves ; that having propounded the
queftion toa Monk of the Order of Atinimes at Lyon , whether he might witha fafe
confcience reveal what was between ti em ; ‘and what he had promifed with Oath to
la Fin to keep fecret , becaufe he fulpected that Ja Fr would deceive him , and tell
all:to che King, and foruinehim, T hewirime had anfwered , that feeing they had
no more inten”ion to put in execution the-things they had projetted, he was nor to
revealthem, andi! /4 Fin did it, he fhould yo to Hell, and himfelfto Heaven; that
he did fo firmly believe this,that alchough the Aschbithop of Bourges had vifited him
in Prifon, and alledged many reafons to the contrary,yet his foul was fo fettled in chat
beliefe, chat he thoughr it was only the part of an Atheïf to {wear with int: ntion to
deceive.

Upon this he begun to accufe /4 Fin of the moft execrable crimes that a man is
capable of, faying chat he made ule ot Remade tor Sodomy. that he was a Witch, «nd
had ordinary Communication with the Devils, that he had fo be witched him with
enchanted Waters and Wax Images, that {poke , that he was conftrained to fubmit
himfelf to all his will, that henever {poke to him but whifpering , and in unknown
words, and after he had Eiffed him in the lefc eye , and he could not deny but he had
fhewed him a Wax Image, ipeaking and frying, Rex impie morieris , thou halt dié
wigodly King, and called him continually his Mafter, Lord, Prince and King; tht
he was a falfe Coiner, and had perfuaded him man. times toattemptupon the King;
but that he would never hearken to its chat the quality ot the Accufators was tobe
confidered,*who not only were partners, but inftigacos of the Fa@ ; chat certainly
the Dake of Savoy was his mortal enemy, for having fince his pardon let ofall his ia-
telligences with him, and feeing that after a long detention he had releafed Renazée,
to come and to bea witnefs againft him ; ‘chat the King had forgiven himat Lyon,and
that upon his acknowledging many times to the King, thar the relufal of che Citacel
of Bourg had very much incenfed him, his Majefty did comfort him'with thefe words:
Marfhal


438  Thetrue Propbecies


Marthal never remember Bourg, and I will never remember what is paft, thatin 22
Monthsafrer he had not offended, chat if he had continued his ill defigns, he mighe
have done iteafily in England and Switzerland, . That.above 100, Gentlemen tha}}
be Wirneffes of his firft Embafly,. and for the fecond, he defireth no other Wic-
nefles than the Kings Embafladors themfelves, that. if they would be pleafed to
confider how he was come, and in what what cafe he had left the Province of Byy-
gundy, it was impoffible to have an ill opinionof hisdefigns ; forthere was not one
Souldier in all the Countrey, and at his going away he gave no other charge to the


Commanders. and Captains, chan to fervethe King faithfully, chat every one dif.


fwaded bim to come to Court, and in the way he received many Letters to char
purpo'e, that he was come upon the Kings word, trufting upon his own Confcience
and Innocency, Ifthe King be not pleaied to confider my tervices ( {aid he tothe
Court) and chofe affurances he hath given me of his Mercy, Iacknowledge my
felf guilty of Death, and do not expe my life from his Juftice, but from yours,
(my Lords) who willremember better: than he what dangers I have undergone for
his fervice.- I. confefs Lhad a mind to doill, but I.never proceeded to effeds:
Ic would bea hard matter if 1 fhould be the firftin whom thoughts fhould be punith-
cd; Great offences require great clemency, I doimplore that of the King, and
neverthele(s I am che onelyonein France, that ismadean example of his (everity,
and that can have no hope in his clemency, which he never denyed:to chofe that
had done worfe.: However I truft more in you my Lords, than Ido in the King,
who having herecofore looked upon me with his Eyes of love,looketh upon me now
with thofe of his anger, and chinkech ica Vertue to be cruel unto.me, and a Viceto
excercife upon me the act of clemency, |

Thus pleaded che Prifoner, with fo mnch eloquency and boldnefs, thar if his
Judges had not feen evidently the truth of the fa&, under his own Hand and
Seal, the refpect of his firft condition might have per{waded them to believe his In-
nocency, and to take compaffion of his ruined fortune.

The Court did hear him as long as he would fpeak, with fo much patience, that
never aman had the likeaudience. The Prifoner {poke fo much, that hislaft reafons
were found contrary to his fift, his allegations did not thew his Innocency 5 for
the Embafladors themfelves which he took for Witneffes of his carryage in Switzer-
land, did report, many words of his, which fhewed his anger and paffion,  Befides
the King had not given his word, that he might come in fafety, and thofe Letters
which he alleadged for his juftification,did prove the continuation of his treacherous
defigns, feeing that he had fent a Fin and Hebert, to Turin and Milan, fince the
pardon, . He could not then expect but Juftice, ina cafe where neither paffion nor
favour could alter Judgment: Neverthelefs he fhewed himfelf much fatisfied with his
anfwers, and therefore being come back again to the Baflille, he paffed the reft
of that day, and thetwonext, torelate unto his Guards the queftions of the Court,
and his anfwers cherereunto, counterfeiting the gefture and the words which-he Ima-
gined the Chancellor had {poken after his going away, though that grave and vene-
table old man neicher {aid nor did any thing, but what was becoming to his Ageand
quality, having fhewed himfelf as full of compaffion,as the prifoner was of his vanity,
for when he was nearer to death he thought lefs uponit, and thinking himfelfthe
only man capable ofcommanding an Army, he found fome faulc in thofe that were
thought capable of it, faying, chat one was unhappy in his undertakings, : che other
was not refpectéd by the Souldiers, fucha one was.a brave man, but he wanted ex-
perience, and another that hath both was a Poreftant. To conclude, he did {o pleafe
himfelf with his own praife anddeferts, chat he chought no body could come neat
him, and that he was foufe'ulrothe Kingdom, thatit would bea great Crime ta
think toundo him,


He


of Michael Noftradamus.


He had fpoken fo long the 27 of the Month, that there was no time left to gather
theVoices: {heChancellor therefore went into thePalace the 29 following to gather
the Voices of the Judges. Fleury the reporter of the Proces; did conform his opi-
nion to the conclufions of the Kings Atcornéy, all che reft agreed toit, either by
Words or by Signs, and all che proofs neceflary for the verification of a Crime
meeting in this cafe, as his Anfwers, Confeffions, Writings, Letters, Inftracions,
and Evidence of Witnefles notreproached; It was found, chat the unnatural € on-
{piracy againft the State, the deteftable acrempt upon the Kings Perfoh, makes him
guilty of high Treafon in the firft and fecond degree, | | |

He confeffeth he hadevil intentions, itis enough, the Laws do punifh the Coun-
cels, cherefolutions, and the effects; for if the Traitor be not prevented, time may
give him the opportunity to accomplith his Defign and Will,and the Will of a Sub-
je& in point of Stace, doth depend immediately upon that of the Prince, He fay-
eth moreover,that without the Kings Me:cy he is undone, and that if he would have
put in Execution the ill defigns that were propounded to him againft his Majefty,
he fhould have bezn gone long ago: Did he ever give notice of them to the King
or to any body elfe, If the Prifoner had brought to pafs his inten:, we mighe
have (aid, farewell State, farewell Juftice, ic is too late co believe the Confpiracy a.
gainft Princes, when they are murdered by the Confpirators.

He hath well ferved the King, itistrue; but his Officesand Dignities did calf
him to that Duty, he hath had notable rewards for it, and frem the time that he
hath fhewed himfelf fo unfaithfull, he hach diminithed theluftre of his deferts; His
deferts had made him capable of the firft dignities of che Kingdom, but the me-
rit of them is vanilhed away, by the greatne(s of his Crime. | |

And what is the State beholding to him, if after he hath contributed fo much for
its reftaura/ion, he goethabout to curn up fide down the Foundation cfit, and to be-
tray it co the Enemies, Ic is nothing to begin well unlefs you end well, tle
ations are judged by theend: Thofe that have deferved beft of the States, are the
moft feverely punifhed when they fall into Sedition and Rebellion. There is
many Sheets of Paper in the Hands o° the Court, containing in them one hun-
dred advices given to the Enemy , the leaft of which is capable to make him
guilty, , |

The Prifoners quality isnot confiderable in this cafes Juftice is blind to all diftin-
ions, and rather confidereth the offence acccrding to the quality of the offender 5
Crimes of high Treafon are not confidered by things paft, but by things prefent and
that are to come; we muft not put in an account what he hath done, but what he
had a mind to do. The quality of a Duke and Peer of France, of Knight of the
Kings Order, of Marfhal, doch not exempt him from the Law, and from being judg-
ed as an Enemy tothe State, and to the Maielty of the Prince, feeing he would have
troubled the State, and attempted upon the Kings perfon. Who in France belides
is more obliged tothe King¢ che greater then isthe Obligation, the greater the iff-
gratitude. God forbid chat the refpe@ of the quality fhould ftop the courfe of
Juftice: a Limb inuft be cut off to faveall rhe body.

Bar his offence hath been forgiven: The pardon cannot extend but to the things
that are confefled; bar he acknowledgech himfelf that he hath not toldall, there-
fore he hath confeffed <s little as he could, hisown confeffions Witnefs, heonly
asked forgivenels, that he might continue his Crimes with more fecurity : Befides,
he would not acknowledze histault to che King, forall the King promifed to for-
give him, and lately he told the Court; he did not believe that fa Fin bad revealed
what was fecret between them: and thought he would have kept his word, which
he had confirmed with fo many Oaths, and that if he had doubted of it; he would
have caft himfelf at his Majelties Feetas readily as he, andasked him forgivenefs.
Te


5
|
|
5
|


sire


480 Tbe true Propbecies
It followeth then that there was fome thing left behind thac was not confeffed : Thus
he acculech himfelf, thinking to excufe his fault; befides, he miftaketh himfelf
thinking to perfuade the Court, that fince the pardon he hath done nothing amifs, for
the Pardon was in Fanuary 1600, and here be Letters of September late , by which he
recalleth /a Fin, telleth him ,-he will think'no more upon the Vanities that were paft
fince, God was pleafed to have given the King a Dolphin, Ic is apparent then that
he hath employed /a Fi at leaft fince the Pardon, till the birth of the Dolphin, and
fa Fin maincaineth chat chere was a note quite to the contrary, and that they did
continue their intelligences and pra@tifes unknown to the King, That the Duke
did recal him, fearing he fhould difcover the Confpiracy , when à man continues in
his faults and abufeth his Pardon, che laft fault payech for all.

Befides, the Court hath not feen thac Pardon , he oughredto have produced it in
writing under the Kings Handand Seal, and to forgive him once more :
him into fuch a condition, as to contrivealways Treafons againft the State ; the re-
medy of a prefent evil is notto be neglected upon the hope of anuncertain Goods
he is ina cale to be no more tifeful ; nothing can be expected from his courage but re-
venge ; he that can bring no profit by his virtde and faichfulnefs, mutt do it by being
made an exemple,

Such were for the moft part the reafons of the Couit , according to which, and to
the conclufions of the Attorney General, the Chancellor did pronounce Sentence of
death againft the Prifoner; fonve were of opinion that / Fiz (hould be artefted, as
one chat could nat juftifie him felf,for having concealed fuch à damnable Confpiracy,
till he faw chat the Spanifh affairs went to wrack. The Chancellor did moderate
thefe opinions, reprefenting that che Confpiracy was not yet wholly difcovered,and
that fuch things would hinder the reft of chofe that knew fome thing of it to reveal
its that a man that faveth the Kings Perfon and his Eftare , ought rather to bere-
warded then punifhed. Andin confirmation of this, the King fent Letters to /4 Fin,
by which he affared him , that fuch a fervice done to him and his Kingdom , fhould
never prove his ruine,

The Court ftayed onely for the Kings intention upon the execution of the Sen-
tence , which Sillery had carried to St, Germain. The Scaffold was ready to be fec
up in the place of Greve, but the execution might have proved dangerous , in the
middle of fo much people of different humors and tempers; and already there was a
rumour, as if fome body fhould throw him a Sword, with which he fhould make him-
felf à paflage, or elfe have died with a blowlefs thameful then that of the Hangman;
upon his friends intreaty the execution was ordered to be done in the Baftie,

The next day about noon, the people knowing chat the Sentence was paft, went
fome to the Greve, thinking that the execution fhould be done there, others to Se,

intony {tree:, to fee the Prifoner pafs by; hefaw from his Chamber that multi:
tude, aad gueffed chat he wasto be the Speétacle of thofe Spectators ; here the an-
guifh of the Grave began to befec him, and drawing a confequence from the fhadow
of death, that the body was not far of; hefent Barantes à Scotifh Gentleman to in-
treat the Marquefs of Rhof#y to come to fee him, or if he could not come, to fue fot
his Pardon tothe King. He fent him anfwer, he could do neither , and that he was
extreamly forry for his misfortune, chat if he had believed him at his coming to
to Court, he fhould have confeffed what the King did defite to know of him, for by
e€oncea'ing of ir, he did hinder the King to give him his life, and all his friends to {ue
for it.

The nexe day laft of fuly 1602, the Chancellor, the firft Prefident, Sillery, three
Matters of Requefts, fome Officers of the Chancery, Rapin Lieutenant of the {hore
Gown, his Lieutenant, Daniel Veifin Regifter of the Court of Parliament, fix Set-
geants, and feven or eight more went to the Baftille , about ten of che Clockin the
mornings


would put


of Michael Noftradamus, 487
morning, as foon as they were come in the Chancellor commanded that the Prifo.
ners Dinner fhould be carryed, without giving him notice of his coming, andin
the mean time he and the firft Prefident made à Lift of thofe whom they wonld
have to be prefent in that action : Some Prefidents, “three Matters of Requelts,
three“ Auditors, fix Serjeants of the Parliament, the Lieutenant Civil, the Kings
Attorney at the Chaffelet, Rapis and his Lieutenant, the Knight of tHe Watch, the’
Prevoft of the Merchants, four Aldermen, four Councellors of the City, ‘and fome
few others, to the number of fifty. — HO FE | AA

About noon the Prifoner looking through the Grates of his Chamber Windows,
perceived the Wife of Rumigny, ; Captain of the Caftle, weeping with her hands
up; and gueffed that chofe Tears were drawn by the ‘compafiion of his Fortune:
Hewas confirmed ‘in his opinion,’ when he 'faw the Chancellor followed by the Ser-
jeants, Rapén and his Lieutenant, and fome others go through the Baftilles Yard
into the Chappel, then he began to cry aloud, Omy God I am a dead man, ah,
what injuftice it is to put an Innocent Ferfon to death, thérenpon hé intreaced Ru.
migny to tell his Brothers, Siftersand Kindred, that they fhould not be afhamed of
his death, becaufe he was Innocent of chat he was accufed. *”'* ?

The Chancellor commanded he fhould be brought downinto the Chappel, where
as foon as he faw the Chencellor, ‘ate you come, faid he, to pronounce me my death:
The Chancellor faluted him, thew put on his Hat, che Prifoner ftood bate headed,
and. began to {peak firft, ““Ahmy Lord Chancellor, is there no pardon? is there
no Mercy? fuchandfuch (whom he did name one after another ) Have committed
fuch offences and’ yet have been pardoned.” ‘What?’ you chat look like an honett
man; have you fuffered ‘that I fhould be fo miferably condemned? ah ! my Lord,
if you had not told the Court'that the King would have me to die, they would not
have condemned me fo, My Lord, my Lord, you could have hindred thar evil!
and you havénot done it, yon thal! anfwer for that injuftice before all the reft of the
Judges that have condemned me, and faying fo, he ftroke the Chancéllor à pon the
Arm. Ali! what a great fervice the King doth this day'to the King of Spain; to
rid him of fuchan Enemy as Iwas, might I not have been kept within four Walls:
till (ome occafion had offered where I might'have been ufeful ? Ahmy Lord, have
you forgot my fathers love to you fo much, as not to give notice to the King of what
1 fay, and what dammage he fuffereth in }oofing me Tam yet as willing as ever to
do fervice to che Kingdom, you could fet him know fo much, he hath fo goad an
opinion of you, I am fure he would believe you: A Meffenger could quickly go
thither aud back again, what fhall x thoufand Gentlemen my Kinfmen fay ¢’ doth
he think chac aiter my death they can do him any fervice ? and what if had been
guilcy,would I have come upon thole falfeaffurances chat Prefident F anin chat great
Cheat gave me, when he told me, chat bufineflés were fo ill mannaged in France,
thac:it was fic I fhould fee the King and tell him of ir, whoat my perfwañon wou!4
fettle them in bettter order: I have neglected all the advices of my friends to
hearken unto his perfwafions. I have trufted to thac cucfed Traitor /: Biz, who
writto me that I could eome inal! fafety, and chat he had told che King nothing but
of the Marriage that:was propounded to me with a ‘daughter of Sazoy,that the King
would receive me with all kincnefs, What then? the goings to and fro of many,
the reafons of thofe who advifed me tocome, and the Kings Letters, were they
all baits co catch: the: Iam well ferved to have trufted fo muchupon his Word, 1
could have fought and got other fécurities, if had nor trufted to my Innocency :
I am come upon the confidence of my integrity fince his pardon, Ah! doth he noc
know that he hath forgiven me; 1 have had fome evil defigas, Ihave hearkened, 1
bave written, 1 havefpoken, 1 confeffed them all at Lyon, he did aflure me never
to remember it; and did exhort me chat from hence forwards ffhould commit no:
Qgq thing


192 T Le true Prophecies


thing that, might compel me to have recourfe to his clemency :. Neverthelefs Iam
now.accufed of things chat are blotced.out by his pardon; I have not offended him
fince, -unlefs ic be in chat Idefired VVar rather than Peace, becaufe my humours
not peaceable, had not the King at that timereafon ro-approve of it». if this Crime’
deferveth death I fly to his clemency, Limplore.his Mercy, The Queen of England
told me, .that.i{ che Barl of Effex. would have humbled himielf, and asked foigive-
nefs, he fhould have obtained it : Ido, being Innocent, what he would noc do being
euilry. . Ah! (hall all Mercy be put out forme; thofe that have done worfe have
found Grace.and Mercy: .1 perceive what, ic is,.I,am not the more guilty butthe
moft unhappy , and the Kings who hath been fo ifparing of his Subjects. lives...
bath a mind ta be prodigal of mine. cuit} me

To conclude, he forgotnothing of what might be faid by aSoul pierced with grief
fpite, anger, and violent chreatmng, in exclamations and revilings againft the King,
and his Parliament, in reptoaches againft the Chancellor, that he had. more contri-
bured to h.s condemnation than to his.abfolution,in words chat are not.fitto be fpo-
ken no: related, ‘ies

His wogds ran fo faft-that che Chancellor could not ftop them:. Neverthelefs he
took occafion to tell him, bis patlion fuggefted him many.things without appearance
of reafon, and againft his own jadgment, that no body had known his deferts better
than he, and chat he could. have wifhed his faults had.been as unknown as diffembled
thatthe knowledge of them had been-to.vifible and apparent, that his Judges had
more ado to. moderate his punifhmentthan to.inflictic,. ThatScntence.was given
upon the proofs of feveral attemps he had made againft the Kings-Perfon and his
Eftate, and for having kept intelligence and correfpondency with the Enemies of the
Kingdom, of which he had been tound guilty,, that.it.ne had concealed the truthin:
the anfwers to his accufations, he fhould now reveal it being fo near to his end, -and
that for thefe caufes t! e King did ask his Order of Knighthood, and his ftaff of Mar
fhal of France, with which he had formerly honoured him : He pulled the Order out
of his Pocket, and put it into the Chancellors hands, Protefting and Swearing upon
the Salvation or his soul, that he never had: broken the Oath he madein receiving it-
that (it istiue) he had defired War more than Peace ; becaufe he could not pre-
ferve in Peace, the reputation he had got in War, .as for the Staff, he never carryed
jt: Neverchelefs by che Oath that the Knights of the Holy Ghoft take, they are
bound totake no Penfion, Wages nor: Money from forrain P rinces, and to engage
themfelves in no bodies fervice but the Kings, and faithfully to reveal what they
fhall know tobe for or againft the Kings fervice,

A ter that the Chancellor exhorted him to lift up his thoughts from Earth to
Heaven, to call upon God, and to hear patiently his Sentence,

My Lord ( faid he.) Ubefeech you do not ufe me as other men; I know what my
Sentence beareth, my acculations are falfe, I wonder the Court would Condemn me
upon the Evidence of the moft wicked and deteftable man that is alive s he never
came near me without Witchcraft,nornever went from me till he had bewitched me;
he did bite my left ear off,and made medrink inchanted waters,and when hefaid. that
the King hada mind to rid himfelt of me, he called me his King, his BenefaGor, his
Prince, his Lord, he hath communication with the Devils, and hath fhewed mea
Wax Image, fpeaking thefe words in Latine, Rex impie morieris, ungodly King
thou fhalt die. If he hath had fo much power by his Magick, as to make an in-
animate body to fpeak, it isno wonder that he fhould make my WVill conformable to
his. 3

Here the Chancellor ftopt him, and cold him, that the Court had well confidered
his anfwers, and his Letters, that he oughe not to find faule with his Sentence, that
it had done him the fame Juftice asa Father fhould doto his Son, ifhe had offended


In


of Michael Noftradamus.


433
inthe like manner. He had {carce fpoken thefe words when the Other anfwered,
what Judgment? I have been heard but once, and ha |


ad no time to tel the fifcieth
ade it clearly
y 5 what Judgment upon the Evidence of a
en bis Wife, ofa treacherous and perfidious
upon che Holy Sacrament, fever to reveil
what was between us, of a Knave thar hach fo often counterfeited my Hand and Seal:
Letters that were thewed me, but I never
and the reft are falfified : Is there not many,
that_can counterfeit fo well the Hand and Seal of others, chat thenifelves can {carce
diftinguith them. Ir is well known that the Lady Marchionels of Vetnevil hath
lately acknowledged that to be her ownhand, which fhe had never written, My
Heart and my A@tions have fufficiently countervailed the faults of my Hand, and'of
my Tongue. Befides, the King hath forgiven me, :I'do implore his Memory for a
Witnels, You fay I have been found guilty to haveattempred Upon the Kings Pér-


fon; thatis falfe, that never came into my mind, and] knew nothing of it rill thac
la Fin did propofe it to me before St. Katherines Fort, fix or feven days after the
Siege, if I had been thus minded, I could have eafily brought it to pafss Iwas


the only man that hindred the King to go before the Fort - If my fervices Had
been taken into confideration, I fhould


not have been thus condemned: Ibelieve
that if you had aot been prefent, the Parliament would not: have judged me fo
rigoroufly ; I wonder that you, whom


I thought co be prudent and wife, ‘have
ufed me fo cruelly; it would have been


more honourable foy your quality and old
age to implore for me the Kings Mercy, than his Juftice. > Thereis Dungeons hére


where I might have been kept bound hand and foot pT fhould have at laft thar con’.
fort to pray for thofe who fhould have got me thac favour from the King. It had
been but a fingle Souldier, I fhould have been fent tothe Galleys but becan‘e I
am a Marfhal of France, I am thoug he to be as dangerous a man to the State, asf
have been ufeful heretofore. My lite is fought atter, I fee there is no Mercy for
me; the King hath often forgiven thafe, whonot only intended ro do evil, but
had done it; this Vercue is now forgotten, he giveth occafion now to the Werld
to believe, that he never ufed clemency or forgivene(s, but when he was affaid? I
was of opinion, that if I had killed one of his Children he would have forgiven me.
Is it not pity chat my Father thouldbave run fo.many dangers, and at‘laldied in the
field to keep the Crown upon his Head, and thaenow. hethould take my head uff my
Shoulders, is it poffible he thould fo


rget the fervicés L'hive donehim’ doth he noe
remember the confpiracy of cxHay


tesyand the dangers he thould have been in if
I had taken the Confpirators part? ‘Hath he fore


gotten the Siege of Amiens; where
I have been fooften among the fire and Bullets, negleéting my own life to preferve
his, I-have nota Vein but hath been Open to preferve his own Blood, T have récei:
ved five and thirty wounds to fave his. life s\he thewerh nowtharlienever love
me but. when he had need of me, he taketh away my head; buciler him bewa‘e chet
the Juftice of God doth not fall uponhis,. My-Blood fhall cry for revenge {orthe
wrong that is done me to day, I call the King of Spaiv and the’ Duke of Szvey to
Witnels, if I know any thing what is laid to my charge. La Fix him(elf did thew me
fometimes a Catholick Lift of about fourlcore Gentlemen) who received Penficn
from the King of Spain, I had never fomuch curiofity as to readit à Jet him be put
to the rack he fhall cell Many. particularities ofir; theKing Within alitette white
fhall perceive what he getterh by my death ; I thall àt laf'diea good Catholick:ärd
conftant in my Religion, { believe chat’s the caufe of my death,
The Chancellor feeing that all-his-difcourfes were full of paffion, vanity and répe-
titions, and void of reafon, and werelike-an impetuous Torrent that cantor be ftope,


Qqq2 and


part of my joftifications if I ha
appear that Ja Fin is {uch a one as Ifa
Bougerer + of a Rogue that hath forfak


ee ==


a re Sur es se


48.4 Tbe true Propbecies


and that all his words were nothing but reproaches againft the King and the Court
of Parliament, blafphemies againft God, and execrations againft his Accufers ; faid
that his bufine(s called him away, and thatin his abfence he would leave him two
Divines to comfort him, and to difpofe his foul roleave'quietly this World, for the
enjoying of a better,

As the Chancellor was going out, the Prifoner begged of him that he might have
the liberty to make his Will, becaufe he did owe mach,and much was owing to him,
and he defired to fatisfie every body, The Chancellor anfwered, that the Recorder
Voifin (hould ftay with him to write his Will under the Kings good pleafure. And as
the Chancellor {poke to poifin, the Prifoner turning to Reiffy, Mafter of Requetts,
asked him if-he were, one of thofe that had condemned him: my- Father hath
loved you fo much, that hough you were one,yet fhould I forgive you, Roify anfwer-
ed,my Lord, 1 pray God Almighty to comfort you.

They went our, and he with a quiet mind and free from paffion , did dictate his
Will in what form he would, with the {ame Garbe,as if he had been making a Speech
at the head of an Army; he :emembred his friends and fervants, and did nor forget
the Baron of Lux, whombelovedabove all the reft. Helefr eight hundred Livers
a year to a Baftard of his, whom he begot of a woman that he left with Child of
another, to which childhe lefta Mannor near Dijon that had coft him fix choufand
Crowns, he dilpofed all the reft of his Debts, and anfwered modeftly , and without
confufion to all che Notes and Bil’s that were brought him’ about hisaffairs. Took
three Rings off his fingers, and intreated Baranton to give them to his Sifters, two to
the Countefs of Reaffy , and the other to that of Saint Blancard, defiring they would
wear them for his. fake 5 he diftributed in Alms about 200. Crowns that he had in
his Pocket, fitty to the Capuchines, fifty to the Fneillants, fifty to the Minimes, and
the reft to feveral poor people. :

The Will being made, the Recorder put him in mind how my Lord Chancellor
had told him he was condemmed to death , and that according to the ordinary forms
ot the Law, he muft have his Sentence read to him; that this action required humi-
lity, therefore willed him to kneel betore the Altar , leaving off hence forth all
thoughts of this W orld, tothink upon the Father of Mercies; he kneeled with che
right knee upon the firft ep cf the Aluar, and heard it read as followeth:


seen by she Court,the Chambers being alfembled togéther, the Procefs extraordinarily made

by the Prefidents and Councellors, appointed by the King under his Letters Patents dated the
18 and 19 of June,at the reque/t of the Kings Sollicstor General ,againft the Lord Charles
of Gontault of Biron, Knight of both orders, Duke of Biron, Peer and Marfhal of France,
Gevernour of Burgundy, Prifoner in the Caftle of Baftille, accufed of bigh Treafon, Infor-
mitions, Interrogations ,Confe/stons and denials Confrontations and Witnelfes, Letters, Ad-
vices, and Inftructions giventothe Ene nies, and ackrowledged by him, and all what the
Solliciter General bath produced, Sentence of the 22 of this Month, by which it was ordered,
that in the abfence of the Peers of France fummoned, it [honld be further proceeded to Fude-
ment Cenclafions of the Kings Sollicitor,the accu(er besug heard and interrogated all things
being daly confidered, hath been concluded, that the [aid Court hath declared, and declareth
the (aid Duke of Biron,attainted and convicted of high Ti realon, for the con{piracies by him
made againft the Kings Perfon and Eftates, Proditions and Treaties with bis Enemies,
when he was. Marfhal of the Army of the laid King, for reparation of which Crime, the [aid
Court bath deprived, and depriveth bim of alt his Eftates, Honours and Dignttits, and
bath condemned and condemneth himtobe beheaded upon a Scaffold, which for that pur-
pole {ball be erected in the place.of Greve, hath declared, and declareth, all and every ont
of his Goods, moveable or moveable, inwbat[eever places {citnated andfeated, tobe ac-


‘quired an. conpifegted tothe King, the Manner of Biron, deprived for ever of the T 4 a
| Dukedom


ee Pescara


“~~ Bo ee =F FS


gp


> + On


— — 7
as £2 <


Le 7


HS = ce
ES =. er SE oe


of Michael Noftradamus, 435


Dukedom and Peerage, and altogether all bis other Goods immediately holden from the
King, rennited to the Crown again, Done in Parliament the laft day of July 1602,
Signed in the Origixal by de Belieure, Chancellor of France, Cownceller in the Court, Re-
porter of the Procefs,


He was not movedat thefe words, attainted and convicted 0 high Treafon, but at
thele, againft the Perfon of the King, he fell into a rage, and Swearing as he had
done miny times before, and {hall do hereafter with great Oaths and Imprecations,
there is no fuch thing, faid hetothe Recorder, itis falfe; blot ouc that ;. he was
alfo very atigry, hearing chat he was to be executed in the placeof Greve; thinking
that for fevetal refpeéts he was to be diftinguifhed from the common fort ot people,
and Swore again, that he would not go thither, andthat he had rather tobe torn in
pieces by wild Hérfes, and thatic was not inthe power of all thofe that ftood by to
carry him thither; then he was 4 little appealed, when /rifin told him, that the
King had done him that favour to change the place of Execution, and that it wasto
be done in the Baffille. The confifcation of his Goods, andthe revenues of the
Dukedom of Biron to the Crown, was the laft point of the Sentence that vexed,
him. WWhae? faid he, doth the King intend to grow rich out of my poverty ¢
The Lordthip of Biron cannot be confiicated, 1 only poffeffed it by fubfticution of
my Brethren, what hall my Brethren do, the King ought to have been fatisfied
with the lofs of my life, | yet

The Sentence being pronounced, 7%/f2 did exhort him again to renounce all the
vanities of the world, to takeno other care but of the Salvation of his Soul, . which
was to be firft by reconciling himfelfto God Almighty, and that there was two Di-
vines for that purpofe, and that according to the ufual forms of Executions,he would
be pleafed to fuffer himfelf to be bound T hat word of Execution did feem fo hor-
tid to him, that he fell into anew rage;, Swearing, that he would never permit fo
infamous a perfon to.touch him, otherwife than wich the Sword, and that he had
rather beheivenin pieces. To keep him trom falling into a further defpair, Faifis
lefe him, with his Divines, viz, Garnicr Almonec, and Conteflor to the King, and
after chat Bifhop of Afontpelier, and Æagnan, Curate of St, Nicolas in the fields at
Paris, who began to talk boldly to him orhis death, and to dilveft himfelf or all his
thoughts, as he had done of his Goods, and to take no other care than that of his
Soul, whereupon he fell into a paffion again, Lec me alone ({aidhe) it is that
muft think upon my Soul, you have nothing todowithit, I hadno need of you, you
fhall not be troubled to hear my confeffion; what i {peak aloud is my conteffion,
have been thefe eight days a conteffiag my felt, and che laft night, me thought f
faw the Heavens opened, and that Goc lent me his Hand 5 my Keepers behed ae
laugh for joy in my fleep. The Divines did not loofe Courage for all enar; but
more and more intreated him to confider, that he was no more what hehsd been
before, that within one or two hours he fhould benomore, that he muft change to
be for evermore, that his Soul was ready to appear before the fearfull Throne ot the
living God, to be rewarded with amore happy life than that he had hitherto pofled,
or be condemned to an Eternal pain. and chat in comparifon of that whtch he 810
fuffer now, it was no more thon che ‘flight pricking ofa Pin, and having in (ome
meafure appeafed him, they left him to examine his Confcience, while Moria went
to give notice of his refufing to be bound ; the Chancellor doubted whether he
fhould be compelled to it; the firft Prefidentfaid, thatit was dangerous to let him
loofe; sellery having learned of 046» that the Prifoner wasat thatime very quiet,
faid, chat if they'went about to bind him, he would break all the bonds oF Patience;
and thould never be brought to Execution bur inarage and:difpairs: atcording to
that opinion he was. left free in his body, that he might be: the more tree in is
thoughts, pact


W EVLC


at Sp ites ny
USF wash TN AN eta


YBR
te


436 The true Prophecies


Which were more to the World, and to the fetling of his affairs, than tothe
faving of his Soal, which he had neglected all his lifetime, and.thewed himfelf
utterly ignorant of the principles of his Religion, for which he faid a little before,
he was put to death, and thofe that were prefent related, chat.his Prayers made
him appear more a Souldier than a Chriftian ; he prayed in commanding, and com-
manded in praying,

His Confeffion being ended, he walked in the Chappel wich one hand upon his
fide, and with the other holding the ftrings of his Shirt, did unbutcon and burton
again his Doublet. Fwfis being come back told him, that che Chancellor and the
firft Prefident were very glad to hear of his Patience, and of his conftant refolution
to die, Hetalked much ofthe Money he had at Dijon, of the worth of his Jewels,
and of what was owing to him, and what himfelf did owe, he defired that {ome Sums
of Money fhould be paid to certain Gentlemen, that had no Obligation for it : Buc
fill he broke forth into exclamations concerning his Innocency, .and execrations
agaiatt la Fin, asking if it fhould.not belawfull for his Brothers to profecute him,
aad to caufe him to be burnt. |

Upon this, chofe chat kept him duriag his Imprifonment,came to take their leave
of him, every one having hig lett hand upon che handle of his Sword, and Tears
in his Eyes, -he moved them to:compaffion by the fight of his prefent condition, and
exhorted them to ferve the King faithfully; againft whom he had faid he had done
nothing amifs, and complained that he could find no Mercy at his Hands, intreated
them to pray to God for him, and co oblige them to that, diftributed among them
all his Cloaths and linnen,: and Watches ; he defiredalfo the Knight of the Watch
to tell the King, chat his Servants knew nothing of his Affairs, that the Earl of
Auvergne was not to be queftioned upon that account: Heintreated much one ex-
empt of the Guards togo tothe faid Earl, and tell him he had laid nothing to his
charge, and that he went:to die without any grief, but of the lofs of his friendthip,
and that the fhortnefs of his life would not give him leave to thew in effect how much
he was his fervant. The Earl fenc-him word, that he did accept of his farewell, as
Of an intimate friend; and:thac heremained behind to lament all the days of his life
the lofs hefuffered in him, intreated him to leave him his Baftard Son, to have him
brought up with hisown Children : After thisthe Prifoner faw a Gentleman be-
longing to the Duke of Mayene, and entreated him to tell his Mafter, chat if ever
in his life he had given him {ome occafion not co love him, that he prayed to believe
that he would die his fervant, asalfoof the Duke of e4iguillon, and Earl of Sam-
merive his Childrens he likewife intreated Arwant, Secretary to the Marques of
Rhofny, to remember his laft commendations to his Mafter, and defire him to re-
member not fo much him that wentto die, as his Brethren whom he left behind,
that he had him in opinion of a good and ufefull fervant to the King, and repented
much he had noc believed his Councel.

About three of the Clock the Chancellor and the firft Prefident went up again
into the Chappel, and finding him in a good difpofition, did fortifie his refolution
by their difcourfes, and defiring to know more particularities from his own mouth,
fent all the ftanders by away, except the Divinesand the Recorder: They did ex-
hort him to confider, that che days of man are limited, that the end of his days de-
pended from the Providence of the Almighty, who would take: himout of this
world before fome great and long mifery fhould make him weary ofit, Hean{wer-
ed, no, no my Lords, do not trouble you about comforting me and ftrengthning
meagainft the fear of death, I have not been afraid of it thefe 20 years; youhave
given me 40 days to ftudy it, buc I could not believe chat having not been in the
power of my Enemies to take away my life, I thould befo miferable as to loofeic
by theconfent of my friends ; having {aid this they left him, and took their leaves:

f
tr)


1e"
né,
ented


ab
ution


of Michael Noftradamus.


ofhim with Tears in their Eyes; :he would nocituffer them to
ceived a new Protaftation of his,. chat he.never had attempted any thing againft the
King, Swearing, that if he would Have doneir, the King fhould not have been alive
three yearsago, | |

As they were going out of. the Baffille with Ssllery, he ent the Knight of the
Watch to intreat the Chancellor, that-his Body might be buried at Biron. in the
Sepulchre of his Anceftors, and that he woulddefire the King to giveto his younger
Brother fome Office in the houfe of the Dolphin, and thewing by his Countenance:
Carryage and Words, to careas little for déathas one that isa great way’ from it‘gave
catife to fufpeët, that he was not out'of hope toobtain his pardon {rom the King, of
to e(cape by fome extraordinary means, usher sl wae

The Divines did exhort.-him to keep nothing backof what might {e?ve'for the
difcharging of his Confcience, and to confider, that they:could give him abfoluri~
on for no more than what he did. confe(s, Although, fait he;the King caufeth me
todie unjuftly, neverthelefs I, have ferved him with fomuch affetion and obedi-
ence, andef have near my death fo much-good will andaffectiôn for him, that'ifl
knew any, thing againft his Perfon or State; I would tellittreely, and upon that
whifpered fome things to his Confeflors, which Voifin did prefently write,

Being about five of theClock, Barantoniwas {ent'to tell/him it was time to 90 =
let us go faid he, feeing I muft die, and defired he would charge his Brothers from
him, to remain faithful to the King, and not to goto Court, till time had blotted, or
at Jeaft leffened the fhame ofhis death, He kneeled before the Alea
ended his Prayer, he defired the Company to pray for him.

Coming out of the Chappel, he met the Executioner, who offered to follow him,
and he thinking it was to bind him; keep off, ( {aid he’) and donot touch me till it
be time;.I fhall go willingly to die without troubling äny body ; butit {hall never
be faid chat Iam dead like a slave, ora Thief, and fwore by God that ifhe came near
him he would ftrangle him, The Divinesexhorted him going down the ftairs to
refift chofe impaciencies and temptations of the Devil, who ftriveth moft to deviate
the Soul from her Salvation, when as he hath moft neëd af the Divine affiftance ro
withftand hisaffaules, remonftrating alfo uato-him, that all his violences and paffions
could not hinder the Soul, to, depart from a place where the was but a Tenant at
Will: He hearkened to them, and faying three times'ah, jah, ah, raifing his voice
at every one; he faid, is chere no Mercy in the world, I fee to day, thacall the world
hath forfaken me, hin R

“He came into the Yard, andfeeing the Lieutenant of the City, in whofe houfe
the King had put. /a Fis, to,fecure him fromal! attempts; My Lord Lieutenant
(aid he} J am very much yourfriend, take heed tohave any thing to do with that
Wicch and Magician chacjyeth,at your houfe, ifyou meddle with him he will undo


; and having


ou, pian!
The Scaffold was fer up inthecorner of the Yard, Overagainft the Garden gare,


"fix foot high, and (even long,..without any Ornament ordiftin@ion;” He knerléd


upon the firft ftep, litted up.-his-Eycsto:Heaven and made a fhoit Prayer, like a
Souldier, and went up as couragioufly as if he had gone to an affault, cladina
Gray Taffety Suit, with a black Hat on his Head, butasfoon as he fiv the Execu-
tioner, he looked furioufly upon him, and bid him ftaud afide till he were ready
to receive the laft ftroke: He threw his Hat, his Handkarchief, and Doublet to
the firft chat would take it, neverthelels one of the Exécütioners meti was nimbler
than all che reft, and looking upon the Souldiers that kept the Gate armed,, with
Mufquets and Fire-locks. Ah! faidhe, mucft I die? isthere no pardon? if at
leaft {ome of thofe good fellows would fhat me ( opening his Breaft) he fhould 052
lige my very much, what pity isit to die fo miferably, and of {othameful a blow,
then


depart cill they had re-


A88 The true Prophecies


Then directing his fpeechto the Speéators, he faid, ‘Ihave put'my Soul intofacha /


ftate as the ought co be to appear before the face of Almighty God, burl pity chat
of the King, who caufech me to dieunjuftly: I-hiveerred I'confefs, but I never
atrempted any thing againft the Kings Perfon, he fhould have been ‘dead ten years
ago if 1 would have believed the evil Councel that was given me concerning that.
the trouble’ aud diftrefs of his Soul! was fo great, that 4 little while before he faid
three years, and nowhefays ten; che Divines having fecled hima little once more
he received their abfolution, ) tar OH d
The Executioner then prefented unto:him a Fronclét, but it proved to him 2 new
wound, anincreafe of grief; and (wore ifhe toucht'hitn'äniy other way than with the
Sword he would ftrangle him, &thereupon he asked again for his own Handkarchief to
make uleofit, his hollow and gaftly Eyes thewed le was'not in his right mind. Foifis
intreated. him to be patientsand to raife-his thoughts tothe place where his Sou! was
to go, and to beattentive to the reading of his Sentence,” He was unwilling to hear
the repetition of his Crimes, and to have occafion to exclaim again againft the Ini-
quitie, of thofe that had condemned him, againft che Kings cruelty, as he called it
that would not grant bim his pardon, and that this was to make him feel dearh be-
fore death... Voifis anfwered, that it could not be done otherwife! He an(Wéred
chat every body knew for what reafon he wastherednd thenasitit were by As
feffion, be faid, well, read, and thereupon held his Peacetill Poifin came tothefe
words, for having attempted*again{t the Kings Perfon; for then he fell into a paffion
again, as he haë done before, and faid, thac 1c was falfe, chat this never came into his
mind, that as God was his Judge, he wonld be for ever deprived of his Grace ifit
were true, that fince two and cwenty Months he had done nothine äpainft the Kings
fervice, that, ic is true he had written fome Letters, but that the King had Rite
him, protefting and calling the Spectators to Witnefs, that it was che truth what he
fpoke, as he would anfwer it before God; and (poke fo many words, and fo faft that
neither he nor che Sheriff could be underftood, à
The Sentence being read, the Divines did admonith him to]
thoughts, to implore the affiftance of Heaven, and to refign his Sid te he
providence of the Almighty, and his Body to what the Lawhad ordained of it he
made fome Prayer to God,and bound his Eyes with his own Handkatchief and asked
the Executioner in what place he was co put himfelf, the Executioner bointin with
his finger, faid, there my Lord; he pulled:off his Handkarchief in 4 rage i LR
is chat chere, faidhe ? thou feeft I am blind fold, and chou theweft bok oi ifI could
lee; he bound himfelf again, and bid che Executioner to difpacchquickly : The Ex-
ecutioner told him he ought to kneel, for fear he fhould do fomething amifs Aine
no, faid he, I {hall not ftir, if chou canft not do it at one blow doit at thirty, he was
intreated again to kneel, which he did, ‘and fpoke thete Imperious words er atch
difpatch, then rofe up again, and untied his Handkarchief, and by cafting his E 4
upon cheËxecutioner,made the people believe,that either he had a mind to feizeu ap
the Sword, or chat he was terribly afrighted by the approaches of Death and aA!
again his former complaints, is therenopardon? muft I die fo miferably » ot
many fervicess The Executioner intreated him to fuffer his hairs A be cue
off ; he began to {wear again fearfully, thatif he toucht him ocherwife than with the
Sword, he would ftranglehim, The Divinestold him that he was £00 caréfuil of
his Body, he would hear no more of that, but fell into a rage, and {wore, chat he
would not be toucht by fo Infamous a Perfon as long as he was alive thane ef
did provoke him too much,-he would ftrangle half the Company, Aad obli ae
other half to.kill him, thofe that were upon the Scaffold went downand ee ep


with the Executioner, who repented: himéelf heartily that he h LAN
him unbound: y ad taken the care of


The


|


Th
Godt


with!


yim f


nen


> oo ey
oe ==
Pt


J
>
=]


3 4.


of Michael Noftradamus. 88:


The Divines went up again upon the Scaffold, and défired him ot the love of
God to refolve to ftep over that pafs, which was neceflary for every man to do, and
with fome few other words, whifpered into his ears, did calm him a little, and made
him refolve to undergo the Execution, after he had made many complaints, and
ihewed great fearsof dying.’ A ftrangething chat as ftout and valiant a man as ever
was born, who had fo many times caft himfelf among ft thegreareft dangers, without
any fear ot apprehenfion,: as if there was no death for him, fhould thew himfelf now
fo fearful at the coming ofit; we may judge by this, that che apprehenfion of death
is incomparably greater when it comech upon a cold blood, and thofe that know
what his Chirurgion was wont to fay, fhall lefs wonderat it, for he faid, chat the
Duke of Biron uled to wonder at himfelf, that being not afraid of the thruft ofa
Sword, neverthelefs he was very cimerous atthe pricking of a Launcet, when he had
occafion to be let blood : Whereupon we muft confefs, that the greateft courage,ind
moft undaunted ftoutnefs of à man, is nothing in comparifon of human Natures
weaknefs, ay

The Divines judging him to be out of fear, gave hinrhis laft abfolution, he
kneeled again, and cried aloud three times, My God, my God, my God, have Mercy up-
on me, then turning to the Executioner, he took the headband that he had in his
hand, and intreated Barantox to do him that laft curtefieas to lift up his hairs behind,
which Baranton did, and the Duke himfelt did tie the Handkarchief about his Eyes.
The Divines feeing him in that good difpofition, did aflure him that he was ready to


. go to Heaven, and to fee God, and to enjoy his Glory. Yes, {aid he, Heaven is


open to receive my Soul,and fo ftooped his neck for the Executioner to do his office.
The Executioner confidering, that he had untied himfelf three times before, and
might do fo again for the fourth, thought fitting to entertain him with fair words,
to defire his forgivenefs, and to put him in mind of faying his laft Prayer, inthe
mean time he beckened to his man, who wasat the foor of the Scaffold, co teach
him the Sword, which no fooner was in his hand, but the Duke of Birons Head was
off his Shoulders, it fell from the Scaffold to the ground, and was chrown again by
the Executioners man upon the Scaffold, the Body was ftript co its Shirt, aad wrap-
ed in a Sheer, and the fame day bured, abcuc nine of the Clock at night, in
St. Pauls Church, wichour any thew or Ceremony, Thus endedthe Tragical H fto-
ry of the Dukaof Biron.


Now follows the two lat Verfes of this Prophecié.
A Polt overtaken in the Ceuntrey,
And the Scrivener [ball caft him{elf intothe water, |

Which as we have faid before, were conceining Nicolas L'hofle, Secretary tothe
Lord Villeroy, chief Secretary of Srate. The Hiftory thereforeis thus.

The French Embaffador at eMadrid, corapla'ned once to Hexry ahe IV. he was
fo ill informed, and fo late of Affairs, chat the King of Spais s Minifters knew them
before him: The King was a great while troubled before he could difcover the
{pring of thacinfidelity, aclaft ir came out in this manner.  Pé/leroy chat great Ora-
cle of France, and the moft confident Secretary to the King, had among his fervants
one Nicolas l'Offe, born at orleans, in whom he did confide fo mich the more, be-
caufe his Father had been the moft part of his lite in his fervice,

The Lord Rechepot going Embaffador into Spain, ‘Ofte defired to be admitted
into his Family, to ferve him as his Secretary, that he might the better fic him(clf fer
publick employment. élleroy's commendation got him eafily that employment,
by which in a few Months he became fo capable of the Spanifb Tongue an manners,
that no body could have diftinguithed him from a natural Spaniard, The Embafla-
dor having {worn in the name of the moft iat King the treaty of Peace

rr made


a


eo eseeast sree PE SE =


£90 The true Prophecies


made at Verwins, the King of Spain prefented him witha rich Chain of Jewels, ans
with fix other of Gold, valued at «50, Crowns apiece, tobeftow upon as many oi
his own fervants as he fhould think fic,

Ue pride and pie‘umption of this young man was {uch as to perfwade him he de:
ferved one of them, and chieAy becaufe one ot his fellows was thought worthy ofir,
but his Mafter did not think fo, and thus he was neglected.

Thus envy aod jealoufie were che. Windows by whichthe Devil crept into his
Souls the vanity, lying, pride, and debauchery gave him a full admittance, he
had{pent all his Money co buy the love of a Courtifane, and wanted means to follow
that courfe which he had no mind co lcaveoff,. His Matters neglecting of him; had
ext-aordinarily vexed him, but he comforted himfelf that he knew hisfecrets, and
thac in revealing chem to the King ot Spains Minifters he (hot two Birds with one
thot; for he fhould avenge himfelf. of that contempt he had received, and fhouid
have a way to continue his amorous expences, With that intention he made him-
felf known to Dm Franche(e one of the Secretaries of State, and told him whar
meons he had t» ferve the King of Spain, and to thew-him proofs of chat fervice and
affcétion he had vowed to him long before, by imparting to himall the Letters that
the Embaffador did both end and receive from the King his Matter.

Don Franchrfe hea:d this propofition, as. toma young.man, whofe Brains were
not we'lfettled, or perhaps did abhor fuch infidelity, therefore told him coldly, chae
the Catholick King was,in fo good amity with the moft.Chriftian one, that he
defired to know no moie of his bufinefs, chan whac his Embaflador thould tell
him.

L’Offe did noc defpond for ai} chis,. but went to Des Tdiaques

tate, who knowing how important it is for. a Prince to know the fecrets ot his
Neighbours, and that the flighting of fuch an offer would be prejudicial to the King
his Maftersfervice, did hearken unto this Traitor, approved of his defign, and ex-
horted him to perfevere in the good affeioa he fhewed to the King of Spains fer-
vice, p:omifed to acquaint the King withit, and to procure him fuch areward, as
he fhould have reafon to be fatisfied with. |

The Counce] a; reed that/ O/fe thould be incouraged, and Dos Tdiaques prefented


him to the Duke of Lerma, to whom he fhewed the Alphabet of Cyphers, with


which his Mafter writ his Letters into Frarce, and for a further proofunciphered the


laft Letter that che King of France had ent. The Duke exhorted him to continue
his good Will, gave him 1200, Crowns for an earne(t of the Bargain, witha pro-
mife of as much for a yearly penfion, befices a confiderable gratification he was to
expect from the King

Since that time the French Embaffador received no Letters but th
fently imparted to the Spanifh Councel:. But the Lord J Rochepot
into France, l'offe loft the conveniency of profecuting his Treafons,and confequent-
ly che hopes of his promifed reward, therefore fought means ro come again into his
firft Mafters, that is, Pélleroy's fervice, but he was a while kept back from it by rea-
{on of a difference berween his Mothet and Villeroy, about fome reft of Accounts; but
J Offe had rather take that Jofs upon him thanto be deprived.of that occafion, The
Embeflador himfelf gave hima large Teftimony of his ability and faithfulnefs, and
was Inftrumentu for his re-admiffion into that fervice,

Thus being re-eftablifbed, he became more diligent and fedulous than ever before,
and not only writ more Letters than any of his fellows, but alfo offered them his fer-
vice to helpthem, that he might have amore perfect knowledge of all tranfaCions,
and foimpare them to the Spawiard,and (0 vifited and confetred withTaxis theSpanifh
Émbaffidor at Paris, and after chat with his fucceflor, Den Baltazar de Cuniga,
with fo much canning andfecrecy, that the Councel Of Spain received his Letters,


before


another Secretary of


ey were pre-
being called back


before
King.

Di
t0 his
vile
fom
rel


pe
rio
AU Lee


‘|


(ai


roue |
The |
(ond


sore,
is fer
Aion
ju
walk
êtes
bent |


1


of Michael Noftradamus. 491


before des Barreaux the French Embaflador at Madrid, could receive thole of the
King.

Des Barreaux (ent word to the King,that when he propounded any thing,according
to his Majefties command, to the Councel of Spaiz , he found them always pread-
vifed, and could not find out by what meanss. certainly faid che King, there muft he
fome in my Councel that keep a ftri intelligence with the Spaniard, and I can not
tell whom to fufpeét. Providence doth often draw good eff. és out of the worfe
caufes, and permitteth that che wicked fhould difclofe one anothers wickednefs, .as a
Naildrivechout another. … Lofte had revealed himfelf familiarly toone Raffis , fore
merly Secretary to the Lord Lanfac, a fugitive into Spain, for many Trealons , and
exempted from pardon; but the Spaniard had begun to cut him fhort of his former
Penfions, fince the Treafon of the Baron of Fontanches, Governour of Dornaveneft in
Brittansy, in which the {aid Baffis had been a principal A@or, though in vain, fo that
fince,the Councel of Spaiz looked upon him as an unprofitable fervant,and withdrew
their Penfion. |

Raffis finding himfelf near a great want and mifery , though: this occafion might
bea means to prevent it, and to procure his return into his native Countrey, by do-
ing fo great afervice to his Princes therefore he went to one of the French Embaffa-
dors moft faithful fervants, and told him his grief, for having had a fhare in fo many
Treafons and Rebellions in France, which he acknowledged God had into his parti-
cular protection , that he was refolvec to blot out thememory of them bya notable
{ervice done to the King and Kingdom, buc chat could not be, unlefs he had firft ob-
tained pardon forall his former mifdemeanors,

This being told tothe Embaffadour, he heard Raffis, who told him in general that
the King was betrayed, and his moft fecret Councel bewrayed , but that he could
not name the Traitor, no not to his Majefty himfel!, before he had his pardon : that
being done, he would wholly withdraw himfelt from thofe whom he knew certainly
to be enemies,to the Kingdom, The Embaffadour (ent an exprefs to the King to

give him notice of it, The K'ng fent him full power to'treat with Raffis, with pro-
mifs to ratifie whatfoever he fhould promifs to Raffis ; Ra/fis could not make good
his accufation, but bytwo Letters written by Loffe, to a greac friend of his, named
Blas, which Letters he knew to be in a Box of Blas , who lodged with him; there-
fore upon fome pre:ext or another, they found meansto fend Blas :s far as Efcuréal,
Inhis abfence Raffis and Defcardes Secretary tothe Embaffadour, broke open the
Box,and took out the Letters, by which Lojfe did much magaifie the liberalities of

Spain, as being above his defert and expectation ; with this proofs and the Embaf-
{adors Letters, Rafjis fained to go to a Momiftery near Madrid, and there make his
devotions upon Palm: Sunday,a. he was wont to do , but he went directly to Bayone,
where he met with Défcardes upon a fet day, Blas came back afrer Palm.Sunday,
and finding his Box open, and his companion runaway, he fufpeétedthe matter,and
gave notice of itto the Spawifh Minifters , who prefencly difpatched two Courriers
to the Spanifh Embaflacor at Paris , to give him notice that a man was gone from
Madrid, who would difcover Loffe and his prottifes , therefore he fhould give him
notice of it, and bid him look to himfelf., and that in cafe he fhould be taken, to
keep fecrefie. te

Defcardes and Raffis came to Paris the Wen{day after Eafter,and carried themfelves
with all faichfulae(s in this occafion , butinot withall the prudence that could have
been defired, Vélleroy was going the fame day to lie at his own Houle, between Paris


and Feuntain-bleaw, where the Court was then; they met with himatFuvify, and


waited on him as far as F%//eroy, but told him nothing of the occafion of their com'ng
by che way, till they prefénred him withthe Embaffadors Letters , which wasa fe
ay" Rrr 2 cable


CNET AR Mi MELD ST ADR ISLE TO) yd


OF aoa
LE


492 The true Propbecies


table fault, for he would certainly have neglected all other bufinefs to fecure his man,
who was then doing his devotions at the Charter.houfe of Paris.

The next day Villeroy was che firft chat told the King of the coming of Raffis, and
of the perfidioufnels ot his own fervant, As he was going back to his Lodging,
notice was given him that two Spanifh Cotttiers were arrived at the Poft-houfe; he
commanded one of rhe Commiffioners of the Pott. houfe, that he fhould caufe them
to withdraw into a Room,and that no body fhould {peak with them ; he charged alfo
Defcardes , that he thoald fpy the coming of Loffe, that he thould keep him clofe
company, and fend him prefently notice of his arrival, The Commiffioner and Def-
cardes did commit here another great fault , for Lofte being come to the Poft-houfe
about noon , this filly Commiffioner told him chat there were arrived two Spanifh
Courtiers who asked for him, that they had Letters for him, and more then thar,
fuffered him to go into their Chamber and feethem, he falated them, andone of
them whifpered him in the ear,chat he was undone if he did not fave himfelf prefent-
ly , and that R:/f5 had difcovered him s. fear and aftonifhmenc with his guilty cen-
{cience, perfuaded him eafily to look to himfelf.

Neverthelefs, he fettled his countenance the beft he could ; he went out with an
intention to take his Horfe again, whichhe had fent before, and fo fave himfelf;
Defcardes and Ra/fis perceived him, Defcardes came and faluted him , and thinking
perhaps that he was {trong enough to give an account of him, neglected to fend word
to Fall:roy, who was then in his Clofet with the Bifhop of Chartres . Defcardes pres
fence was a great thorn in Leffe's foot, to be rid of him > he faid he was going to his
Matter, who ftayed tor him’; Defcardes offered to accompany him: he anfwered,he
had not dined, and that be‘ieving it was paft Dinner time at home, he would go into

fome Cabaret to look fora Dinner, the other anfweted I have not dinned neither,
we {hall dine together, Ls/fe found another excufe, and {aid my Boots hurt me, I
pray give me leave that I may go and pull them off; Defcardes anfwered , he mutt
needs drink with him. Thusarguing together, they came to Villeroy’s Lodging,
Where Defcardes thinking co have him fute, left him inthe Room, not knowing that
the Spanifb Courtiers had talked with him, and came near the Clofet to give notice
Of it to Prlerey; burafloon as he faw himfelf rid of Defcardes,he went down into the
Stable, and finding his Horfe yet Sadled he Mounted,and with all {peed rid to Paris;
Villeray in the mean time having notice that his man was come, he commanded they
fhould bring them in; but he was not to be found » nor his Horfe neither, no body
knowing which way he was gone, 2/leroy told the King chat his man was efcaped,
they fent after him on all fides, and Vieroy particularly fenc all his Servants after into
all the ways, ofke coming to Paris about nine of the Clock at night, wentto take
counf; lof the Spazifh Embaffadour , and before day, went out habited like a Spa:
niard, with the Embafladors Steward, and took his way towards Weaux, with an in-
tent to get into Laxembonrg by Pofte.
That every one might endeavourthe apprehending of that Traitor, it was fpread
abroad that one of Wileroy’s Secretaries had attempted upon the Kings Perfon , and
notice was given of his Starure, Age, Cloaths and Horfe. The Sheriffs of every
Countrey were in queft, and ali Poft- Mafters were forbidden to let out any Horfes,
but chat of Afeaux had notice of it too late, Lofte was got on Horfeback already,but
affoon as he began to gallop, his Horfe fell to the ground, and was an ill Owes to the
Riders hegotup again, and fhewed fo much fearfulnefs in his Countenance,that the
Poftillion him(elf thought he had committed fome notorious villany, which he did
run for, Being come home,he gave notice of it to his Mafter,who fufpecting himto
be the man enquired off, he gave notice of itto the Sheriff, whoprefently made after
him at the fecond Ferry of la Ferte fonds Fouare , where he was Croffing the River :


the


of Michael Noftradamus. 49:
the Sheriff cried after the Ferry man co come back, but the fear of hig lifes which &}: 4
two run aways put him into, prevailed upon him, above the Sheriffs commands; bé.
ing got over , and judging that their Poft-Horfes fhould be quickly overcaken bj
thofe of the Sheriff, they forfook them and che Poftillon : and trufted to their héé).
in the datkne(s of the night among the Bufhes and Brambles that are upon the Rive;
€Marne. The Sheriff fcattered his men all about, caufed fires to be made, and ra:
fed up all the Countrey people thereabouts the Spaniard ran over the Champi: 1:
Countrey, and Lo/te went from Buth to Buth , and whether accidentally or wiliül},
he fell into the River Marne, where he was drowned 5_ the next day his Hat was found
between two pofts, and his body two days after not far from that place,


Thus you may plainly fee the full event of thofetwo famous Prophecies, contain
ed inthis fixch Stanza.


VIL.
French.
La Sangfue au Loup fe joindra,
Lors qu’en Mer le bled defaudrä,
Mais le grand Prince fans envie,
Par Ambafiade luy donra,
De fon bled pour luy donner vie,


Pour un befoing s'en pourvoira.


Englith.

The Leech will joyn it felf to. the Wolf,
When in the Sea Corn fhall be Wanting,
But the great Prince witbout envy,
By Embafly fhall give him,
Of bis Corn io give him life,
Of which in bis need he [ball make provifron.

| ANNOT,

By the Leech is underftood the Spaniard. By the Wolfis meant the French, by
reafon of the multitude of thofe Creatures in that Kingéom the meaning therefore
of this Prophecy is, chat there fhould bea great famine in Spain,wherein the Spania à
fhould be conftrained to make his application to. the Fresch for relief of C crn, which


thould:be granted him, This happened in the year 1665 for you muft underftarid
that moft of chefe laft Prophecies were to be fulfilled in the Reign of Henry IV:
: VIII,
French,
Un peu devant l'ouvért Commerce,
Ambafladeur viendra de Perfe,
Nouvelle au Franc Pats porter,
Mais non receu vaine efperance,
A fon grand Dieu fera I’cflenle,
Feignant dele vouloir quitter:


The true Prophecies


Englith.

A little before that Trade fball be open,

An Embaffador fball come from Perfia,

To bring news into France,

But be fhall not be received, ,O vain hope!

To bis great God {ball the offence be,

F aining that be would leave bim.

ANNOT.
In the year 1608, the year before the Truce was concluded between the Spaniard

ad the Hollanders , by whichall free Commerce was opened through Ewrope., The "al
King of Perfis being then in War with che great Turk , fent an Embaffador to all the |


_Chriftian Princes, and chiefly into Frasce, tomove them to make a diverfion in |
fo fit a time, but he could prevail nothing, and went back again-re énfecta, which he |


chought to be a great injury done to his Prophet Mahomet.
1X.
French.

Deux Eftendars du cofté de l'Auvergne,
Seneftre pris, pour un temps prifon regne,
Et un Dame enfant voudra mener,

Au Cenfuart, mais difcouvert l'aflaire,

Danger de mort, murmure fur la Terre,

Germain, Baftille, Frere & Sœur prilonier.

Englifh.

Two Standards in the County of Auvergne,

The left one taken, for a while Prifon fhall reign,

And a Lady fbali endeavour to carry a child

To the Cenfuart, but the plot being difcovered,

Danger of Death, murmur upon Earth,

Own Brother, Baftille, Brother and Sifter prifoners.

fF A N N O A À
This Stanz being moft obfcure and difficult, cannot be underftood fo well by
parcels , as by laying down the whole Sysopjis of it, which I do the more willingly,
bectufe I think it will be delightful to che Reader , and chat the whole being known,
the meaning of every particular will eafily be underftood,
charles the IX. King of France , the laft of the Houfe of Valois left only one natu-

ral Son , called the Earlof Aavergne, who had a Sifter by the Mothers fide, chat
was called Henrietta de Balzac Duchefs of Perneuil, once Miftrifs to Henry the LV,
by whom the had upon promifs of marriage oneSon, atthistime Duke of Vernueil,
and Governour of Languedoc ; butthis promifs being made void by A& of Parlia-
ment, Henry IV. married Mary of cMedicis , by which he had iflue Lewis the XIII,
and other children: now upon the difcontent of the Marfhal of Biren, the Dutchefs
of Vernenil, the Earl of Asvergue her Brother, and cheir party joyned with him for
the promoting of the Duke of Vérnenil’s intereft tothe Crown, whereupon the King
fent for the Earl of Auvergne, who was then in his County a hundred Leagues from


Paris, but the Earl trufting more the good will of the Citizens of Clermont in An-
wergne


of Michael Noftradamus, 46s


vergne who loved him, then to the Kings Clemency, neglected to come, whe; eupon
the King fentagain the Lord d'Efewres with pardon for what was paft ; he pro-
mifed to come when he {hould fee his pardon Signed and Sealed in good form ; the
King was offended at his proceeding, and took it very ill that a Subje@ of his would
capitulate with him , who intended to deal plainly and fincerely ; the King never-
thelefs paft that over for many confiderations, one of them was that the Earl wes of
the blood of France , and brother by the Mother to one. that had been his Miftrefs;
befides that he was a Prince endowed with may good qualities ; moft of which did
Sympathife with chofe of the King , thus che King {ent him his Patdonas well fot
What was paft, as for the prefent, but with this previlo that he fhould coihe; fot
all this, he dtd not ftir out of Clermont ; the King feeing that, did refolve to have
him at any rate : chere was feveral propofitions made for to take him: at Hunting,
at running of the Ring, at fome Banquet, in the Fields, inthe Citys all chefe ways
might be (ufpected by the Earl, but anew one was found out » of which bé himfelé
was the Author; the Troop of the Duke of Vende{me was preparing for to Mutter,
the Earl intreated d’£uyre Lieutenant of the {aid company , that it might be in the
Fields by Clermont towards Nonnain, becaufe he intended to take revenge inthe be-
halt of a Lady , upon the Inhabitanis of that place. The King fent dire@tions and
orders to d’£yrre, how he fhould govern himfelf in that action » and gave him for
Aflociates, /a Bowlaye, Lieutenant of the Marquels of Vernueil’s Troop, and Nereflan :
Colonel ofa Foot Regiment, By the Kings advice they imparted the bufinels to
the Vifcount of Pont du Chaffeaw, tothe Baron of Canillac and tome others, that had
authority in that Province, and were devored to the Kings fervice , and all keeping
religioufly che Laws of filence.’ The 12 of November the Troop met at the Rendez:
vous ; the Earl came thither by times with wo only of his followers , thinking thac
the Troop fhould not be ready fo foon, and fo he fhould have pretext either to go
back to Clermont, or to goon further to vifichis Mitrefs, The prudence and dili-
gence of thofe that managed the bufinefs did prevent him , and begot a fufpition in
him, for he was feen totru(s up his Cloak and to try whither his {word did not fick
tothe Scabbard. D’Ewrre went to him, and having complemented him rode on his
left hand, while the Troop was fetting inorder, Nereffan came to (alute him on the
other fide, androdeon his right hand , being followed by three flout Souldiers, ha-
bited like Lackeys , and appointed for this action. “The Vifcount of dy Pent dé
Chaffeas and his brother rode out of the Troop and encompaffed him on all fides.
One of the Souldiers laid hold on the Horfes Bridle; d’Eurreat the {ame time laid
hold on his Swords Hite, faying, my Lord, we are commanded by the King to give
him an account of your perfon , and we intreat you to fubmit unto his Majelties
good pleafure, char we may have no occafion to ufe you otherways then we defire,
Maifon-vike and Lizerne who were his two followers drew their Swords, think:ne co
make him way toefcape, but fome thor {pent upon them , made them prefently re
tireandrun away. He was put upon a Trumpeters Nag as far as Briare, and thence
conduéted to Montargis in a Coach , and alrerwards by water to Paris and pucin the
Bañtille. KE M: ru :

By this Hiftory, and the explication of the word Cenfuart, which Is an ancient word
derived from the Latine word Cenfor\ and taken here for the Kinglyoffice; the whole
Prophecy is eafily underftood, and obvieus to the meaneft capacity,


The truc Propheies


X.
French.
Embaffadeur pour une Dame,
A fon Vaiffau mettra la rame,
Pour prier le grand Medecin,
Que de l’Ofter de telle peine,
Mais a ce s’oppofera Roine,
Grand peine avant qu’en voir la fin.
Englifh.
An Embaffador for a Lady,
Shall fet Vares to his Ship,
To intreat the great Phyfition,
To take ber out of fuch pain,
But a Queen fhall oppofe it,
A great deal of trouble before the end of it.
ANNOT.
This Prophecy is concerning Mary Stwart Queen of Scots put in Prifon by Queen


Elizabeth , whois called here the opponant Queen, to che Embaffy that the faid
Queen of Scots fent for relief to the King of France, called here the great Phyfitian,


XI.
French.

Durant le Siecle on verra deux ruiffeaux,
Tout un terrouer inonder de leurs eaux,
Et fubmerger par Ruifleaux & Fontaines,
Coups, & Monfrein Beccoyran & Alais,

Par le Gardon bien fouvent travaillez,

Six cens & quattre, Ales & trente Moines.


Englifh.
In this Age two Rivolets fball be feen,
To overflow a whole Countrey with their waters,
And to drown by Rivolets and Fountains,
Coups, and Monfrein, Beccoiran and Alais,
By the Gardon often tronbled,
Six bundred and four Alais, and thirty Monks.
ANNOT.

An Age isthe fpace of one hundred years, the meaning therefore of this is, that
within che Age following, his Prophecies namely as he faith after, in che year 1664,
there thall be great Inundation in Languedoc, caufed by the overflowing of two fmall
Rivers, befides that of Garden, which Inuadation fhall drown thefe following places,
Coups, Monfrein , Becoyran and Alais , befides, and Abbey wherein there was 30,
Monks,but of this I could find nothing in the Hiftory therefore thofe that live about
thofe places muft make it good,


French.


of Michaël Noftradamus.


XII
Freach.


Six cens & cing tres grand nouvelle,
De deux Seigneurs la grand querelle,
Proche de Gewaudan era,
En une Eglife apres l’offrande,
Meuttre commis, preftre demande,
Tremblant de peur fe fauvera,
Enghifhi:
In fix hundred and five [ball be great news
The quarrel of two great Lords,
Shall be near Gevaudan,
In a Church after the Offering,
A murder committed, the Prieft fhall ask,
And quaking for fear, fall fave bimfelf.
ANN OT.
This (liketheformer) is a patticuler accident,of which the publick Hiftory taketh
nornotice sit feemeth that:in the year 1665. in Gevaudan, a Province of France
near Languedoc y there was a great quarrel between two Lords who meeting at


Church, did about the time of the Offering fet one upon another, and one of them
was killed, whereupon the Prieft being terrified, ran away.


X ITE
French,
L’aventurier, fix cens, & fix ou neuf,
Sera furpris par fiel mis dans un Oeuf,
Et peu apres fera hors de puiflance,
Par le puiffant Empereur General,
Qu'ou Monde neft an pereil ny efgal;
Dent un chafcun luy rend obeiffance.
Eoglifh.
The adventurer, fix hundred, fix or wine,
Shall be furprifed by Gall put into an Egge,
And a little while after fball be out of power,
By the potent Emperour General, |
To whow in the world there is not bis like or equal,
Wherefore every one yieldeth obedience to him.
ANNOT. a
This Prophecie was concerning the Dukeof Savoy'and Henry the IV, for about
that time mentioned by the Author, after the death of Marfhal de Biren, who fided
with the Duke of Savoy (which death is called here Gall put into an Ege; )the Duke
of Savoy refufed to perform che treaty concerning the refticution of the Marquifate
of Saluces, wherefore Henry the TV went and fubdued moft of his Countrey, and
compelled him to give the Province of Breffe inftead of the faid Marquifate,
SEF Freach,


3


The true Prophecies


X TY.
French,

Au grand Siege encor grand forfaits,
Recommenceant plus que jamais,
Six cens & cing fur la verdure,
La prife & reprife fera,
Soldats es Champs jufqu’'en froidure,
Puis apres recommencera.


Englifh.

At the great Siege yet great imildemeanots:

eee Si
Beoinning again more than ever

5 fos Tha

Six bundred and five about the § pring,
The taking and retaking fall be;
Souldiers in the frelds til! Winter,
And after that foall begin again.


ANNOT.


This Stanza is about’ the fame fubjedtas the precedent: By the great Siege here is
meant the Siege: of Afoaipeiian, the ftrongeft placein Savoy,’ which Henry the lV,
tooks and by m compelled: the Dakd-of: Savoy to an agreement, : Thereftiis


caite.


XV. x fs
French.

Nouveau efieu Patron du grand Vaifleau,
Verra long temps briller Je grand flambeau
Qui fert de Lampe’a ce grand territoire,

Et auquel temps Armées foubs fon nom,
Jointes a celles de l’heureux de Bourbon,
Levant, Ponant, & Couchant fa memoire.


Englifh.
The new cle£ted Mafter of the great Ship,
Shall a great while fee the great light bine,
Which ferveth for a Lamp to this great Territory,
And at which time Armies under his name


Foyned with thofe of happy of Bourbon,


Ea LA Weft, and North his memory hall be.
ANNOT.


The three firft Verfes are concerning Clement the VIII, who was elected Pope


about chat time; and was Inftrumental to make a Peace between the Ki
andthe. Duke of Sevey, and: was Pope a good while,


By the great Ship ismeantthe Church, of which heis called Matter. The reft


ng of France


French.


os =a =


ap,


qui


Of Michael Noftradamus.


XVI,
French,


En OGoebre Six cens & cing,
Pourvoieur du MonftreMarin,

Prendra duSouverain le crefme

Ou en fix cens & fix en Fuin, |
Grand joye aux Grands & au Commun,
Grand faits apres ce grand Baptefme.


Englifh.
In Oftober fix hundred and five,
The Purveyer of the Sea Monfter ,
Shall take the unttion of the Sovereign,
Or in fix hundred and fix in June, :
Great joy [ball be to the Great ones, and tothe Commons.
Great feats fball be after this great Baptifin.


ANNOT.

Inthe year 1606. the 14 of September, inftead of which the Printer hath put O¢fe-
ber, the Dolphin of France, Lewis the XIII, fonto Henry the IV. was Chriftened
with his two Sifters at Fountainbleau, and becaufe the Ceremonies were extraordina-
ry, and our Author calleth this a great Baptifm, it will not be amifs for che fatisfa@i-
on of the curious Reader, to give here fuccinétly a defcription of ir. ;

In the great quadrangle of the Caftles Yard, was erected a great Theatre, all
fpread and hanged with moft rich Garpets and Hangings, inthe middle of which
Theatre was a {quare of thirty foot oneach fide, with rails about it, all covered with
Carpets, in the front of it was erected an Altar, adorned with the @rnaments be-
longing to the Order of the Holy Ghoft, behind the Table was a Footftool of three
fteps, fpread with Carpets, and in the middle of the Footftool was a kind of a Stand,
covered with a Silver Cloth, upon which were the Fount, covered with a moft ex-
quifite Towel, and a Canopy over it, on both fides of the Alrars were two Scaf-
folds for two Quires of Mufick, anda little lower on the right hand a Bench covered
with Carpets for the Prelates to fit, among which were three Archbifhops, nine
Bithops and three Abbots, onthe left hand were the Lords of the Councel, and bee
fore the Altar was the Cardinal of Gesdy, encompaffed with Almoners and Chap-
lains, and a great multitude of Spectators feated upon Benches, in form of a Theatre,
round about the Theatre were the guard of Switzers, having every onea Torch in his
hand

The Dolphin and his Sifters were in their Chambers upon Beds of State, with
their Robes lined with Hermines, and were brought to the quadrangle, the waiting
Gentlemen going before with Torches in their hands, with the Bed Chamber men,
and Gentlemen of the Chamber, five Drums, Waits, and Trumpeters, Heralds,and
the Knights of the Holy Ghoft, with the three Honours ; in the firft, for the young-
eft Daughter, the Ewer, the Bafon, the Pillow, the Wax Taper, the Chrifme, the
Saltfeller, were carryed by the Baron, Son to Marthal dels Chaffre, by the Lords
Montigny, la Rochepot, Chemerand, Liencourt, Fervacques, and the Lady was carryed
by the Marfhal of Bos Dauphin, followed by Charles Duke of Lorrain Godfather,and
of Don Fuan de Medicis Brother tothe great Duke ot Tn/ca»y, reprefenting Chriftian,
Banghtes to the Dukeof Lorrain, and Wife se a great Duke. Afte: FAIRE

2 the


B50 T be truce P ropheies


the Durches of Guife, the Counteffes ofGwiche, of Saulx, the Marchionefs Moxlanr,
and other Ladies.

The Marthals of Laverdin, and of la €haftre, the Dukes of Silly, of Monbazos, of
Ejpernos, of Efguillon did the {ame office forthe elder Lady. The Lerd of Ragny
caryed her for Diaua Dutchefs of Angoule(me, whodid repiefent the Infante, Clara,
Eugenia, Enfabella, Archidutchels ot axftria, followed: by the Durchefs of Rehan,
CHontmoréncy, Mayenne.

The third Honour for the Dolphin was.carried by the Earl of Fasdemont, the
Knighe of Vendome his elder Brother, the Duke of CAenfier, the Earl of Soiffons,
and the Prince ot County, all three Princes of the Blood, and the Dolphin was carryed
by the Lord So#uray his Governour, in the room of the Prince of Coude, firft Prince
of the Blood, whobecaule of his ficknefs could do him no other fervice then to hold
him by the hand, The Dake of Gaife carryed his Train, and the Cardinal of Foy-
oxfe followed him, reprefenting the Pope Pau/ the V, then followed Eleonor Wife
to Vincent Duke of Mantua, and che Prinzefs of the Blood, all richly attired,

The Dolphin being brought upon the Table of the quadrangle, the Cardinal of
Gendy appointed for this Cererony, camenear him, and having heard him anfwer
pertinently co che queftions asked by the Almoner according to the ufualforms, and
to fay the Lords Prayer and the Creed in Latine, he was exercifed, appointed, and
by the Cardinal of Foyoufe Legat, named Lewis,

The Ladies were afterwards brought upon the Table, and the eldeft, named
Elizabeth by the Datchels of Axgoule/me, reprefenting the Archidutchefsher God-
mother, without any Godfathe::

The youngeft was named by Dos Fuan of Medicis(reprelentins the great Dutchefs)
Chriftierne,

At Supper the King was waited upon by the Princefsof his Blood ; the Prince of
Condé ferved for Pantler, the Prince of Compty for Cupbearer, the Duke of Monpen-
fier for Squire Carver, the Earl of Soifows tor high Steward, the Duke of Guife and
the Earl of Vowdemont waited upon the Queen, and the Duke of Su//y waited upon
the Legat. The Godfathers fat, and a ter them the Princeffes, Ladies and Lords of
high quality, at che greac Ball the Duke of Lorrais did precede by the Kings order,
for the only confideration that he was Godfather,

The next day chéte was a runing at the Ring,and at night the Duke of Swdly caufed
an artificial Caftle to be affaulted with an innumerable quantity of Squibs, Chambers,
Canon fhots, and other Fire Works, but never any thing was feen more incredible
or wonderful, then the beauty, ornament and luftre of the Princefles and Ladies of
the Court; The Eyes could not ftedfaftly behold the fplendor of the Gold, nor
the brightnefs of the Silver, nor the glittering of Jewels; the Princes and Lordsdid
out vie one another who fhould be moft richly attired, among thereft the Duke of
Efpernon had a Sword valued at 30000. Crowns, and upon the Queens Gown were
32000, Pearls, and 3000, Diamonds.


XVII.

French, ;

Au mefme temps un grand endurera,

Joyeux, malfain, l'an complet ne verra
Et quelques uns qui feront de la fefte,

Fefte pour un feulement, a ce jour, . |

Mais peuapres fans faire long fejour, |

Deux fe donront l'un l’autre de la tefte.


> |


of Michael Noftradamus. : Sor


Ha, LY
Englith,
un F = 6 . > a
$ LE ! At the fame time a great one fall fuffer,
APHY = à . : À
| Joyful, fickly, fhall not fee the year courpleat,
) | ÿ 4 . we
a, 0 And fome others who fall be of the feaft.
A feaft for one only at that day, :
the But alittle while after without long delay,
HH) % .
he | Two fhall knock one another in the head:
a AMT | à
ne À | ANNOT, |
hi M This Stanza hath relation to the precedent , for about the time of, or a little be:
ie fore that famous Chriftning died Pope Leo the IX, formerly called Cardinal of F/0- Wh
Wits rence, who did not live a whole year in the Papacy, and is called here Foyful, Sickly, nD
| becaufe though infirm,he did much rejoyce in the obtaining of it; thofe others thac iy
lof were of the Feaft, were {ome Cardinals of his party, who died alfo within the fame |
alver year. } À |
and The two laft Verfes fignifie che differences that happened between Paul V, his
ad Succeflor, and the Common-wealth of Venice prefently after his death. fe
| " 3 f fie |
| XVIII.
me M French. |
0


Confiderant la trifte Philomtele,
Qu'en'pleurs & cris fa plainte renouvelle,
Racourciffant par tel moyen.fes jours,
col à Six cens & cing elle en verra l’ytlue,


Tr A tet ag Ro ER PRET ESE


mo De (on tourmenr, ia la toile cifftie,

rad Por fon moien feneftre aura fecours. |
ipon M |
ea English.

de, D Confidering the fad Philomela,


Who in tears and cries renewetb ber camplaint, |
Shurtaing by fuch means ber days
Six hundred and five fhall fee the end
ésof Of ber torment, then the Cloath W over, |
By ber finifter means foall baue help, i]


AN NOT. |

This fad Philometa was Henrietta of Balzac Daughter to Francis of Balzac, Mat:

quefs of Entragues, and Miftrefs to Henry the IV. who being found guilty of a Con:

{piracy againft the State , was confined to the Abbey of the Nuns of Beaumont lez

Tours, where fhe was feven Months, after which the King taking pitty of her, pafled |

a Declaration, wherein in re{peët of his former Love, and of the Children that hé

| had by her, he forgave her all what was paft , did abolifh and fupprefs for ever the

| Memory of the Crime that fhe was accufed off , and did difpenfe her from appearing

| beforethe Parliament, who inher abfence did Regifter her Letters of Pardon the

6. of September 1605, Thus Reader you may fee how punctual was out Author in his
Prognoftications:


w


French


T be true Prophecies


XIX.
French.


Six cens & cinq, fix cens & fix & fept,
Nous monftrera jufques l’an dixfept,
Du boutefeu I’Ire, haine & envie,

Soubs l’Olivier d’affez long temps cache,
Le Crocodil fur la Terre a cache,

Ce quieftoit mort fera pour lors en vie.


Englifh.
Six bundred and five, fix hundred and fix and feven,
Will fbew us unto the year fewentcen,
The anger of the bontefen, bis hatred and envy,
Under the Olive-Tree a great while hidden,
The Crocodile upon the ground hath hidden,
What was dead, [ball then be alive.


ANNOT,


This Stanza is fo difficult, fignifieth nothing but the confufions that have happened
in France from the year 1605. to the year 1917. which would be too tedious and
prolix hereto relate, the Reader may fee them inthe French Hiftory,


NX
French.


Celuy quia par plufieurs fois,

Tenu la Cage & puis les bois,

Rentre a fon premier eftre,

Vie fauve peu apres fortir,

Ne fe fcachant encor cognoiftre,

Cherchera fubje& pour mourir.

Englifh.

He that hath many times,

Been in the Cage and in the Woods,

Cometh again to his firft being,

And ball go ont a little after with his life fafe,

And not able yet to know bimfelf,

Shall feck a fubjeét to be put to death.
ANNOT.


This is yet concerning the Earl of Auvergne half Brother to the Dutchefs of Yer-
seuil, who for his mifdemeanours having been put feveral times in the Baftille, and


‘et free again, neverthele(s was attempting ftill ome new thing, which might have
endangered his life.


of Michael Noftradamus.


XXE
French,
L'Autheur des maux commencera Regner}
En Ian fix cens & fept fans efpatgner,
Tous les {ubjects qui font a Ja Sangfiie,
Et puis apres s’en viendra peu a peu,
Au franc Pais rallumer fon feu; D xu 25h 39
S'en retournant d’ou elle eft ifluie;


Englifh:

The Author of evils fhall begin to Reign,

In the year fix hundred and fewen without paving,

All the fubjetts that belong tothe Leech,

And afterwards fhall come by little and little,

To the free Countreyto kindle again his fire,

Going back again from whence it came.

_ ANNOT, “oh
The Author being a zealous Roman Catholick, calls here the Hollanders the Ad-

thors of evils, who in the year 1607; and 1 608, made 2 Stievous War, and had feve-


ral fucceffes againft the Spaniard, with the help of the French.and Englifh,cill che year


1609, when by the mediation of the French and English Embafladors. the Truce was


concluded at Antwerp , between the Arch-duke and the States of the United Pro
winces, the Articles of it to the number of 38. were folemnly ptoclaimed and pub-


lifhed the ninth of April , and ratified by the King of Spain in the Month of Faly
next enfuing. hag


XXIT

French,
Cil qui dira defcouvrifant l'affaire,
Comme du mort,la mort pourra bien faire,
Coups de Poniards par un qu’auront induits,
Sa fin fera pis qu’il n’aura fait faire,
La fin conduit les hommes fur Ja Terre,
Gueté par tout, cant le jour que la nuit,


Enohifh.

He that fhall fay difcovering the bufinefs,
How of the dead, can make a death well,
Strokes of a Dagger by one that hath been induced to it,
His end fhall be worfe then he bath caufed to be done,
The end leadeth all men upon the Earth,
Efpied every where, as well by day as by wight.

ANNOT,


This Stanza is wholly abftrufe and Enigmatical , therefore I will mot pretend to


expound it » but leave the interpretation tothofe chat have more time and leafure
thenI,


French,


The true Prophecies
XXII.
French,


Quand la gfand Nef, la prove & Gouvernail,
Du franc Pais, & fon Efprit vital,

Defcueils & flots par là Mer fecovée,

Six cens & fept & dix cœur afliegé,

Et des reflux de fon corps afflige,

Sa vie eftant fur ce mal renovee.


Englifh.
When the great Ship, the Prow, and Rudder,
Of the French Countrey, and ber vital Spirit,
Being toffed by Baks and Waves,
Six bundred and feven, and ten, a heart befet,
And by the ebbing of bis body afflicted,
Her Life being upon this, evil knotted again.
ANNOT.

This Stanza fignifieth the great troubles chat were in France from the year 1610:
ae Hepry the LY, died, to the year 1617. in which the Maïfhal d'Ascréwas

ed.

This man was named Cancino Concini à Florentine born, who in alittke time was
grown very great, and from a bafe extraction had afcended to the dignity of Marfhal
of France, by the favour of the Queen Regent Mary of Medicis, and grew fo rich,
chat he offered to the King to maintain at his own charge 6000, foor, and 800,
Horfes for four Months together ; he had made himfelf Matter of many ftrong Places
in Picardy and Normandy , went about to buy the Government of feveral Provinces,
did difpofe of the Kings Exchequer at his pleafure, and fpent vaft fums of money at
his Mafters charge. His infolencies were the caufe of his ruine, when he thought
leat of it; for he threatned every one with words and deeds, fo far as to fay, that he
would caufe them to eat up their fingers, that fhould oppofe his Will, and fo caufed
many Officers and Souldiers of the contrary party to be puttodeath, Fhe King
Lewis the XIII, was particularly informed-of the unfufferable pride and mifdemea-
nors of this Marfhal, and that his defign was to keep up thé War in France, to con-
tinue his Authority and Power; therefore the King commanded Vitry, the Captain
of his Guards, to apprehend him, This was a difficult thing, becaufe that the Mar-
thal ( befides his Menial fervants ) had always twelve Guards wearing his Livery,that
were delperate fellows; there wasalfo another difficulty , becaufe no body could
tell , when or at what time he would come to che Lonure ; neverthelefs ac laft he
cameto it, upon the 24, of April 1617. attended with a great Train and his Guards ;
the great Gate was opened tohim, and prefently (hut again, Vitry drew near to him,
and holding his ftaff to him, faid, Iarreft you in the Kings name, upon thefe words the
Marfhal ftept back, as if it were to make refiftance, faying, Me ¢ whereupon thofe
that were with Vitry fhot three Piltols at him,one did hic him in the Heart, the other
in the Head, and the third in the Belly, fo that he fell down dead immediately
upon his left fide, a certain Lord that was on his right hand {peaking with him,
fell.down alfogvithout any hurt, but his followers fecingshim dead run away,

This death was the canfe of great.alterations in the publick Government. The
body of the faid Marfhal was buried at St. Germain de L'aux errois, but the people
digged ic out, and dragged it tothe new Bridge, where they hanged it by the feet

upon


of Michael Noftradamus. sos


upon a Gibbet, having cut off his Nofe, his Ears.and his privy parts, then they took
him down, and dragged him through the Town, and afterwards burntit, Thus did
perith be that was worth about two Millions of Pounds Sterling, and pretended to
make his houfe perpetual and Sovefeign, The new Officers chat had’ governed the
State from the 24 of November to the 24 of April 1617, were arrefted in their


pues and the old ones pur in again, and the Princes called back again to the
oure. x


XX IV,
French.
Le Mercurial non de trep longue vie,
Six cens & huit & vingt; grand maladie,
Ec encor pis danger de feu & d’eau,
Son grand amy lors luy fera contraire,
De tels hazards fe pourroit bien diftraire,
Mais bref, le fer luy fera fon Tombeau.
Englith.
The Mercurial not too long lived,
Six hundred-and eight and twenty, a great fickuefs,
And what is worfe a danger of fire and water,
His great friend then fhall be againft bin,
He might well avoid thofe dangers,
But a little after, the Iron fhall make bis Sepulcher.


y AN NjOT,


i


. This is. concerning. Lewis the XIII. King of France. who fell dangeroufly fick of
the Plague at Lions,about the year 1628; after thac went with his Army into Savey,
where he efcaped many dangers of fire,and water., As forthe Verfeit muft not be
underftood , as if he had been killed, but that the cares he took abont his Armies
fhould fhorten his days.; . The fourth Verfe is to be underftood of the Lord Belling-
ham, then favorite to the King , who forfook him in his ficknefs , for which he was
afterwards difgraced, and could never come into favour again:
XX Vs
French.
Six cens & fix, fix cens & neuf,
Un Chancelier gros comme un Bœuf
Vieux comme le Phenix,du Monde,
En ce Terroir plus ne luira,
De Ja Nef doubly paflera,
Au Champs Elyfrens faire ronde.
_ Englifh.
Six hundred and fix; fix hundred and nine,
A Chancellorbig as an Oxe,
Old as the Phoenix of the World,
Shall fbine 20° more in this Countreÿ,
_ Shall-pafs from the Ship of forgetfulnefs
Inia the Elyfian Fields to go the round.
AIA Tee ANNOT


à ‘


omer


806 The true Prophecies


ANNO T,
Six and nine joyned together makes 15. the meaning of this therefore is, thar a-
bout the year.1615. fhould:die the Chancellor of Frasce , who was then Nicolas
Bralart Lord of Sillery a very corpulent man,
XX VI,
French.
Deux freres font de l’ordre Ecclefiaftique,
Dont l’un prendra pour la France la pique,
Encor un coup fi l'an fix cens & fix,
N’eft afflige d'une grand maladie,
Les Armes en main jufques fix cens & dix,
_Gueres plus loing ne s'étendant {a vie.
Englih,
Two Brothers are of the Ecclefiaftical Order,
One of which fhall take up the Pike for France,
Once more, if inthe year fix hundred and fix,
He be not afflicted with a great ficknefs,
The Weapons in his hands till fix hundred and ten,
His Life fhall reach not much further.
ANNOT,

Inthe year 1606, there was two Brothers of the Houfe of Foyeufe, one called
Francis Cardinal of Feyenfe, and the other a Capuchin Frier,the reft of the Brothers
being dead without iffue, Father Angel got a difpenfarion from the Pope to go out
‘of his Covent;sad to Marry, thacthe Family might not be extinguifhed, and fo turn-
ed Courtiet and Souldier again, till he’ had got a Daughter’, who was afterwards
martied to thé Duke of Guifes after that,remembring his Vows,he turned Capuchin
again, and alicclewhile while after died, coming from Reme to Paris.

XX VII.

French.
Celefte feu du cofte d’Occident,
Et du Midy courir jufqu’au Levant,
Vers demy morts fans point trouver racine,
Troifiefme Age a Mars le Belliqueux,
Des Efcarboucles on verra briller feux,
Age Efcarboncle, & a la fin famine.

Englith.
A Ceeleftial fire on the Weft fide,
And from the South fhall run to the Eaft,
W arm, half dead,and incapable.to find Koots,
The third Age to Mars the Warrionr,
Out of Carbuncles fires fhall be feen to fhine,
The Age foall be a. Carbuncle, bat in the end famine.


Tony ANNOT;


we
ye


of Michael Noftradamus.


i 4,7 Ma 3 3cAN N OFS
This fighifies nothing but'the troubles. chat were all France over, from: the year
1620, to the year 1628, when Rechel was taken, and the great famine chat was in the


| year 1626,
| XX VIEL


French.
L’An mil fix cens & neuf ou quatorziefme,
Le Vieux (baron fera Palquésxen Careime,
| Six cens & fix par elcrit le mettra,
| Le Medecin de tout;cecy s'eftonné,
A me{me temps afligné en perfonne,
Mais pour certain l’un deux, comparoiftra. ij
. Englifh, '
In the year a thoufand fix buddred and nine or fourteen,
The old Charon fhall Celebrate Eafter in, Lent, |
| Six bundred and fix fball put it imwriting,
| The Phyfician wondereth at allthis,
' At the fame time being Cited in per/oe,
But for certainÿone of them hall appear.


St ea RTE RE


—


| | * ANN OT, cs }
ed This figeifietti chat about-the time mentioned by. the; Author, fome great one |
us | fhould be very fick'in Lent, and fhould.eat flefh , which is called hereto Celebrate | |
QUE Eajfter in Lent s.and chat his Phyfician wondering ac it fhould fall fick himfelf , and |
m that without failjone of them two fhould die.
rds | f XXX: |
a French. |


| Le Criffon fe peut apprefter,
Pour a l’ennemy relifter,
Er renforcer bien fon Armée,
Autrement l'Elephant viendra,
Qui d'un abord le fürprendra,
| Six cens & huit «Mer enflammée.
| | Englith.
|| The Griffin may prepare bimfelf;
| To refifithe Enemy; |
And to frengthen bis Army,
Otherways the Elephant fball come, i
Who on a fudden [ball furprife bint,
Six hundred and eight,the Sea fhall be inflamed.
ANNOT.
By the Griffin was meant the Hollanders, who were warned here to beware of the
Elephant, thatis, the Spaniard , and¢o ftrengthen their Army for fear of being fur-
prifed,
| ms LA TA Ttt 2 The
on eran: ‘|


The true Propbecies


The laft Verfe fignifieth, thac in the year 1608, there (hould be a notable Sea-
fight, which was then frequent enough between the faid Hollanaers and Spaniard,


French, se ty
Dans peu de temps Medicin du grand mal, r


Et la Sangfue d'ordre & rang inegal,
Mettront le feu ala branche d Olive,
Pofte courir d’un & d’autre cofte,
Et par tel feu leur Empire accofté,
Se rallumant du franc finy falive,
Englifh.
Within a little while the Phyfician of the great difeafe,
And the Leech, of order and rank unequal,
Shall fet fire'to the branch of Olive, . |
Pofts fhall run to and fro, |
And with {uch fire their Empire acquainted, |
Shall kindle again with the French finifhed fpittle. |
AN NOT: |
By the Phyfitian of che great difeafe,is meant the King of France ; and the Leech |
the King of Spain , fo thacit is foretold bere , how they fhall fet fire. to the branch |
of Olive, that is, (hall break the Peace and fall co War, which in the year 1636:
when upon the imprifoning of the Archbifhop of Triers by the King of Spain , be-
caufe he had put himfelf under the Freach Proteétion:, the King of France fent an
Army of 40000, men in the Low-CGountreys , to come with the Prince of Orange at
ne «Maftricht , which quarrel hath continued till the Marriage of the King of France
Wee | with che Infanta of Spain, Daughter to Philip the IV. «The laft Verfe is forced in, |
i a only to make up the rime,


ei ” 2


XXXI. |
French. |


Celuy qui a les hazards furmouté, |
Qui fer, feu, eau, na jamais redouté, fof
Ec du Pais bien proche du Bafacle, Po
D'un coup defer tout le Monde eftonné, |i
ne Par Crocodil eftrangement donné, |
a Peuple ravy de voir un tel {pectacle.

ot Englifh.

Me He that hath overcome the dangers,

That bath never feared Iron, Fire nor Water,

And of the Countrey near the Bafacle,

By a ftroke of Iron (all the World being aftonifbed, )
By a Crocodile firangely given, |
People will wonder to fee fuch a fpettacte.


ANNOT:


et
ach
36;
bee
tn
tat
ie
i


|
|
|
|
|
j


of Michael Noftradamus:
_. ANNOT:!
This Prophecy may admit of two Interpretations : the firft, that Henry the IV.


who was born inthe Province of Beara, notfarfrom Thowlowze , the cheif City of


Languedoc, wherein there isa place upon the River called Balacle, where the Mills
are, who was ftobbed witha knife by Francis Raviflac in the year 1610.


The other is of the laft Duke of a¢oatmorency, who being Governour of Langue-
doc, took up Arms againft the King, in the belialf of the Duke of Orleans, for which


he was beheaded at Thoulonfe at the folicitation of Catdinal Richelies. which happened
about the year 1632. :


XX XI 1
French;
Vin a foifon tres-bon pour les Gendatmes,
Pleurs & foupirs, plaintes, cris, & alarmes,
Le Ciel fer fes Tonnerres pleuvoir,
Feu, eau, & fang le tout meflé enfemble,
Le Ciel de Sol en fremit & en tremble,
Vivant na veuce quil pourra bien voir.
Englith.
Plenty of Wine, very good for Troopers,
Tears, and fighs, complaints, cries, and alarims
Heaven fhall caufe its Thunders to rain,
Fire, water and blood, all mixed together,
The Suns Heaven, quaketh and fbaketh for it ,
No living man hath feen what he way fee then.
ANNOT.

This great plenty of Wine happened in the year 1634, at which time there was
in France fuch plenty of Grapes, that half of them perifhed for want of Veflels to
put them in,and I temember very well, that then whofoever would bring a Poinchon
Veffel, which is che third part ofa Tun, might have ir filled with Grapes for half a


Crown ; and that being my felfat chat time at a Town of Burgundy, called Beaune,
where the beft Wine of France groweth , four of us had one Pottle of Wine Englilb


meafure for one half penny. The reft fignifieth‘no more but the miferies that hap-,


pened in Germany by the Wars that che King of Swedes brought in about the fame
tire,
| XXXIIL
French.

Bien peu apres fera tres-grand miferé,

De pou de Bled qui fera fur la Terre,

De Dauphiné, Provence & Vivarois,

Au Vivarois eft un pauvre prefage,

Pere du fils fera Autrophophage,

Et mangeront Racine & gland du Bois:


Englith;


“ TITS,
«


T he true Propbecies


Englith.
A.little after fhall be a great mifery, :
Of the: fcarcity.of Corn that fball beupon the ground,
Of Dauphine; Provéncé and Vivarôis, |
Ix Vivatols if poor prefave, Lo à
Father of Sonfhall be Antwropoppage,
Ad foall eat Roots aud Acorns of the Wood:


ANNOT,


This came to pafs when the Duke’ of Roba headed the Proteftant party, aad
nade thofe Provinces the feat of the Civil Wars in France, about the year 1640, or


X-X XT V.

French.
Princes & Seigneurs tous fe feront la guerre,
Coufin Germain, le Frere avec le Frere,
Finy? Arby de l'heureux,de Bourbon,
Ye Hierufalem les Princes aimables,
Du fait commis enorme & execrable
Se reflentiront {ur la bourie fans fond.

Englifh,

Princes and Lords fbali war one againft another,
Coufin German’, the Brother againft the Brother,
The Arby finifbed of the happy Bourbon,
The Princes of Hierufalem fo lovely,
Of the enormous and execrable fact cominitted,
Shall reffent upon the bottomlefs Purfe.


ANNOT.


This foretelleth of the Wars that were to be between thé Princes and Lords a
little after the death of Hey che IV. whenthe Marfhal 7’ Ancre took upon him the
edminiftration of affairs by the favour of the Queen Regent Mary of Medicis,


XXXV:

French.
Dame par mort grandement atrifice,
Mere & tutrice au Jang qui la quittee,
Dame & Seigneurs faïts enfants Orphelins,
Par Jes Afpics & par les Crocediles,
Seront furpris forts bourgs, Chafteaux & Villes,
Dieu tout puifiane les garde des malins.


co


ero oo


A


of Michael Noftradamus.


Englifh:
A Lady by death greatly afflicted,
Mother and Tutor to the Blood that bath left ber,
Ladies and Lords made Orphans,
By Afps and by Crocodiles,
Shall ftrong holds, Caftles,and Towns be fur prifed,
God Almiobty keep them from the wicked.


ANN OF.


That gréat Lady affi@ed by death, and Mother and Tutorto'the Blood that
left her was Mary of Medicis, VWWife to Henry the lV. whoafter the deattrof her Hus*
band was much troubled in her regency by her own Son Lewis the XIII, and feveral
great Lords of his party whence did follow the Battle of Pont de Cé,


XXXVI.
French, |
La grand rumeur qui fera .par la France,
Les impuiflans voudront ayoir puiflance,
Langue emmiellée & vrais Cameleons,
De boutefeus, allumeursde chandelles,
Pyes & Geais, rapporteurs de nouvelles,
Dont la morfure femblera Scorpions.
Englith.
The great rumor that foall be through France,
The impuiffants would fain have power,
Honey Tongues, and true Camelions,
Boutefeux, and lighters of Candles,
Magpies and Fays, carriers of uews,
Whofe biting fhall be like that of Scorpions.
| ANNOT,


This hath a relation to the precedent, and expreffeth farther the ntiféry of thofe


XXX VIE

| French..,,11 25 :
Foible & puiffant feront en.grand difcord,
Plufieurs mourront avant faire l'accord,
Foible ou puiflant vainqueur fe fera dite,
Le plus puiflant au jeune,cedera,
Et le plus vieux dés.deux, decedera,, .
Lors que l’un d’eux envahira l'Empire,


The true Prophecies


Englifh.

The Weak and powerfull fhall be at great variance
Many fball die before they agree,

The weak fhall canfe the powerful to call hin V; ictor,
The moft potent fhall yield to the younger,

And the older of the two fhall die,

When one of the two fhall invade the Empire.


ANNOT,


>


This Prophecie isnot come to pas yet ( for all I know ) therefore I leave the in-
terpretation to every ones liberty, |


XXXVIIL
French.


Par Eau, & par fer & par grand maladie,
Le Pourvoieur a l’hazard de {a vie,
Scaura combien vaut le Quintal de Bois,
Six cens & quinze ou le dixneufiefme,
On gravera d’un grand Prince cinquiefme,
L’Immortel nom fur le pied de la Croix.


Englith.
By Water, by Fire, and by great ficknefs,
The Purveyor to the baxard of bis life,
Shall know how much is worth the Quintal of W ood,
Six hundred and fifteen, or the nineteen.
There [hall be graven of a great Prince the fifth,
The immortal name upon the foot of the Crofs.


ANNOT,


By the Purveyor is meant the King of Franee, as we have {aid before,


The great Prince the V. was Paw/ the V, who was foretold he thould die about
the yéar 1615, 1619, | i


XXXIX.
French.


Le Pourvoieur de Monftre fans pareil,
Se fera voir ainfy que le Soleil.
Montant le long’la ligne Meridienne,
En pourfuivant l'Elephant & le Loup,
Nul Empereur ne fit jamais tel coup, ©
Et rien plus pis a cé Prince n’avienne:


Englith}


of Michael Noftradamus.


Englifh.
The Purveyor of the Monfter without equal,
Shall fhew bimfelf like the Sun,
Afcending in the Meridional line,
In perfecuting the Elephant and the Wolf.
No Emperour did ever fuch an ak,
Ew fh nothing worfe may happen to that Prince.
ANNOT.


This is a Prophecie of the glorious fuccefs that Lewis the XI. was to have
againit the Spaniard in Italy, and the Proteftant party at home.


XL,
French,
Ce qu'en vivant le Pere n’avoit fceu,
I] acquerra ou par guerre ou par feu,
Et Combatra la fangfüe irritée,
Ou jouira de fon bien paternel,
Et favory du grand Dieu Eternel,
Aura bien toft fa Province heritée.


Englith.
That which while he lived the father did not know,
He fhall get it either by Water or by Fire,
And [hall fight with the angry Leech,
Or fhall enjoy bis Paternal goods,
And be favorifed by the great Eternal God,
Shall quickly become Heir of bis Province.


NNO T,


: A
This concerneth the prefent, King of France Lewis the XIV, who hath lately got
by Fire and Sword thofe Provinces in thez


Wives Title, which his father never knew nor attempted,


ow- Countreys to which he laid claim by his


XLE>

French.
Vaiffeaux Galeres avec leur Efténdar,
Sentrebattront pres du Mone Gilbatar,
Et lors fera forfait a Pampelonne,
Qui pour fon bien foufitira mille
Par plufieurs fois fouftiendra'les 4
Mais a la fin unie a la Cofonne:


maux,
aux,


Thetrue P ropbecies


Englifh.
Ships and Galleys-with their Standard,
Shall fight near the Mountain Gilbatar,
And then [ball be endeavoured againft Pampelonne,
Which for her good fhali fuffer a thoufand evils, %
And many times fballrefift the affaults;
But at laft fhall be united to the Crown.
ANNOT, \
This Prophecieth the reduction of the City of Pampelous, the chief City


of the Kingdom of Navarre, under the obedience”of the King of France and Na-
varre,


Xb.

French.
La grand Cité ou eft le premier homme,
Bien amplement la ville ie vous nomme,
Tout en alarme, & le Soldat es Champs,
Par Fer & Eau grandement afiligee,
Et a la fin des Francois foulagee,
Mais ce fera des fix cens & dix ans.

Englith.

The great City where the firft man is,
Fully [name the Town to you,
Shall be alarmed and the Souldier in the field,
Shall be by Fire and Water greatly affiitled,
Aud at laft fhall be helped by the French,
But it fball be from fix hundred and ten years.

‘That great City where the firft man is, is 4mferdam, becaufe the firft Letterand
the laft Sylable of it maketh ‘Adam : But of her affli@tion by Fire and Water, and of
her being relieved by the Frezebin the year 1610. I can fiad nothing in the Hiftory;
thofe that are better furnifhed with Booksichan Iam, may chance to fatisfie theme
felves and others, better than I can do,


XLII
French.


Le petit coin Provinces mutiness,
Par forts Chafteaux fe verront dominées,
Encor un coup par lagent Militaire,
Dans bref feront fortement afliegez,
Mais il feront d’un trefgrand foulagez,
Qui aura fait entrée dans Beaucaire,


| Englifh.
The little corner, Provinces revolted, ;
By ftrong Caftles, fall fee themfelves conmanded,
Once more by the Military Troops,

Within a little while fhall be firongly Befieged;
But fhall be helped by a great one,


That bath made his entry in Beaucaire.
ANNOT.


This little Corner and Provinces revolted are Holland ; and thereft of the Unitéd
Provinces, who are threatned here with many troubles, as they did fuffer till the
Peace of emtunfler,

That great man chat helped them, was the King of France.


XLIV.
French. :


La belle Rofe en la France admirée,
D'un tres-grand Prince a la fin defirée,
Six cens & dix lors naiftront fes amours,
Cinq ans apres lera d’un grand bleflée,

> - +p
Du tract d'Amour elle fera enlaflée,
Si a quinze ans du Ciel recoit fecours,


Englifh,
The faire Rofe admired in France,
Shall at laSt be defired by a great Prince,
Six hundred and ten,then [ball ber love begii,
Five years after fbe fhall be wounded,
With the love of 4 great one fhe fhall be intangled,
If at five years fhe receigeth help from Heaven,
ANNOT.,


This Prophecy was concerning the Match between Lewis the XIII, and ofan of
Anffria Anfanta of Spaces, who were both Married very young,


XLV.

French,
De coup de fer tout le Monde eftonné,
Par Crocodil eftrangement donne,
A un bien grand, parent de la Sangfue,
Et peu apres {era un autré coup,
De guet a pens commis contre le Loup,
Et de tels fairs on en verra l’yifue.


Vvva Faghih,


|
|
|
|
|
{
|


T he true Prophecies
Englifh.

All ihe World being aftonifbed at a blow of Iron,

Strangely g given by a Crocodile,

To a great one, kin to the Leech,

And a little while after HAE blow

On purpofe given againft the Wolf,

And of “fiuch deeds the end [hall be feen.

ANNOT.


I think this needeth no further explication, then chat 1 have given upon the 31,


Stanza,
XLVT.


French.
Les Pourvoieux mettra toutien defroute,
Sanglue & Loup, en mon diréelcoute,
Quand Mars fera au Signe du Mouton,
Joint a Saturne, Saturne a la Lune,
Alors fera ta plus grande infortune,
Le Soleil lors en éxaltation.

Englifh.
The Purveyor fhall put allin diforder,
Leech and Wolf do ye hearken to me,
i Wig Mars fhall be in the Sign of Aries,
Toyned with S aturh, a#d Saturn with the Moon,
i fp ll be iby greateft misfortune,
The Sun being then in its exaltation.

ANNOT.


This is plain, if you remember that by the Purveyor is meant the King of Frante,
by the Leech the King of Spaiz, and by the Wolf the Duke of Savoy,


XV ET:
French:


Le grand d'Honsrie ira dans la Nacelle,

Le nouveau ne fera guerre nouvelle,

A fon voifin, qu’il tiendra: afliecé,

Et le noireau avec fon Altefle.

Ne fouffrira que par trop.on le prefle,

Durant trois ans {es gens tiendra rangé,

Englifh.

The great one of Hungary foall ¢ cv inthe Boat;
The new born [ball make a new War

To his Neighbour, whom he fall Befiege,

And the black one with his Highefe,
Shall not suffer to be owerpreffed, ?
During three years he fhall keep hit Men in order.
ANNOT


Of Michael Noftradamus.
| ANNOT. |
| | This is concerning the King of Bohemia , and his War with the Emperour, who


is called here the great one of Hungary, becaule he is King of it; the black one with his


Highne/s,is the Pals-grave, who after three years broils was defeated at the Battle of
Prage,


XLVUL | il
French. |
Du vieux Charon on verra le Phoenix,
| Eftre premier & dernier des fils,
: À Reluire en France & d’un chafcun aimable,
Regner long temps,avec tous les honneurs: |
| Qu’auront jamais eu fes Predecetleurs, | |
Dont il rendra fa gloire mémorable. |)


1

_ Englifh. | | |

The Phxnix of the old Charon fball be feer, | |]

| To be the firft and laft of the Sons, |


| To fhine in France, beloved of every one,
To Reign a great while with all the honours,
That ever bis Predéceffors had,


By which he foall make bis glory memorable. |


is ANNOT. _ |
No doubt but this'is meant of fome King of France, which is to come: |
XLTX. |

French.


op la AS EAM + + =


Vents & Sol, Fupiter & Mercure,
Augthenteront le genre de nature,
Grande Alliance en France fe fera, |
4 Al Et du Midy là Sanglue de mefine, VOR) |
| Le feu efteint par ce remede extreme; a |
En Terre ferme Olivier plantera,
Englifh,
Vents and Sol, Jupiter aad Mercury;
| | Shall augurent humane kind,
A great Alliance fball be trade in France,
And onthe South the Leech [ball do the fan,
The fire extingnifbed by this extrente remedy s
Shall plant the Ulive-Tree in a firm ground.
zi ANNOT.
By che confent of all Aftrohomers , thofe four bénigne Planets augmeéat gene
ration; ee |
That great Alliance mentioned here, by which the fire was extinguithed, and the |
Qlive-Tree planted in a firm ground, is che Marriage of the prefent King.of France, |
Lewis, the XIV. with the Infanta of Spain , by whichall differences were compofed:


and the Peace firmly fettled; |


French,


T be true Prophecies
Li i 4 s
| French. ni 3111 | |
“Un peu devant ou'apres PArgleterre, +
Par mort de Loup mife aufly bas que terre,
Verra le feu refilter contre l'eau,
Le rallumant avecque telle force,
Du fang humain, deflus ! humaine efcorce,
Faute de pain, bondance decoufteau.


Englifh.
A little while before or after, England,
By the death of the Wolf being put as low as the ground,
Shall fee the fire refist againft the water,
Kindling it again with {uch force,
Of humane blood, upon the bumane bark,


That want of bread and abundance of knives foall be.


ANN OF.


The meaning is,that a little while after or before the faid match mentioned in the
foregoing : England was or fhould be brouzht as low asthe ground ; and that there
fhould be abundance of humane blood fpilled and a great decay of Trade,with Wars,
which is that he calleth, Want of Bread and abundance of knives,


7,

French. :

La Ville qu’avoit en fes ans, |
Combatu I’Injure du temps,
. ° ° ° ||
Qui de fon Vainqueur tient la vie, |
Celuy qui premier la furprit, |
wa Vids re ; . : |
| | | Que peu apres Francais reprit, |


2 7e pr mr A ge A TINT OR BAND


Par Combats encore affoible.


sement ous ET repart ne
Mer”


Englifh:

| The City that bad in her years,

qe Refifted the injury of the times, }

| | And oweth her life to him that overcame her,

Le Being the firft that furprifed it,

1 Which a little while after Francis took again, f
a Being yet weakened with fightings, i


> veneh,


of Michael Noftradamus.
Lit
| French.
La grand Cité qui h’a Pain a demy,
Encor un coup la faint Barthelemy,
Engravera au profond de fon Ame,
Nifmes, Rochelle, Geneve & Montpelier,
Caftres, Lion, Mars entrant au Belzer,
S’entrebattront le tout pour une Dame.
Englith.
The great City that bath not bread half enough,
Shall once more engrave |
In the bottom of ber foul St. Bartholomew’s day;
Nifmes, Rochel, Geneva azd Montpelier,
Caftres, Lion, Mars coming into Aries,
Shall fight. one againft another, and all for a Lady.
ANNOT. |
* That great City mentioned here, is Paris, which is thteatned of another Se, Bar-
tholomew’s day , which was fatal co the Proteftants in France , for upon that day in


the year 1572. there was a general Maffacre made of them through all France, info-
much, that in Paris alone there was above ten choufand flain.


As for thofe Towns here named that are to fight about a Lady , I cannot guefs
what Lady it fhould be, unlefs he meaneth the Rowan Church.


LUM.
| French.
Plufieurs mourront avant que Phoenix meure,
Jufques fix cens feptante eft fa demeure,
Paffe quinze ans, vingt & un, trente neuf,
Le premier eft Subjet a maladie,
Ft le fecond au fer, danger de vie,
Au feu a.l’éau eft fubjet à trenteneuf.
Englifhy. <4.

Many fhall die before that Phanix dieth,
Till fix hundred and feventy he fhall remain;
Above fifteen years, one andtwenty, thirty nine,
ie fhall be [ubjeit, to ficknefs,
And the fecond to Iron, a danger of life,
Thirty wine foall be fubjeEt to fire and water.

Pour ANNOT.

By the Phoenix is meant a Pope, becaufe there is but one of that kind at once,the


meaning of the reft isunknowto me, | |


French,


The true Prophecies
LIV.
French.
Six cens & quinze vingt, grand Dame mourra,
Et peu apres un fort long temps pleuvra,
Plufeurs Pais Flandres & |’ Angleterre,
Seront par feu & par fer aflligez,
De leurs Voilins longuement afliegez,
Contraints feront de leur faire la Guerre.
Englifh.
Six hundred aud fifteen, and twenty, a great Lady [hall die,
And a little after it fball ram for a great while, |
Many Countreys as Flanders and England,
Shall by fire and fron be afflicted,
And a good while Befieged by their Neighbours,
So that they [hail Le conftrained to make War againft them.
ANNOT.

W hat that great Lady was, thatfhoulddieintheyear 635.is not eale to guefs,
there being many inevery Countrey that died chat year. Thereft is eafie, and we
have feen the truth of it in our days, and may fee it hereafter.

LV.

French.
Un peu devant ou apres tres-grand’ Dame,
Son ame au Ciel, & fon corps {oubs Ja lame,
De plufieurs gens regretce fera,
Tous fes parens feront en grand triftefle,
Pleurs & foufpirs d’une Dame en jeunefie,
Et a deux grands le dueil delaïflera.

Englifh.
A little while before, or after, a very great Lady,
Her foul in Heaven, and her body in the Grave,
Shall be lamented by many,
All ber kindred [hall be in great mourning,
Tears and fighs of a Lady in her youth,
And fhall leave the mourning to two great ones.

ANNOT. ‘i


This may be underftood of the death of Anna of Aaffris, Queen of Francé, who
left in mourning two great ones , viz, her two Sons Lewis the XIV. King of France,


and Philip of Bourbon, Duke of Orleans,
Orofthedeathpéghe Queen Dowager of England Henrietta@Marias who, alfo
was much lamented. : .d left in mourning two great ones, viz. Charles the II, King


of England and Fames Duke of York his Brother,


French,


of Michael Noftradamus:
LV.
French.
Toft Elephant de toutes parts Vérra,
Quan Pourvoyeur au Griffon fe joindra, |
Sa rie proche, & Mars qui toufiour gronde;
Fera rands faits aupres de Terre Sainte.
Grads Eftendars fur la Tete & fur ’' Onde,
Si laNef a efté, de deux frére enceinte.
We et Englifh.
Shorly the Elepbanton all fides (ball fee,
Wha the Purveyor fball joyn with the Griffin,
His'nine at hand, and Mars which always grumbleth,
Sha! do great feats near the Holy Land,
Grat Standarts upon the Exrth and the Sea, :
If ve Ship hath been with Child of two Brothers.


ANNOT,


The Elephant isthe Bmpéror, the Purveyor the King of Fraacé, the Griffin the
Hollanders « the meaning ther is that the Emperor thall 0 to tuine, when the Freach
and the Hofanders (hall joyntogether, © ROR ee NPA

And that there fhall be great Wars and Fightings in the Holy Lands, both by Sea
and Land, when two Brothers of great quality fhall.go in one Ship. "APR


;


LVII.
French.


Peu apres l'Alliance faite,
Avant foleminifes la Fefte,
L'Empereur le tout troublera,
Et la nouvelle Mariée,
+ Franc Pais par fort liée,
peu de temps apres mourra:
Englifh.
itile afiter the Alliance made,
afore the Preaft be Solemnixed,
The Emperor fballironble all,
And the new Bride, —
Being by fate tied to the French Countrey,


"A little while after fball die.


ANNOT


This is concerning a match that (hall be made between the French King, and fome
Lady of another Countrey, which Match fhall be difturbed by: Emperour , and
the Bride fhall diea little while after her Marriages


K xx


French,


Tbe. true Prophecies
LVL.

French.
Sangfue en peu de temps mourra,
Sa mort bon figne nous donra,
Pour l’accroiffement dela France,
Alliances fe trouveront,
Deux grands Roiaumes fe joindront,
Francois aura fur eux puiflance.

Englith.
The Leech within a little while fball.die,
His death fball-be a good fign to us,
For the augmentation. of France,
Alliances fball be found, |
Two great Kingdoms fhall joyn together; «
The French foall have power over them:


: ANNOT. |
The Leech was Philip the IV. the laft King of Spaiz ; who died alittle Yhile after
he had Married his Daughter to Lewis the XIV. now King of France, by which Mar-
riage the.Peace was made.between the two Kingdoms,in the Ifland of the Conference;
upon the Borders of France and Spain... By his death and that Match is foretold the
encreafe and happy condition of the Kingdom of France,


D nn 27 aaa y, me. — dy les,
= ~ L a >. all . ee a ST à
s D TRE ee ee a Ts — : = ties oe i - E—. PR DÉS PU oe SS a pe Pr ES a + = à n is _ “%
7 Ba > te ES Se De an a, i = ae DE US i SY aa = =. RTS 7 à |
[te <r Ts - Se # Ne éme 4 à * % Se
; .
Fr =


ee ae.
i DR RP A CE
nts ro -- sm AS
“= * Veet. ao A =
oye ste : PRE tS ae 2


= us D, oy 3 ee 7 ' 1 y 2 LS * <2 ss nant Lt Por D


à


3
En nas am re


/
à
x
4
Ya gts <P eet
as ne RS
A ñ ij
ry
